






















































February 17, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 17, 1995 

 

 
241 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — Petitions for private Bills are presented and laid on 
the Table as follows: by Mr. Swenson, of the Briercrest Bible 
College in the province of Saskatchewan; by Mr. Cline, of Our 
Lady of the Prairies. 
 
These are the petitions for private Bills: by Ms. Lorje, of the 
Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the Seventh-day 
Adventist Church in the province of Saskatchewan; by Mr. 
Upshall, of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A little confusion in 
the morning helps to get the blood stimulated. 
 
I have a petition from people in the Gull Lake area. I'll read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any money available from the federal infrastructure 
programs towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these people come from Tompkins, as I said, Gull Lake, 
and that area. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure this 
morning to once again table petitions on behalf of citizens who 
live along Highway 42 or have to drive on it. And I'll just read 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate the total amount of 
funds garnered from the taxpayer for fuel tax, vehicle 
licence fees, and provincial sales tax on new vehicles 
toward the maintenance and capital costs of 
Saskatchewan roads; and further, that the Government 
of Saskatchewan dedicate any monies available from the 
federal infrastructure program towards Saskatchewan's 
road system, rather than provide these sums toward 
capital construction of casinos in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I have petitioners from communities such 
as Morse; Regina; Eyebrow; Calgary, Alberta; Moose Jaw;  

Kelowna, B.C. (British Columbia); Keeler, Saskatchewan; 
Tugaske, Saskatchewan; Chaplin, Saskatchewan; Brownlee, 
Saskatchewan; Fort Qu'Appelle, Saskatchewan; people all over 
the province who use this particular piece of road, Mr. Speaker, 
and I am pleased to table it today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
petitions I wish to lay on the Table. And I'd like to read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing stiffer 
penalties on abusers, and urge the federal government to 
recognize that gun control and crime control are not 
synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have in my hand are signed by 
people from the communities of Preeceville, Punnichy, Sturgis, 
Chamberlain, Endeavour, Buchanan, Canora, Simpson, 
Nokomis, and Regina. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, from 
across this province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
present the following petitions. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Francis, Weyburn area of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, Melville, Tyvan, Sedley. I'd like to lay 
them on the Table now. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate funding toward the maintenance 
and capital costs of Saskatchewan roads. 



February 17, 1995 

 
242 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery I would like to 
introduce some constituents of mine and very dear friends, 
Cecil and Ina Ralchenko. And I would like this Assembly to 
please welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a former member of this Assembly, Mr. Ted Gleim, 
who has joined us behind the bar today. 
 
Ted, as you know, is from Eastend, Saskatchewan, the beautiful 
south-west part of our province where the dinosaurs have been 
discovered and tourism is abounding. They are looking forward 
to a tourism season such as the world has never seen before this 
summer. And we're happy to have Ted with us here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure in fact 
to also introduce Ted Gleim, an hon. opponent. And having 
been transferred back to the private sector by Ted in 1986, I 
want to say to Ted a special welcome. And also say that there 
are three former members from Shaunavon in the House today, 
one who's only here for the next few months. But I do want to 
say seriously to Ted, we've been good friends for many, many 
years and that friendship . . . even while the campaign was on 
we maintained close friendship and I think that's what politics 
in Saskatchewan should be about. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join 
in welcoming Ted to the legislature today. And I guess the 
member from Regina Elphinstone can be rest assured that he 
will once again be sent back to the private sector. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through to all the members on the floor of the legislature, 
Mr. Ken Nelson; he's in the gallery behind me here. He's the 
editor of the Nipawin Journal in Nipawin, Saskatchewan, and 
he came down to hear the budget read yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Family Resource Centre 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
commend a group of people whose efforts will make a 
difference for some preschool children in Moose Jaw. 
 
Over the past two years a local group came together to find a 
way to better help children at risk in the Moose Jaw school  

system. They felt that these kids could find success in school if 
they had better early development and healthier self-images. 
That means better coordination of community services, more 
help with preschool development of language and social skills 
and self-image, and help for parents to improve parenting skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people from the Moose Jaw School 
Division, public health, mental health, John Howard Society, 
Social Services, Moose Jaw First Nations Council, and parents' 
associations concluded that there really can be a solution. And 
it's called the Family Resource Centre for preschoolers at risk 
and their parents. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in Moose Jaw it's going to happen. They 
have received funds from the Department of Education, 
Training and Employment to hire a coordinator and start up a 
family resource centre this fall. 
 
My colleague, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, and I 
were so pleased to be a part of the announcement, Mr. Speaker, 
that combines local cooperation with provincial financial 
freedom. We share the local enthusiasm that the Family 
Resource Centre will go a long way to replacing 
discouragement with hope for our most valuable resource, our 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Parkland Health District 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has 
always been a leader in health care and with the health reform it 
is leading again. I am pleased to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 
health reform in the Turtleford constituency is a success. 
 
The Parkland Health District has an abundance of positive 
news. First, the saving of about $200,000 in administration 
reduction has been redirected to 24-hour nursing coverage for 
the district nursing homes. 
 
The Parkland Health Board has approved as well an increase of 
25 per cent in direct services to home care. Home care services 
have been decentralized and are now provided from 10 
locations in the district, including the four hospitals. In Big 
River, Spiritwood, Canwood, people now have a single entry 
point for services that they require. 
 
Also, added services in the four hospitals have been 
implemented — services such as respite beds, physiotherapy, 
palliative care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hospital bed utilization in the district has been 
dramatically reduced through good management, by avoiding 
unnecessary admissions, and early hospital discharges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these health reforms are definitely a milestone in 
the history of Saskatchewan Health. And I believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan and the people of the Turtleford 
constituency . . . 



February 17, 1995 

 
243 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The member's time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Luther Invitational Tournament 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday a special 
event took place in Regina, the opening ceremonies of the 42nd 
annual Luther Invitational Basketball Tournament, the LIT. 
Begun in 1953, the LIT is the longest continuously running 
basketball tournament in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
basketball skills displayed here are of the highest calibre. 
 
Those who are lucky enough to squeeze into the Luther high 
school gymnasium are guaranteed first-class sport 
entertainment. They also risk permanent damage from deafness 
. . . or deafness from the enthusiasm of the crowds, but some 
rewards are worth the risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the LIT is unique in many ways. It invites teams 
from high schools across western Canada to compete, and the 
tournament is totally student run and operated — almost totally 
— with some help from the staff and other people involved. But 
over 80 students are directly involved in the organization of the 
LIT and the majority of the 500 students are involved in one 
way or another. 
 
For those unable to attend in person, the final two games on 
Saturday will be televised on our local cable channel. 
 
The LIT is a very special event in Regina for those who 
attended or who have children who've attended Luther, and of 
course for those who are competing or have competed in the 
past. It's also significant for those who believe that sport should 
represent the pursuit of individual and team excellence solely 
for the joy and fulfilment it brings. I congratulate all involved in 
this year's LIT and wish each competing team the very best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pilot Butte Lions-quest Program 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to mention and applaud a program taking place in Pilot 
Butte School, my old school. 
 
The program is sponsored by the Pilot Butte Lions Club and is 
called, appropriately enough, the Lions-quest program. The 
program, Mr. Speaker, is just one of many ways the Lions 
support education in our community. The club also provides 
annual bursaries for students to attend camps and workshops, it 
collects eyeglasses for its eye care program, and it contributes 
every year to the school Christmas concert. 
 
The Lions-quest program itself has been implemented in grades 
4 to 9 and also has a pilot project in one kindergarten class this 
year. Through Lions-quest, teachers are sent to in-service 
training seminars, curriculum guides and teaching materials are 
purchased, and student workbooks are provided. 

Lions-quest has five goals: to help students develop positive 
social behaviour; to help them develop the social skills 
necessary to lead healthy and productive lives; to promote a 
strong commitment to community; to encourage a healthy, 
drug-free lifestyle; and to support parents, teachers, and others 
in their efforts to educate and lead young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I like that last point. Students are encouraged to 
teach adults to help students. Education, after all, is a circular 
experience. Anyone involved in education knows we all teach 
each other. 
 
The Pilot Butte Lions Club is to be congratulated for its 
commitment to education and to the community. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
GRIP Premiums 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday you delivered your budget and once 
again we only got half the story. Let's talk about some of the 
things you forgot, Mr. Premier. You forgot to mention the $95 
million in gambling money that you're taking out of 
Saskatchewan communities. You forgot to mention that you 
balanced the budget by stealing $188 million . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I ask the member to 
refrain from using that language in question period. Order, 
order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you forgot 
to mention that you balanced your budget by taking $188 
million from Saskatchewan farmers. You forgot to mention that 
while you were taking that money from farmers, you didn't take 
one dime from the Crown corporations of this province. 
 
The Provincial Auditor says that the budget doesn't give a clear 
picture of where the Crown corporation profits should have 
been directed. They should have been directed to the 
government, rather than the farmers' GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) premiums, Mr. Premier. You took millions 
of dollars from Saskatchewan farm families and you didn't even 
touch the family of Crown corporations in this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, when you go on TV on Sunday, are 
you going to tell them the whole story? Are you going to tell 
Saskatchewan people that you balanced the budget of this 
province by taking from farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for that rather long question. 
 



February 17, 1995 

 
244 

Let me deal with the issues that he raised. Let me start first of 
all with GRIP. We gave back to the farmers their share of 
GRIP. We put 70 per cent of our share, the provincial share of 
GRIP, back into farm programs. The problem is in Ottawa. 
They put less than half of their share of GRIP back into farm 
programs. Why are they after us? Why don't they go after the 
problem? 
 
But what I'll say to the member opposite is, what he's not 
talking about today is the fact that this government, for the first 
time in over a decade, has balanced the books of the province. 
We had a plan to balance the books of the province; we 
delivered on that plan. We have a new plan to give tax relief to 
people, to create jobs, to provide a quality education and health 
care system, and to pay down the debt. We delivered on our 
first plan; we will deliver on our second plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Madam 
Minister, the only thing that you are giving farmers these days is 
bills in the mail. That's what you’re giving Saskatchewan farm 
families. They're getting a bill in the mail these days from your 
government. 
 
And on top of that, you took $188 million from their GRIP 
premiums and directed it towards the budget of this province. 
That's what you did for the farm families of this province, 
Madam Minister. You took $188 million from them. 
 
First of all, the member sitting beside you broke their contracts 
and now you're taking $188 million from the farm families of 
this province to balance your budget. Your budget is entirely 
balanced on the backs of the Saskatchewan farmers, Madam 
Minister. 
 
How can you, Madam Minister, and Mr. Premier, how can you 
be so proud of a budget that is balanced by balancing it on the 
backs of Saskatchewan farmers — $188 million worth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
can't speak out of both sides of his mouth. He says yesterday, 
geez, I would have cut government spending by 5 per cent. 
Eighteen per cent of that new spending is in agriculture. If he's 
going to cut government spending by 5 per cent, he's going to 
be giving farmers even less than what we're giving them. He's 
got to be consistent here. 
 
You know, these opposition members simply can't stand good 
news. All across Canada people are saying, Saskatchewan is the 
first province to balance its books. Congratulations, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — People all across Canada are proud 
of Saskatchewan today. And what do the members opposite  

say? They niggle and natter and niggle and natter. What I say to 
the people of Saskatchewan, we had a plan to balance the 
books; we delivered on that plan. 
 
We will stand on our record. Will the members opposite stand 
on their record in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. There's simply too much interruption, 
particularly when the minister is trying to answer, and I ask 
members to please not interrupt and let the person ask his 
question and the minister answer. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, four years 
ago you got elected by saying, trust me and I'll lower your taxes. 
Then you got in and raised their taxes. You told farmers, trust 
me and I'll come up with more money for agriculture. Then you 
got in and you broke contracts and stole hundreds of millions of 
dollars from farm families. Now you're telling farmers, trust me 
and I'll come up with a better safety net. It's like asking chickens 
to trust Colonel Sanders. 
 
Mr. Premier, why should farm families trust you? Why should 
they trust you? Why should farm families trust the very person 
who has taken $188 million from them in this budget alone? 
 
Mr. Premier, how do farm families know you aren't going to 
renege on the new farm safety net program as well, just as you 
have broken their contracts in the past and have taken money 
from them in this budget as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite's 
got to look at some basic facts. We have given to Saskatchewan 
farmers a new farm safety net. What about the counterparts 
around us — Alberta and Manitoba? What have they got? 
They've got a huge . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I'm not interrupting the Minister 
of Finance but I do want to hear her answer, and I ask members 
to please quit interrupting. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What do our neighbours, our Tory 
neighbours around us have? A huge, massive deficit in GRIP, 
which they will be giving to their taxpayers as a nice bill 
sometime near in the future. 
 
Look at the facts. Eighteen per cent of our new spending is on 
agriculture. Be clean with the public. 
 
If you're going to cut everything by 5 per cent, tell them and say 
farmers are going to get less from these folks. But don't run 
around the province saying: by the way, we'll cut, but not you; 
and by the way, we're going to cut your taxes. 
 
Yes, they're going to cut our taxes just like they cut our taxes in 
the 1980s. They cut the gas tax; people felt great. A few years 
later, high deficits; they raised not only the gas tax but other 
taxes. 



February 17, 1995 

 
245 

We have a plan for the province of Saskatchewan which 
provides tax relief for every taxpayer in the province, provides 
quality education and health, provides jobs, and the payment of 
debt. We'll stand on our record . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation Dividends 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, in today's paper 
there's a headline that says that your budget is not accurate. And 
I've noticed, Madam Minister, that when we talk about policy in 
respect to Crown corporations, that your budget showed $60 
million dividend from CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) that suddenly was not taken. You didn't transfer 
one dime. 
 
And the Provincial Auditor is saying in today's paper that you 
are not presenting an accurate budget by doing that. That's in 
spite of record utility rate increases. Your family of Crown 
corporations, Madam Minister, is so bloated with ill-gotten 
gains from the taxpayers of this province, that they're bulging at 
the seams. 
 
Madam Minister, is it the case that your CIC policy, which is 
administered by the Premier's friend, Don Ching, has nothing to 
do with fiscal considerations but has everything to do with your 
political agenda? Is that not what the auditor is saying to 
everyone in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I would expect this 
kind of question from a Tory opposition: you mean you have 
some money in this government somewhere and you haven't 
gone out and spent it? You haven't gone out and taken every 
single penny and spent it? What's the matter with you? That's 
how you run the province. 
 
That's how they ran the province in the 1980s. That's how they 
added a billion dollars each and every year to the debt. 
 
Now with respect to the auditor. Let's quote the auditor and let's 
see exactly what he's saying. He said in February, 1995: the 
government's financial statements represent fairly in all material 
respects the financial position of the government of the 
province of Saskatchewan, following accurate accounting 
principles. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read the rest of it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, yes. What the auditor's talking 
about is the way he wants us to budget. We budget the same as 
every other government in Canada except Alberta, because they 
have no Crown corporations. 
 
For the members opposite to be standing up and lecturing us 
about open, accountable government — when they were in  

power the people of the province just didn't have any idea of the 
size of the debt because they weren't prepared to tell them. 
 
We've opened the books. We are open, accountable. We have a 
new plan and we will deliver it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Question to the 
same minister. Madam Minister, why didn't you have the 
courage to read the rest of the article in the House? Just like you 
didn't have the courage yesterday to tell people in your budget 
address what you were really doing to this province. 
 
You could have had a surplus of $229 million if you'd only 
followed your own budgeting allocations of last year. The 
auditor says there should be a complete financial picture of the 
province, which you're not giving. 
 
Madam Minister, $60 million would have been easily attained, 
given the rate increases and the taxation which you have passed 
on to Saskatchewan families in the last year. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, the question is, you budgeted 50 million 
for the following year. Are you going to draw that back because 
you've changed your policy? We would like to know what that 
policy of CIC is. You budget it one day, you take it away the 
next; you put another figure out for the next year, and you 
continue to tax through the Crown corporations. 
 
Madam Minister, show us what that policy is so that next time 
we'll know the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, you really do have to 
have a sense of humour to have the Tories giving us lectures 
about open, accountable government and keeping the books 
properly. 
 
Let me tell them in very plain, simple language why we have 
left some money over in CIC. It's because of their megaprojects. 
When we inherited this government, we inherited megaprojects 
whose financing was a nightmare. We have worked to stabilize 
them, to try to save the jobs, but they were bad financial deals 
and you can't turn a disaster into a rose. 
 
So yes, we have left some money there to guard against any 
uncertainties with respect to those megaprojects. The money's 
there; it's open, it's accountable, people can see it, people know 
what is happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have moved light years in opening up the 
books of this province to the people, because we're proud of 
what we're doing with their books. We are managing their 
finances in a prudent way, and now we have a new plan which 
will give them tax relief, improved health and education, a plan 
to pay down debt, and jobs. We're proud of our plan. I wish 
they would be. 



February 17, 1995 

 
246 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Identification of Young Offender 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. 
 
It comes to my attention that on February 3, 1995, the Attorney 
General was a guest on a local radio talk show. While on that 
radio program, the minister made comments which served to 
identify a young offender involved in the Martensville sexual 
abuse case. 
 
While I will not repeat what was said in this Chamber, I have 
sent over a transcript of the Attorney General's remarks to 
refresh his memory. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Justice: Mr. Minister, would 
you not agree that your comments were in contravention of the 
law, and if so, would you turn that transcript over to the Justice 
officials for investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I've just been handed the 
document that my friend refers to — by the page — and all I 
can say is that I'll study it and of course I'll refer it to the 
appropriate authorities if there's anything untoward about it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question to 
the Minister: Mr. Minister, let me take a moment just to remind 
you of the law. Section 38 of the Young Offenders Act says 
that, and I quote: 
 
 . . . no person shall publish by any means any report . . . 

of any hearing, adjudication, disposition or appeal 
concerning a young person who has committed or is 
alleged to have committed an offense . . . 

 
I also remind you that anyone who contravenes this section 
 
 . . . is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to 

imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, anyone else publicly identifying an individual 
convicted under the Young Offenders Act is subject to the full 
weight of the law. Will you ensure that a complete, open, and 
independent investigation is undertaken such that you will have 
equal treatment under the law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I guess that this signals 
that the budget debate is over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I told the Minister . . . I told the 
member, I should say, that I don't recall this. I've just received 
the transcript; I said I'd review the transcript; I said I'd refer it to 
the appropriate authorities if there's anything untoward about it. 
Now that's the second time I've answered it, and I hope that we 
can leave it at that. 

Health Board Election Costs 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
does not have a thoughtful plan when it comes to health care in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and the facts speak for themselves. 
As recently as this week, the government has put a band-aid on 
their unsuccessful attempt at major reconstructive surgery. 
 
The Minister of Health allocated 20.3 million to try and fix their 
mistake. Mr. Speaker, they're now gearing up for health board 
elections across the province. This process should have been 
part of the original restruction, will cost approximately $1 
million extra for taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. You could have saved 
$1 million. The $1 million it will cost to run these elections 
could have been spent to help people. How can you justify 
spending $1 million on elections at a time when you've closed 
52 rural hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
member for his question. I would have expected on this day 
questions regarding the budget, the budget of the Department of 
Health; but as my colleague, the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General says, apparently the budget debate's over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to speak to the member's question: it's very 
difficult to address questions from the Liberal caucus. Today 
the member is saying we should not be doing district health 
board elections. That's what he's saying. There shouldn't be 
something in the budget for district health board elections. 
 
Now that's an interesting position. A year ago, not quite a year 
ago, he was writing articles in his own weekly journals, calling 
upon this government to immediately go into elections — 
immediately. Now I heard his leader this spring saying that we 
should postpone and suspend the election process. Mr. Speaker, 
it would help I think the understanding of the public, my 
understanding, the understanding of the House: would the 
member please identify what is the Liberal policy on health 
board elections? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 
disappointing to see the Minister of Health make light of what 
they've done to health care in rural Saskatchewan here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, governing is about making choices that are in the 
best interests of the people who elect them. This NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government has made some extremely 
questionable choices, Mr. Speaker. One glaring example of this 
is, the government's poor judgement is demonstrated by the 
million dollar reduction in spending in the field of cancer 
research and redirecting these funds to non-essential services 
such as electing health board officials. 
 



February 17, 1995 

 
247 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, how can you reduce funding in an 
area as important as cancer research and use the money to run 
elections that should have been conducted at the same time as 
the municipal elections last fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again the member surprises 
me by — and surprises I think the public of Saskatchewan — 
by seeming to forget we had a provincial budget delivered 
yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address very specifically the question 
about the funding for cancer research in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, it's true in the Estimates this year, the number is down 
because in last year's budget we injected substantial amounts of 
money in capital improvements, Mr. Speaker, capital 
improvements to research and treatment in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those improvements will be in place, and indeed 
in terms of cancer treatment and research in this province we, 
like in other areas, are leading the country. We have, Mr. 
Speaker, across Saskatchewan, available in communities across 
Saskatchewan, the best mobile breast screening treatment 
program in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again I ask the member, and I challenge the 
member and his leader, what is the Liberal position on health 
board elections? One minute they're telling us we should have 
done it before, the next minute they're telling us they should 
suspend it; now he's telling us we shouldn't have put something 
in the budget to see it happen. Mr. Speaker, would the member 
please acquaint the public and this House of the Liberal 
position on health board elections. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, it's very clear that this 
government has again demonstrated the lack of concern for the 
vulnerable people of Saskatchewan. This NDP government has 
recently announced that they plan to spend 1 million taxpayer 
dollars to celebrate Saskatchewan's 90th birthday, yet they also 
plan to eliminate funding for nursing homes that house the 
increasing population of seniors who built this very province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a quote from Hansard, March 28, 
1989, from the then former health critic, the member from 
Regina Hillsdale: 
 
 It's time for this government to get its priorities straight, 

to cancel its birthday celebration, and to start spending 
its money where it counts, and where the people of this 
province want the money spent. And that's in our major 
services such as health, education and social services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister of Health, I want you to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan today why your priorities are parties 
and not the well-being of our pioneers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, from the day this 
government was put into office our priority has been to restore  

the fiscal security and future of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and yesterday in this province, Mr. Speaker, we took a giant 
step forward in achieving that goal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, by taking that giant 
step forward we are now in a position, as the Minister of 
Finance has indicated, that where there are some surplus dollars 
we'll be able to lower the debt of this province, relieve the 
taxpayer of this province, and to provide some program 
initiatives in the important areas of health and education. 
 
And as the member well knows, in this budget there is one of 
the most progressive initiatives that we have seen in the 
province of Saskatchewan. As a result of this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, we will have available to communities across our 
province the most comprehensive program and people-sensitive 
program of community-based and home-based services that you 
will find anywhere in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously what 
the Minister of Health isn't catching on to, the people of 
Saskatchewan don't want millions spent on health board 
elections. They don't want the millions spent on things that they 
don't need. They want their services back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our rural health care system has been turned 
upside down by this government with little or no consultation 
with the people who are directly affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this is really about choices. Not one person 
in this province is against health care reform but they definitely 
question this government's decisions and choices. Other 
provinces have cut spending by $240 million in health and not 
closed one rural hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given these facts today — Mr. Minister — can 
you explain your government's decisions to close rural hospitals 
and inadequately fund regional hospitals that has left people all 
across this province feeling vulnerable, frightened, and without 
a safe and reliable health care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member again my surprise that the Liberal caucus House 
Leader, on the day after the provincial budget — the first 
budget, balanced budget, in Canada, which has gained national 
attention — that the House Leader of the Liberal caucus is not 
addressing that issue today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, somehow this caucus, its leader, and now its 
back bench, are walking all sides of the street. Today the 
member is suggesting, I believe what he's suggesting, is that we 
should be putting more resources into health care. Now I've 
heard his leader, in the last 24 hours, in the last 24 hours, say 
you've got to cut government, government's way too big. 
 



February 17, 1995 

 
248 

Mr. Speaker, where will the Liberal caucus have us cut in the 
Department of Health? What is the answer to where the cuts 
should be undertaken in the Department of Health? When the 
member stands up and when his leader stands up and tells us 
where those cuts should be taken, then we can have, I think, a 
good debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget Provisions 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, 
you're taxing people more and more. You're spending more and 
more in this government. You're taking from farm families, as 
we've seen in the budget. You're leaving huge profits in Crown 
corporations to be used for . . . that could've been used for 
paying down the debt of this province or directing it towards 
tax cuts, while at the same time you are saying Saskatchewan 
has entered a new day. Editorialists around this province 
disagree with you, Madam Minister. 
 
And I'll just quote from one editorialist, Bruce Johnstone, and 
he says: 
 
 So, at the end of the day, Saskatchewan will still be the 

same old place it's always been: a small, overtaxed, 
land-locked province waiting for its ship to come in. 

 
Just sitting around waiting for its ship to come in. Madam 
Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I won't make a comment from the comment 
made by the member from Estevan, but I could not hear what 
the Leader of the Opposition was asking. Order. Order, order. 
 
I'd like to have the Leader of the Opposition put his question 
again so the minister can hear it and answer the question. Order, 
order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I 
know that your back-benchers don't like to hear about the kinds 
of things you're doing to farm families or the kinds of profits, 
the huge profits, you're leaving in Crown corporations, Madam 
Minister. And that's why the Provincial Auditor is saying that 
you're not telling the whole story. That you're purposely, 
purposely leaving money in Crown corporations. At the same 
time you're taking from farm families, you got this big election 
slush fund that's just ready. 
 
That's the question, Madam Minister. Will you admit to the 
people of Saskatchewan today that you are building up huge 
profits in Crown corporations, all the while you're taking from 
farm families, just in time for the next election campaign for 
whenever the member from Riversdale decides to drop the writ? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it's hard 
to follow the line of reasoning. Have they already conceded this 
election to us and they think we're building a slush fund for the  

next election? I mean if this is a slush fund and this is an 
election budget, why aren't we spending the slush fund? I don't 
know, this is like Tory numbers. 
 
But he likes quotes; so do I. Let me give him a couple. Dale 
Botting, hardly a consistent admirer of this government: how 
can you criticize a budget that puts a down payment on our total 
gross debt, balances the budget last year, balances the budget 
this year, looks at balancing the budget for the next four years, 
and provides tax relief? 
 
Let me finish with a comment made nationally by Mike Duffy, 
and I think he said it best. He said it best. He said: so what 
you're saying is zero deficit, the goose egg, and he, our Premier, 
is now paying down the debt? A remarkable achievement and 
the result of having some political courage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. I will ask the 
Premier and the former premier to please, if they wish to have a 
discussion, to do it outside of the chambers. The minister 
couldn't even hear the Bill that was being introduced. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure once again to enter into the debate on the budget. 
 
As we have been talking about all through question period, 
Madam Minister, and Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, there's lots of 
people that have lots of concerns about your budget and we're 
just beginning to see that now. 
 
And, Madam Minister, we're seeing where the Provincial 
Auditor is saying, you haven't been clean with people. You 
haven't been up front; you haven't been straight with people. 
And we're also seeing other editorialists saying the same thing, 
Madam Minister. 
 
We'll start with the Provincial Auditor where he says that the 
Crown corporations, there's huge amounts of profits that are 
being left with Crown corporations right today, Madam 
Minister, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan I think can 
only wonder why that's the case. 
 
And they're talking about . . . were talking about a slush fund 
being built up for the next election campaign for the NDP. And  



February 17, 1995 

 
249 

I think that's very obvious. And the minister makes light of it 
and says that they're building it up for the next election 
campaign after this one. Well what kind of ridiculous notion is 
that? Everyone knows, Mr. Speaker, that what they are doing is 
hiding away Crown profits, so when they come into an election 
campaign, they can trot out the goodies to the people of 
Saskatchewan and try and buy their votes once again. The exact 
same way they've always tried to buy the votes of Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. The way they did it in every election 
campaign in memory, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It all goes . . . we see the same, exactly the same thing, 
happening in Saskatchewan today that we saw back in 1982 and 
earlier, where a government felt more concerned about the 
Crown corporations of this province than the families of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. More concern, more concern about the 
Crown corporations, the family of Crown corporations, than the 
real family of this province. 
 
Particularly when you look at what has happened in agriculture. 
It's no surprise, Mr. Speaker, farmers are getting bills in the 
mail every day, it turns out, right now. They're getting a bill in 
terms of their GRIP premiums; they're getting a bill in terms of 
the adjustments with their crop insurance right now, Mr. 
Speaker. Most farmers have got two bills from this government 
in the last little while — two bills farm families have. 
 
And now they see the balancing of this budget has been done 
on the backs of the farmers. And they see it and they don't like 
it. I was in a meeting last night out in Last Mountain-
Touchwood and the moment that the farmers of that community 
found out where this budget was being balanced, they all of a 
sudden turned on you, Mr. Premier. Prior to that they thought, 
well, not a bad job; balanced the budget. 
 
But as soon as they found out that $189 million of it was 
recorded as other income, and when the people found out that 
that other income was GRIP premiums, they turned on you, sir. 
They turned on you, sir. They said, this Premier is wrong to do 
that. This Premier was wrong to take from farm families. This 
Premier was wrong to cancel GRIP contracts. This Premier 
doesn't know the value of a contract. This Premier has not been 
straight with the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Premier, they're asking, Mr. Speaker, is he going to tell all 
that on Sunday when he talks to the people of this province? Is 
he going to stand in his place and say to the people of this 
province, yes, we have balanced the budget; here's how we've 
done it; we've taken from farm families and we've left huge 
profits in Crown corporations? 
 
I challenge the Premier that on Sunday when he's talking to the 
people of this province, tell the whole story — tell the whole 
story — so farmers across this province know what has 
happened to them and what the rest of the people are being 
asked to bear the burden as well in huge profits in Crown 
corporations and utilities, Mr. Premier. Tell them everything on 
Sunday. Talk about those kinds of things. Talk about how you 
broke their contract, to begin with. 

And talk about gambling; that's another good question. VLTs 
(video lottery terminal) in this province, income is disputed. We 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that the average VLT machine is 
taking somewhere in the neighbourhood of a thousand dollars a 
week — a thousand dollars a week on average — is what is 
being taken by the average VLT machine that's out there. 
 
You go into a small community. There might only be a hotel 
left in lots of communities. I can think of one of them, White 
Bear, Saskatchewan, where the former minister of Agriculture, 
within his constituency, he knows all about White Bear, 
Saskatchewan. All that's left there, all that's left there is a hotel. 
And they have four VLT machines in there. 
 
Four thousand dollars a week is being drained out of that 
community by this government, $4,000 a week. And at the 
same time, they're draining from the farmers of that community, 
around that community, Mr. Speaker, GRIP premiums and 
overpayments in crop insurance, draining that out of them and, 
at the same, Mr. Speaker, they've closed their hospital. At the 
same time. Decimating rural Saskatchewan, that's what you 
people are doing to rural Saskatchewan these days. 
 
And that's why when you go around to rural Saskatchewan and 
you talk about all of these kinds of things to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan, they know now that you can't trust this Premier. 
You cannot trust this government because they've seen . . . they 
have had proof positive time after time after time about what 
this government is prepared to do them. 
 
And the minister from North Battleford there, he knows all 
about that because I think he's been out in his communities and 
that's why he's not going to run in a rural constituency. He's 
going to take North Battleford as his constituency because he 
knows that that other constituency of Cut Knife-Battleford he 
wouldn't have a hope in because the farmers out there at mad at 
him. We were talking to them out there. 
 
We were out there earlier this week and they're very upset with 
this government because they suspicioned all along, 
suspicioned all along that their premiums were going to be 
directed to balancing this budget. And we've seen that now. 
 
That's why editorialists are saying some of the things that 
they're saying about this government. That's why, I suspect, the 
Premier thought he was going to get glowing marks and the 
Finance minister was going to get glowing marks for this 
budget. But now when the light begins to shine on how they did 
it, now the people of this province are beginning to come 
forward in opposition to it. 
 
And that's why editorialists are saying things like: 
 
 So, at the end of the day, Saskatchewan will still be the 

same old place it's always been: a small, over-taxed, 
land-locked province waiting for its ship to come in. 

 
Waiting for its ship to come in. 
 



February 17, 1995 

 
250 

And the Finance minister stands — I couldn't believe it — the 
Finance minister stands in her place and says that what they 
have done to the farmers in this province is better than what has 
happened in Alberta and Manitoba. Incredible. 
 
Where is the money that is in Alberta and Manitoba with 
respect to the GRIP? Where is it? Where is it? It's in the 
farmers' hands, that's where it is. And the Economic 
Development minister knows that. 
 
The farmers of Manitoba and the farmers of Alberta have had 
the money and they've used the money, and that's why 
agriculture is booming in those places because they've been able 
to reinvest into their operations. 
 
And that's why we see things like 79,000 jobs in Alberta today 
because they're reinvesting into their communities and into their 
operations and into farm business, Mr. Speaker. That's what is 
happening in Alberta where people have had the benefit of a 
program that was set up to benefit farmers, not the provincial 
treasury, like is happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's little wonder that the Provincial Auditor is 
saying that the picture of this budget isn't clear, because it isn't 
clear to everyone else in this province either, Mr. Speaker. But 
it's becoming clear, it's becoming clear the farm families will 
find out about this around this province. They will realize what 
this government has done to them. People that are in small 
towns will realize what gambling is doing to them. It's just 
beginning to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's just beginning to see where a thousand dollars a week is 
being drained by the average VLT machine from each 
community. A thousand dollars a week. Could you imagine, 
Mr. Speaker, what kind of revenue that's taking out of the 
average small community in rural Saskatchewan these days, 
what it is doing to them? What it is doing in terms of the moral 
fibre of that community? What is it doing to the resources and 
finances of people in those communities? 
 
The evidence is very clear, Mr. Speaker — VLT gambling is 
addictive, the most addictive form of gambling there is, 
according to gambling experts. The most addictive form of 
gambling there is, because it's all of the lights and whistles and 
bells and all of those kinds of things and it happens so quickly, 
it gives the gamblers that gambling rush, that gambling rush 
that they all seem to have to have in order to continue going. 
 
And they're plugging them in, loonie after loonie after loonie, 
and it's just draining out of their community into the Finance 
minister's pocket, Mr. Speaker. Draining out of their community 
into the Finance minister's pocket. 
 
Saskatoon, Regina, we see casinos, big mega-casinos going to 
be built in this province, on-reserve gambling, maybe off-
reserve gambling. No one knows where it's all going to go. No 
studies to indicate whether they're going to benefit this 
province, in fact very little evidence that there will. 
 

Most studies have shown in other jurisdictions when gambling 
is brought in that actually there's economic decay rather than 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. They're holding out the promise to 
the people of this province, that when you plug in a dollar 
maybe there'll be a windfall at the end of the day. No wealth 
creation whatsoever, just the hope, just the dream of hoping that 
when you plug that loonie in that there might be a pail of money 
flow out at the bottom. Just an unreasonable dream. 
 
Everyone knows that people's efforts would be far better spent 
if they were using that money for their economic well-being, 
rather than just plugging it into another machine and watching 
it go down the drain. And that's what's happening in 
Saskatchewan all across this province today, Mr. Speaker, 
where the dream of VLTs is what the . . . the only hope that this 
Finance minister and this government is giving to the people of 
this province. That's the only hope, Mr. Speaker. And that's why 
people across this province are rebelling. That's why they think 
that they should have been looking at different things, Mr. 
Premier, as solutions to the problems in this province. 
 
They should have been looking at cutting spending, Mr. 
Speaker. They should have been looking at starting at the top. 
They should have been looking at cutting the cabinet. They 
should have been looking at cutting the Premier's office staff. 
 
They should have been looking at cutting the Premier, the 
Premier's own million dollar pension. Should have been looking 
at that. If they wanted to cut a million dollars, I could find a 
million dollars for the people of Saskatchewan in one fell 
swoop — the Premier's pension alone, Mr. Speaker. They 
should have been looking at reducing the number of staff that 
that Premier has. 
 
They should have been looking at eliminating the provincial 
secretariat. When we mentioned that last night in the meeting, I 
couldn't believe the response. People don't even know what the 
Provincial Secretary is, Mr. Speaker. It's the highest paid 
secretary by far in this province. Seven million dollars is the 
budget of the Provincial Secretary — $7 million. And that 
budget has increased by 200 per cent, 200 per cent since this 
government took over — 200 per cent. 
 
What it's used for, as we all know, is political polling and all of 
those kinds of things, the kinds of things that this Premier 
operates on and the way he makes his decisions; the kind of 
political polling that is telling him right today that he's made 
some mistakes. He's made some mistakes in terms of health 
care reform, he's made some huge mistakes in agriculture, and 
he's made mistakes with gambling too. And that's what that 
polling, I suspect, is telling this Premier. 
 
They should have been looking at, Mr. Speaker, eliminating 
things like third-party grants, business grants, Arts Board 
grants. Those are the kinds of cuts that are meaningful. They 
should have been looking at reducing the civil service in this 
province. 
 
They should have been looking at welfare reform, Mr. Speaker.  



February 17, 1995 

 
251 

They should have been looking at welfare reform where you're 
asking the able-bodied people of this province to contribute to 
the well-being of this province. The kindest and most 
compassionate thing that you can do for someone on welfare, 
Mr. Speaker, is not just hand them a cheque but teach them how 
to earn a cheque. That's the kindest and most compassionate 
thing that you can do for someone on welfare. 
 
(1100) 
 
And the NDP don't operate under that philosophy, and we know 
that because they want to keep people down. They want to 
reduce people to the lowest common denominator where people 
are dependent on government, dependent on people like 
themselves to give them something, to promise them 
something, to constantly be able to be the be-all and end-all, the 
cradle-to-the-grave mentality that permeates the benches 
opposite; the cradle-to-the-grave mentality that they say, we will 
protect you. Don't worry, we're the government; we can look 
after you. 
 
We can look after you. We can keep the realities of the big, bad 
world from happening here in Saskatchewan. That's the kind of 
mentality that's always been part of the NDP philosophy. 
 
He should have been looking at a 5 per cent cut to all 
government departments — 5 per cent, just as you took as a 
salary decrease and I took as a salary decrease. A 5 per cent cut 
wouldn't hurt any single department, and you know it, Mr. 
Minister, and Madam Minister, and Mr. Premier. Everyone in 
this province knows that there's 5 per cent can easily be cut 
from any budget, just as when you're asking farm families or 
households around this province. 
 
When times get tough, what do they do? They cut back on 
spending. What does a business do when times get tough? They 
don't go in and increase their prices. They work harder; they cut 
their spending. That's what they do. And that's what this 
government should have done. It should have worked harder at 
cutting spending rather than taxing more and more and more. 
 
You're spending . . . The revenue in this government — the 
revenue, the amount of taxation that this government takes in is 
up $425 million over last year. Four hundred and twenty-five 
million dollars, almost a half a billion dollars, is being drained 
out of the economy of this province to satisfy the spending 
habits of this Premier. 
 
That's what's happening, Mr. Speaker. Spending is up $117 
million on top of that. Projected tax relief by 1999 is $82 
million, less than one point off the PST (provincial sales tax). 
You're asking the people of this province -- cut back, cut back, 
cut back, cut back, but we're going to increase spending and 
we're going to keep on the profligate standard of government. It 
just says, spend more and more and more and more, without 
any indication of how that's going to change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You've balanced the budgets on families' backs. You've 
balanced the budget on the backs of Saskatchewan families.  

And the editorialist, Murray Mandryk, he points out a real life 
situation where these folks in . . . Kathy and Larry Dolter in 
Regina, a fire-fighter, and his wife works as a teacher-
administrator. They have a combined income of $60,000, Mr. 
Speaker. And they say, we used to dream of earning $60,000. 
Now that we do, it isn't so great. Because they see their taxes 
just increasing and increasing and increasing. 
 
They have four kids — three of them teenagers. They don't 
drink. They don't smoke. They don't drive big, new cars, and 
they don't gamble. Fortunately for them, they don't gamble as 
well, or they'd even have more taxation on them by this 
government. In fact, the only thing out of ordinary is that they 
spend $5,400 to educate their children in a Christian school. 
That's the only, what might be considered discretionary 
spending. 
 
And what do they see? They see more and more of their money 
going towards taxes. More and more and more being drained 
off by this government on every single occasion. They see their 
income tax going up, they see their contributions to UIC 
(Unemployment Insurance Commission) and CPP (Canada 
Pension Plan) and everything else going up and up and up 
because of the philosophy of government to ask more and more 
and more from the people of this province. We see their utilities 
going up and up and up. Gasoline taxes going up and up and 
up. 
 
And all the while, all the while, Mr. Speaker, they believe the 
Premier of this province when he said back in 1991 that he was 
going . . . there would be no new taxes. And that $4.5 billion 
was enough of spending. That $4.5 billion was enough, and if 
any premier couldn't operate on that, they don't deserve to be in 
government. I didn't say that. It's the member from Riversdale 
and the Premier of this province who made that pledge during 
the election campaign. 
 
And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province will 
remember that in the next election campaign. They'll remember 
this Premier who has said $4.5 billion was enough and now is 
spending over $5 billion. And the spending just keeps going on 
and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, I think he is wrong. I think he's wrong. I think the 
people will recognize it. I think the farmers of this province will 
remember. And I know that all rural members on that other side 
are hoping that farm families don't find out about the GRIP 
surplus and where its being directed today, and where their 
GRIP premiums are being directed today. 
 
And the member from Biggar today sits there with a smile on 
his face. But I suspect the electorate is going to wipe that smile 
off your face, sir, because you were always one of the big 
proponents of help for agriculture; sat there and talked about it 
during the election campaign, talked about all of those kinds of 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
people of this province will recognize this budget for what  



February 17, 1995 

 
252 

it is. I think they will recognize where it's come from. I think 
they'll recognize that it's come from taking money from farmers 
and not taking money from Crown corporations. I think instead 
of taking it from the Crown corporation family of this province, 
they have taken it from farm families and everyone else, every 
other family in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I think at the end of the day this 
government will reap its just reward in the next election 
campaign. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to rise in this Assembly today and to 
enter into the debate on the budget speech. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to start out by congratulating our Minister of Finance for 
bringing forward yesterday the day that many of us have 
worked for for a lot of years. That's the day of the balanced 
budget, a balanced budget in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time I want to congratulate and thank 
our Premier for his excellent leadership, for his fortitude, and 
for his vision in being able to deliver to Saskatchewan to this 
great day. This day, Mr. Speaker, is truly a great day in 
Saskatchewan and it makes me proud; it makes me proud to be 
a Canadian, proud to be a Saskatchewan citizen, and proud to 
be a New Democrat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to bring forward, to bring forward the first 
balanced budget in Saskatchewan in over a decade is truly an 
achievement, but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
is the first province in Canada to achieve that. Once again 
Saskatchewan is leading the way. As we have in the past, we 
are in the future leading the way to straightening the affairs of 
this province and straightening the affairs of this country so that 
we can once again enjoy the quality of life that Saskatchewan 
people and Canadians so much deserve. 
 
But this budget, Mr. Speaker, was more than just a balanced 
budget. It set forth a plan for another five consecutive balanced 
budgets; a half a decade of progress, a half a decade of forward 
thinking government. And for that, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure no 
one will deny that all the credit goes to the fine people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The fine people of this province who in 1991 recognized the 
need to change the direction of this province and called on the 
New Democratic Party to do that. They recognized that they 
needed the New Democrats to once again pull Saskatchewan 
out of the doldrums of deficits and debt that hung over our head 
and hung over this province like a dark, dark cloud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give all the credit for the achievements of the 
past three and a half years to the people of Saskatchewan who 
pulled together, who made the sacrifices, who worked so 
cooperatively in order to see this great day dawning in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

And all through this three and a half years, Mr. Speaker, I've 
often wondered why the other guys in the opposition benches 
criticized and criticized and criticized. What really made me 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, is why they would criticize the obvious, 
the bare, bold-faced facts, facts that have been substantiated by 
third party independent agencies. 
 
And then it came to me, Mr. Speaker. It came to me why they 
would stand in this House and criticize the first balanced budget 
in Saskatchewan in over 10 years. It came to me, Mr. Speaker, 
simply by looking at their track records in government. 
 
The Tories here in this province, when they were the 
government, delivered 10 straight deficit budgets. Deficits, 
deficits, deficits. Then we look at the Liberal track record in 
other provinces where they are the government and we see a 
similar thing. Deficits, deficits, and debt. 
 
Then we look at the recent federal government. And I'll draw 
your attention to some of the news announcements of yesterday 
in regards to Moody's, a bond rating company in New York, 
looking and suggesting that they're going to review Canada's 
credit rating. And we know what that means, Mr. Speaker. It'll 
likely mean a downgrade. 
 
That then tells me, Mr. Speaker, that the philosophy, the 
thoughts, the ideas, the intentions, and the hidden agenda of 
whether you be a Conservative or be a Liberal is exactly the 
same thing. That, Mr. Speaker, leads me to wonder why, if there 
is a difference between the two, then why when we check the 
voting records of Hansard, we see that they always vote the 
same way — further evidence and further proof that there is no 
difference between the two. 
 
But this budget, Mr. Speaker, this budget shows that 
Saskatchewan once again is rising from the ashes of ruin by the 
other guys to a new day dawning. This budget, Mr. Speaker, not 
only is a balanced budget, but it also lays out a plan of debt 
management. Debt management, Mr. Speaker, that has 
hamstrung this province for the half a dozen years, hamstrung 
this province and left us at the whims of international bankers. 
 
But thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, for this government and this 
government's long-term vision, and this government's fortitude 
to make the right decisions that will deliver Saskatchewan from 
the claws and the grips of the international bankers, and provide 
us once again with a financial freedom so that we can continue 
to pursue the establishment of programs, establishment of 
facilities to support the people of Saskatchewan. But not just 
the facilities and programs, Mr. Speaker, but programs and 
facilities that are on a leading edge, and leading the way, 
because that is what Saskatchewan people deserve — the best 
that's available. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, lays out a plan that is solid because it 
is built on what has already been accomplished. It has been 
built on the very principles, guiding principles of the vast 
majority of people of Saskatchewan, and those are the 
principles of cooperation, compassion, and community. 



February 17, 1995 

 
253 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — It has been those principles, Mr. Speaker, that 
have been the guiding light for this government. It has been 
those principles upon which we have built the turnaround of the 
Saskatchewan economy. And it is those principles that will 
sustain the Saskatchewan economy into the future, to meet the 
challenges of the future as we enter into a changing world. 
 
Jobs, Mr. Speaker, are a clear priority in this budget, for we 
recognize that in order to have a strong economy we need the 
business investment, and with that business investment, Mr. 
Speaker, will come jobs. That, Mr. Speaker, has already started. 
 
As I'm proud to say and draw your attention to StatsCanada 
figures which already indicate that there is 7,000 more jobs in 
Saskatchewan today than there was in 1991. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Why it's simple. It's simply because the business world has 
confidence in Saskatchewan. They have confidence in 
Saskatchewan because they know that there's a government at 
hand and in control of this province that is a progressive 
government, and is looking forward to developing the economy 
that will allow business to grow and will allow jobs to be 
created and benefit the entire province. 
 
But this, Mr. Speaker, has not been done along the lines of what 
the former government did or what the Liberals would do and 
that is cater to the corporate sector, cater to the big business by 
giving them . . . basically by giving away the store. 
 
(1115) 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, we have adopted the principles of community. 
We know very well, Mr. Speaker, that the communities in 
Saskatchewan are the backbone of our province and are the 
backbone of our economy. We know that the strengths of 
Saskatchewan lies in the people spread across this great 
province. We know that those are the people who will make the 
difference in Saskatchewan because they are committed to this 
province. 
 
We've seen that start to happen, Mr. Speaker, through 
community-based industries being developed. An example I'll 
draw to your attention is Norquay Alfalfa Processors, Mr. 
Speaker, a three-year-old company that has created 70 jobs in 
that community. 
 
I'll also draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to a recent 
announcement by Sask-Can Fibre which is a community . . . 
which is a cooperative, a straw cooperative, community-based 
group in Canora who have recently signed an agreement with 
Cargill to form a venture company, Dura-Fibre, to further 
explore the ability to take oil-seed flax straw and process it into 
commercially viable fibre. 
 
To this ends, Mr. Speaker, they have established a pilot project 
in the town of Canora that will create five jobs during the 
lifetime of the pilot project which will be approximately two 
years. But from that will grow the technology necessary to  

establish a full-fledged flax straw processing operation in the 
town of Canora. That, Mr. Speaker, will create a number of 
other jobs. 
 
But the desire, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan people to be in 
control of their own destiny and to have their own ability to 
finance themselves can be seen in a lot of sectors over our 
economy, and agriculture not the least. 
 
As we've noticed in the last three years in particular, Mr. 
Speaker, a number of intensive hog operations springing up 
across Saskatchewan. Most of these hog operations are as a 
result of communities and individuals within those communities 
getting together and forming a community corporation, making 
their own investment in their own community, attracting 
financing and partnerships from larger companies throughout 
Saskatchewan to develop these operations. Many of these 
operations create 15 to 20 jobs each directly, but also create a 
tremendous number of spin-off jobs. It also creates the 
economic opportunity for farmers to get involved by producing 
feed grains to sell directly to those operations, which gives the 
farmer the fourth option or fifth option in his crop rotation and 
also gives him an increased cash flow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of the things that are 
happening in Saskatchewan as far as economic development is 
concerned. And one other that I would be remiss if I didn't 
mention it, is the expanding livestock operations, expanding 
livestock operations, particularly cattle. In my neck of the 
woods, Mr. Speaker, just recently with the assistance of the 
Department of Agriculture, a breeder-feeder co-op was formed. 
 
That breeder-feeder co-op enables individuals who are presently 
involved in a cattle operation, and in some cases individuals 
who have not previously been involved in cattle operations, to 
start up a cattle operation. To this ends, Mr. Speaker, over this 
last three to four months in the Norquay area in particular, some 
300 bred cows have been imported into that area as a result of 
this program. Further, Mr. Speaker, further supporting 
agriculture and further supporting farmers out there in their 
diversification attempts and enabling them to have a cash flow 
that will allow them to maintain a solid, strong farm operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, Saskatchewan experienced a very 
good crop last year, with the exceptions of the odd spot in our 
province where weather conditions weren't conducive to the 
production of a good crop. But overall, Mr. Speaker, farm net 
income last year is at $925 million, Mr. Speaker, a significant 
amount of money. But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it is 69 
per cent higher than the previous 10-year average. Obviously, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are making the business 
decisions out there that will strengthen and support their 
operations and their industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was because farmers made those decisions 
to diversify, but made those decisions based on market signals 
and not on fickle government-support programs, is the reason 
that Saskatchewan's net farm income is the highest it has been  



February 17, 1995 

 
254 

in the average of 10 years, but it's the reason why Saskatchewan 
is leading the way in agriculture diversification and why 
Saskatchewan is suggested by many of the agriculture 
economists to be on the verge of a major breakthrough and a 
major windfall in the agriculture economy. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that the world is changing and the 
world of agriculture is changing and is changing quite 
dramatically as a result of changes in global marketing and 
changes in global communications, and Saskatchewan farmers 
have recognized that, and Saskatchewan farmers are leading the 
way to meet those changes, to meet the challenges and to 
position themselves in a very good position to take advantages 
of the new markets that are expanding elsewhere around the 
world. 
 
Mr. Farmer, there is no doubt — Mr. Speaker, pardon me — 
there is no doubt that farmers in Saskatchewan have recognized 
the fact that agriculture is changing and that change is being 
escalated by the global impact and by the changing market-
place. No longer, Mr. Speaker, can we be hewers of wood and 
carriers of water. In this world, this ever-changing world, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to look at value added, because no longer can 
we continue to produce a raw product here and ship it 
elsewhere to be value added . . . by that shipping away, the 
value-added benefits and the jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to this end, this budget supports that concept of 
value adding here in Saskatchewan, here in this province, 
keeping the value added benefits here, keeping the jobs here. It 
supports that, Mr. Speaker, it supports that by the reduction of 
the corporate income tax for manufacturers and processors. 
That, Mr. Speaker, has been reduced from 17 per cent to 10 per 
cent — the lowest of any province west of Quebec. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt that this 
province is leading the way, leading the way on the recovery of 
Saskatchewan by setting an example and setting the trend for 
the other provinces in Canada to follow. Quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that the present federal Liberal government 
could take a page out of our book. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, I'm a farmer from Pelly 
constituency, and I think we all know the — for those of us at 
least who live out in rural Saskatchewan and do much of our 
business in our small communities — we all know how vital the 
small-business man is in our communities in providing us with 
the services and to act as a centre of that community and 
keeping that community alive and keeping the agricultural area 
around it serviced and alive. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, small business, we know, creates 
about 72 per cent of all the jobs created in our society. To that 
end, Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of 
the small-business man by reducing the small-business income 
tax to 8 per cent — the lowest provincial rate west of Quebec. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that small business is the engine that 
drives our economy. And, Mr. Speaker, we as government are 
doing all that we can afford to do to assist small business in 
putting fuel in their tank to feed that engine that drives our 
economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Truly, Mr. Speaker, a good, solid foundation to 
build on, to create a provincial economy that is sustainable not 
only for today but for future generations. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
what's laid out in this budget. It's a lot more than just a balanced 
budget for today. It's a lot more than just a balanced budget for 
the next five years and for a half a decade. Mr. Speaker, what it 
is is a blueprint for success, prosperity, and opportunity for 
future generations in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — As the economy grows, Mr. Speaker, here in 
Saskatchewan trained workers will be needed to fill the various 
jobs. Those jobs, Mr. Speaker, will be created to meet the 
challenges of the future. As we know, the traditional jobs of the 
past in many cases may not be here, but they will be replaced 
with jobs of greater . . . requiring greater skills and greater 
educational levels. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that, and 
we've introduced a program called JobStart. JobStart, Mr. 
Speaker, that will provide work-based training programs, that 
will provide the opportunity for individuals to receive their 
training right in the workplace, hands-on experience to meet the 
needs of the various companies and corporations that they work 
for. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that the opportunities of the future will 
require specific training, higher qualities of education; and that, 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to provide the ability for post-
secondary graduates with small . . . to find jobs with small and 
medium-sized firms that will benefit both ways. The individual 
students will have the opportunity for employment and the 
small and medium-sized firms will benefit from the expertise 
that these graduates bring to their companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that we all agree that we live in a 
changing world, we live in a changing economy. And to that 
end, Mr. Speaker, we have to be prepared to meet the 
challenges of the future. And those challenges, Mr. Speaker, 
will be met best with an educated workforce. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, we are endeavouring in every way 
possible to provide financial assistance for the youth of today, 
to gain that opportunity to further their education so that they 
can be educated leaders of tomorrow. To that end, Mr. Speaker, 
we have created, or will be creating . . . this budget lays out a 
plan to create 2,400 new jobs for summer students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 17, 1995 

 
255 

Mr. Harper: — Those jobs, Mr. Speaker, will assist these 
students in paying for their education, providing them the 
opportunity to earn some money, not only to help through the 
summer, but to provide them with the opportunity to save some 
dollars to assist them in their education throughout their classes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, greater student aid to better reflect the cost of 
living and the possible increased costs of secondary education 
is first and foremost. As we noticed, Mr. Speaker — as we 
noticed, Mr. Speaker  the reports on the news over the last 
few weeks have indicated the real intentions of the federal 
Liberal government to turn their backs on the youth of Canada, 
and in particular the youth of Saskatchewan, by offloading their 
responsibilities to funding our post-secondary institutions, and 
forcing those post-secondary institutions to increase their 
tuition fees, and thusly increasing the cost to students to obtain 
their education, and thus limiting the number of students who 
would be able to achieve that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any forward-thinking government recognizes that 
a strong economy and a good quality of education is required to 
maintain a good quality of life. We recognize that, Mr. Speaker, 
and we are doing everything we can as a province to provide the 
educational opportunities for our youth. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, high quality of life means high quality of health 
care. High quality of health care is what Saskatchewan people 
are going to get once again. Quality health care comes about as 
a result of change. Mr. Speaker, in this term of government we 
have embarked upon the road of changing the delivery system 
of health care in Saskatchewan. Change, Mr. Speaker, is what 
we've always been about. For without change we would have 
never had hospitalization in 1947. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, from looking at history books, we 
know what the Liberals of the day said. The Liberals of the day, 
Mr. Speaker, went around Saskatchewan saying that if 
hospitalization was ever introduced, it would be the worst thing 
possible because there would be no hospitals left in 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the Liberals 
said, at the end of the day when hospitalization was introduced, 
Saskatchewan ended up with more hospitals and more hospital 
beds per capita than anywhere else in Canada. 
 
For without change, Mr. Speaker, in 1962 we would have never 
had medicare. And I can, Mr. Speaker, even at my tender young 
age, I can remember, Mr. Speaker, the circumstances 
surrounding the introduction of medicare in 1962. I can 
remember what the Liberals were saying. The Liberals went 
around Saskatchewan and said that if medicare was introduced 
there wouldn't be a doctor left in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals took a leadership role in going around 
Saskatchewan and into almost every community and organized 
KOD meetings — Keep Our Doctors. At these meetings, Mr. 
Speaker, they would bombard the public with misinformation, 
half-truths, and stirred the public up. They worked with the  

doctors, Mr. Speaker — and not all, but some of the doctors 
here in Saskatchewan — and encouraged them to withdraw 
their services for a period of time. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, the rallies that took place in the front 
of this legislature. And I even remember the leader of the 
Liberals at that time, Mr. Thatcher, kicking at the door of the 
legislature — kicking at the door of the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. He was the leader of the Liberals and he was kicking 
at the door of the legislature. Why? Because he wanted to get 
into this legislature and destroy medicare. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, medicare was introduced in 1962. And 
when at a later point in time Ross Thatcher was the premier of 
Saskatchewan, even he couldn't with one fatal swoop of the pen 
remove medicare from Saskatchewan. He tried, though, to chip 
away at the foundations. He tried to chip away at the 
foundations by introducing utilization fees and deterrent fees. 
And personally, Mr. Speaker, I well remember those times. 
 
But recently, Mr. Speaker, it has been brought to my attention 
by some of my wife's family members, of a personal experience 
that their family went through during that particular period in 
Saskatchewan's history. 
 
My wife had an aunt, Tillie Burym, who in 1970, Mr. Speaker, 
lost her battle with cancer. She lost a five- or six-month battle 
with cancer that found her hospitalized for four to six months. 
And, Mr. Speaker, she lost that battle by leaving us and leaving 
this good world. 
 
And at that time of her departing, Mr. Speaker, her husband and 
her family were all with her in the hospital room there in 
Canora. And as the tear-struck family was leaving the hospital 
and walking past the admittance desk, the nurse there reached 
out and said, Mr. Burym, come over here, please; you have a 
bill to pay. You have a hospital bill to pay, Mr. Speaker; you 
have a Liberal death tax to pay. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what Liberals are all about. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is what Liberal health care programs are designed for. 
Mr. Speaker, that will never happen here in Saskatchewan as 
long as there's a New Democratic government at the helm of the 
ship of state of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude by 
saying how proud I am, how proud I am to be a part of this 
forward-looking, progressive, compassionate government. And, 
Mr. Speaker, how proud I am to be a part of this history, a part 
of a new day and a new dawn breaking all across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to get a 
chance to speak in support of this quite remarkable budget. But 
before I do, I'd like to take the opportunity to welcome you and  



February 17, 1995 

 
256 

the other members back to this House. I didn't get a chance to 
speak to the throne speech, so I'll take that opportunity just 
now. 
 
It's nice to see you up there, sir, and I look forward to a 
productive session with you and colleagues on both sides of the 
House. Why I've even got used to the faces of those guys on the 
other side there. It seems the appropriate place for them, and I 
must congratulate the member for Kindersley for his new post 
as Leader of the Opposition, and I hope that he spends a happy 
and productive lifetime leading the opposition. 
 
I'd also like to congratulate our new Lieutenant Governor, the 
Hon. J.E.N. Wiebe. I'm sure that he'll make a good job of it and 
I hope that he will enjoy his tenure of the office. 
 
Personally, I consider it a great honour to be asked to perform 
this office. It may well be a political plum, but even so there are 
many people who get passed over. And the person who does get 
it, I consider a great honour to them to get it. And really I envy 
them the position and I hope he'll enjoy it. 
 
He said in his opening remarks of the throne speech that in 
1991 Saskatchewan did indeed face one of its darkest hours, 
and he was so true. We suffered the effects of a decade of Tory 
misrule in this province, piggybacked on top of the decade of 
Tory misrule down in Ottawa — that everybody in the country 
had to put up with — and that was adding insult to injury. 
 
Anyway, we have turned this province round, sir. Whether the 
opposition likes it or not, we've done so. 
 
And the opposition tells us we're lucky. And I'm sure it's true. 
But I firmly believe that we make our own luck. I think that is 
what is meant by the expression "fortune favors the brave" 
because the New Democratic Party and its predecessor, the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), have been brave and 
brave and brave, time and time again. 
 
I get the same impression living in Saskatchewan as I did living 
in England during the Second World War, during the Blitz. Our 
attitude then was, do your worst; our turn will come. It certainly 
did. And part of it was because we got people like Winston 
Churchill and David Lloyd George and Clement Atlee who got 
together and formed a coalition to face the common enemy, the 
common trials, and the common disasters. 
 
If we could do that in this House, we'd be further forward. 
Unfortunately, we do not get the cooperation of the two 
opposition parties. And on top of the baying of the opposition 
hounds, we have the bleating of a little quisling. 
 
Nevertheless, we have managed to balance the budget. And I 
hope that this means that perhaps we can get a little bit more 
money for rural services in general and for health care in 
particular. An announcement of $20 million extra has been 
made and I'd like to see where that goes when the time comes 
that it is distributed. 
 

The effects of the cuts out on the periphery really have been 
devastating on so many of our little towns and our inhabitants. I 
get a lot of this in feedback, particularly because I'm a 
physician, and people expect me to understand and know 
something about it. And they bring their medical problems to 
me. 
 
If they don't bring their agriculture problems to me, it's because 
I can't tell the difference between a blade of wheat and a blade 
of oats. And that's fair enough. There are other members in the 
caucus here who can deal with that. But medicine is something 
that I know something about, and people bring me their medical 
problems. 
 
So we did have a stroke of luck. But if that particular stroke of 
luck we had had not appeared, another one would have. Fortune 
favours the brave. It happens over and over again. But when the 
luck comes, you have to be waiting for it and ready to grasp it. 
 
We had planned to balance the budget next year, sir, 1996-97. 
But as Shakespeare put it in Julius Caesar: "There is a tide in 
the affairs of men which, taken at the flood, leads on to 
fortune." 
 
And this applies to government as well as to individuals. It 
applies to premiers and it applies to ministers of Finance. At 
least the flood came to Julius Caesar. We were in rather a 
difficult position, sir, because not only was there no flood, we 
had to wade down through the mud to the lowest ebb in 
Saskatchewan's history and provide our own flood before we 
could even attempt to take it, whilst for 10 years the Tories sat 
around like so many Mr. Micawbers, waiting for something to 
turn up. Do they not read, sir, or is it just that they do not 
understand? 
 
Perhaps they are like the vampire in Rudyard Kipling's poem of 
1897. And it goes like this: 
 
 And it isn't the shame 
 And it isn't the blame 
 That sears like a white hot brand. 
 It's coming to know that they never knew why 
 (Seeing at last they could never know why) 
 And never could understand. 
 
And what do we get, sir? Not just a balanced budget forecast in 
'95-96 and for every year into the foreseeable future, but as a 
bonus we get a balanced budget for the year '94-95. Surprise, 
surprise! The shock I got at the briefing yesterday morning to 
find that we got a balanced budget for this year as well was 
incredible — two for the price of one. Yes, sir, we are lucky. 
 
And if you look back to previous NDP administrations, you'll 
see that they've always been lucky too. Go back beyond that to 
Tommy Douglas and the CCF and Woodrow Lloyd and more 
luck, sir. And now we know why. 
 
This doesn't mean that I cannot be critical, but there's a 
difference between positive criticism and negative criticism. If I  



February 17, 1995 

 
257 

tell you, sir, that I like your hat, that's positive criticism. If I tell 
you that you've got muddy boots, that's negative criticism. But 
there's a difference also between constructive criticism and 
destructive criticism. So as I go on to say that your boots are 
muddy but take them off and put these slippers on, then my 
negative criticism becomes constructive. 
 
Let me read you a definition of the word critic from Gage 
Canadian Dictionary: "a person who makes judgements of the 
merits and faults of books, music, pictures, plays, acting, etc." I 
assume that we can add policies to that, but note the words 
used, "merits and faults", not just faults. That's just for the 
knockers up in that gallery there, sir, who like Kipling's vampire 
never will understand the point of government and the way this 
particular government works. 
 
The new Governor General, Romeo LeBlanc, at his installation 
put it very succinctly to the press. He said, remember fellas, 
there is good news as well as bad. 
 
And the dictionary defines criticism as an art, but for those who 
normally sit up there who have turned it into pornography, sir, 
perhaps you've heard of the four major bones in the body. As an 
anatomist I know this quite well. The wishbones who wish that 
things were easier; the jawbones that sit around the coffee pot 
and talk about everything; the knuckle-bones that knock 
everything; and the backbones that get under the load and move 
it. 
 
(1145) 
 
The Tories were the wishbones for 10 years; the Liberals are 
just jawbones; the knuckle-bones are up in the press gallery; 
and the backbones are the cabinet of this province, sir. 
 
I like the idea of a balanced budget and I like the idea of 
balanced budget legislation combined with flexibility, the way 
it seems to be laid out, as long as it really is flexible. Sometimes 
we lose the real meaning of terms in the same way as people 
talk about criticism as being entirely negative and never 
positive. 
 
For some reason or other, a gentlemen up there decided that I'm 
a dissident. I don't know what the opposite to dissident is — 
maybe a consonant. Certainly I'm a dissenter as a Protestant. 
And as being a non-Catholic of course, that makes me 
automatically a heretic. 
 
But I wish people would look up the words in the dictionary 
though before they use them rather than say silly things. And 
the photograph was lousy, too. 
 
But we do have problems with definitions. But if we have real 
flexibility and use it the way it should be used, meaning you can 
go either way not just one way only, and don't use it 
hypocritically as sometimes words like compassionate can be 
overused and abused. 
 
When I have a contractor to do a job in my house there's going  

to be a mess. I expect that. But part of the contract is that he 
will clear up that mess after he's finished, and if he doesn't, then 
I don't pay him. 
 
And in government there are times when you need to borrow 
and get into debt. But I see no obvious reason why the 
government shouldn't work in the same way as a contractor. 
The contractor makes a mess, he clears it up. The big mess in 
government is getting into debt, and they should be forced to 
clear that up before they call an election. 
 
So they borrow for a year or two to get things organized, their 
programs put into place, but they should balance the budget in 
the last year. And I think this is the sensible thing. 
 
And if they balance the budget in the fourth year, expecting an 
election, and something happens that they decide to wait for the 
fifth year for an election, then obviously they're going to have to 
balance the budget in the fifth year too. And that is a plus for 
us. And I think this is a sort of unexpected side effect of a 
balanced budget over a four-year period. 
 
And another side effect of this is that it would prevent a snap 
election. If somebody gets . . . if government gets into trouble 
after a couple of years and they're in a mess financially, they 
can't just throw up their hands and go through an election and 
say, damn it, somebody else can get in and fix it. Because they 
wouldn't be able to go to the election unless they had a balanced 
budget. 
 
So they'd have to bear this very much in mind. This would be an 
added protection to the people in the province and another 
incentive for the government to be careful with its financing. 
The problem is of course that there's no way we can guarantee 
that the Tories won't ignore this like they ignored the maximum 
five-year term in 1991 and went over. 
 
Mind you, I doubt if they'll get a chance to trash the place again 
within my lifetime, sir. Once bitten, twice shy. 
 
I remember speaking in an earlier budget debate two or three 
years ago — I forget exactly when but it's in Hansard — when 
we introduced the idea of a four-year budget plan. At the time, 
sir, there were howls of derision from the opposition benches. 
And I said at the time that the howls were not because they 
doubted we could do it, but because they knew we could do it 
and we would do it. And we have, sir. We have, in spades. 
 
Each year we cut approximately $300 million from the year's 
previous deficit until we've arrived at this happy event when we 
can announce not only that we intend to do it but — surprise, 
surprise — we have already done it. No fuss, no big drums, no 
fanfare of trumpets, no cheerleaders, no drum majorettes. We 
just did it quietly and competently. 
 
So maybe the Tories' champion in Alberta will announce a 
balanced budget when he gets his chance in a week or two's 
time; or the Liberal idol down in New Brunswick will do the 
same — will announce that they're going to be balancing the  



February 17, 1995 

 
258 

budget for '95 and '96. And we could just sit back here and 
smile very contentedly and tell them, so what, we did it last 
year. The bliss is incredible, sir. 
 
And the long faces over there during the budget yesterday . . . 
It's great to sit in this particular place. It may not be very 
important, but you see everything. And the faces getting longer 
and longer and the expressions getting blacker and blacker as 
each new successful part of the budget came out was a triumph, 
sir. 
 
And there is a difference between them and us. Sometimes we 
get to think that there isn't; that if there is, it's very minimal. But 
there is a difference, and that is in the word competence. And I 
don't think we have to say anything more on that score because 
we have proved it and we will keep on proving it, sir. 
 
Sir, we shall be reducing the corporate tax on small businesses 
whose total manufacturing and processing is in Saskatchewan, 
and if part of their manufacturing is in Saskatchewan we'll 
reduce the tax on that. For DeCap's Trailer Manufacturing in 
Lafleche and Keith Brown's Custom Ag Industries in 
Gravelbourg this should result in a reduction of tax from 17 per 
cent all the way down to the 10 per cent because they are 
confined to Saskatchewan. They're Saskatchewan-born people, 
Saskatchewan-bred people, and they've devoted their whole 
lives to Saskatchewan farming and business. 
 
And Sunset Solar Systems in Assiniboia who deal in solar 
equipment and they also manufacture windmills which are sold 
all over Canada and the United States, they should benefit from 
this too. And this is exactly the sort of stimulus our economy 
needs. And it's directed to the right sector of manufacturing, the 
small guys struggling along in our small towns — not the 
nationals and the multinationals that have enough already. Why 
should we give them money? 
 
If there's money to be given away in Saskatchewan, let's give it 
to the people who live here and work here and will be buried 
here, not people who simply step over the border with their 
hand out and when you fill it they say, that's not enough, fill the 
other hand too. And this I think is very positive and I should be 
very happy to tell people about this in the constituency — in the 
present constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the new 
constituency of Wood River. 
 
Yes, the opposition is going to tell us we're lucky. And they're 
right — we are lucky. And why are we lucky? We're lucky 
because we plan ahead. We plan ahead and we make good plans 
and then we nail our colours to the mast. 
 
Now to you landlubbers, perhaps that doesn't mean anything, so 
I'll explain. Before engaging in a naval battle each ship of the 
line runs up its national flag so its own ships won't fire upon it, 
of course. And it runs this up to the top of the highest mast and 
the signal for surrender is for it to strike its colours and pull the 
flag down. And that means to the opposition, don't fire on us 
any more; we're surrendered; we're captured; we won't fire at all 
again. 

But the tradition in the Royal Navy has long been to send a 
sailor shinnying up the mast after the flag with a hammer and a 
mouth full of staples. And his job is to staple the flag to the 
mast so it can't be struck; it can't be pulled down. Then they get 
the choice: you either fight and win, or you die. And out in the 
middle of the ocean there's nowhere to run unless you can walk 
on water. And we as a government have fought and won, sir, 
and we lived. And this is where the member of Shaunavon is 
seen to be such a sad man, sir. He struck his colours, turned and 
fled before the enemy was even in ranging distance. 
 
My sources tell me that he joined the New Democratic Party 
way back in 1978. In the fall of 1991 through his own efforts he 
won the chance to do something for his home town and the 
people that he lived with, but when the time came he failed. In 
1993 he sold his birthright for a mess of potage that's worth 
maybe $5,000 a year. As it says in the good book: "O ye of little 
faith." It's really rather sad. 
 
Over the time his friends and colleagues I'm sure will forgive 
him, but will he forgive himself, sir? This is the real question. 
Twice they've called and decided on a nominating convention, 
and twice they postponed it. His enemy is not me, sir, his 
enemy is not a Tory even, but a fellow Liberal. One that, 
unfortunately for him, can't be bought off by being given a 
Senate seat because we have none available in this province, 
and in any case they're not government either. 
 
As a matter of fact, I wish him well and hope he wins his 
nomination, sir, because it's going to be a lot easier to beat a 
turncoat than Gerry Ruess who, if nothing else, at least is an 
outspoken and, I hope, honourable Liberal. 
 
And this is the Liberal quandary. He has served his purpose, 
which makes him disposable, I'm afraid. But fortunately for 
him, he has two motherly ladies looking after him. So let us just 
watch what happens, sir, when the tin roof gets hotter in the 
spring sunshine, because I understand the cat's claws are 
notoriously tender. 
 
And if I wander off the point, sir, let me get back. To repeat, we 
are lucky because we plan ahead and we plan well. And safe 
within our plan, when a bit of luck passes by we can reach out 
and grab it and incorporate that luck into our plan. When we 
planned to balance the budget, we left a little bit of room for 
luck, knowing that something would come by. And when that 
luck came, and it doesn't matter whether it's in the form of 
increased gas and oil permit revenues or a bumper crop or gold 
or diamonds — what difference does it make? — we took that 
luck because everybody likes a bit of gravy. And I'm looking 
forward to the next year when we have that meal. 
 
Now I'd like to talk about one or two things in my own area, 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency and Wood River. The big 
problem in Gravelbourg of course is the nursing home. It's been 
promised and it's been promised and it's been promised again. 
Three members of this Legislative Assembly have either battled 
with the problem or not battled with the problem. How do we 
know whether they actually tried or whether they didn't? But  



February 17, 1995 

 
259 

nevertheless each of them in turn failed to get it going. It's been 
designed, it's been redesigned, and it's designed over and over 
again. 
 
Do you know, we spent over $800,000 in plans, in pieces of 
paper with pictures on them. You know, those plans are almost 
as valuable as Rembrandts or Van Goghs or Salvador Dalis. 
Architects are retiring on the proceeds of Gravelbourg alone. 
It's ridiculous, sir. 
 
It was way back in 1978 that the government of the day, and 
that was the previous NDP government under Allan Blakeney, 
they agreed that our hospital was too old — it was built in 
1928, sir — and our nursing home was a fire trap and both 
needed replacement. And it took 16 long frustrating years to get 
the go-ahead. And we've been working on it solidly since then. 
 
(1200) 
 
And now, thanks to the present government, the walls and the 
roof are on and we're working inside, and we're very happy that 
we have got this. And I thank the Minister of Health and the 
previous minister of Health and the Finance minister, who 
found the money, and the Premier who was quite insistent that 
this go ahead. 
 
And we have a letter, signed by the deputy minister of Health, 
Duane Adams himself, dated June 20, 1994, instructing us to 
start building a 50-bed long-term facility. 
 
I also have a document dated September 28, 1993 which was 
produced by the district support branch of the department, 
which states, and I quote: 
 
 . . . 50 replacement beds in Gravelbourg meet the target 

range of 120-140 beds (per)/1000 population aged over 
75 for this district. 

 
I even have a letter addressed to me as the mayor of 
Gravelbourg dated December 1, 1988 — a long time ago — 
when we were offered 75 beds. And he cut it down  50 and 
we accept that, okay, no problem. We all need to draw in our 
horns. 
 
But on November 8, 1994 a meeting was held at St. Joseph's 
Hospital. Members of the Department of Health, the district 
health board, our local hospital board, members of the medical 
staff, and myself were present. A certain Bob Croft, who is an 
ex-employee of the Department of Health and now a consultant 
employed by the department, told us quite categorically that if 
we did not accept the cut-back to 43 long-term beds, we would 
get no acute care beds. 
 
Now you can imagine what the hospital board and the local 
people think about this. We consider this blackmail, sir, that 
somebody like that, after it's been decided by the department in 
1993 that 50 long-term beds are within the 120 to 140 limit and 
then we get a letter from June 20 from the deputy minister 
himself telling us to go ahead with 50 beds, I cannot understand  

why some twit like that comes to us and tries to strong-arm us 
into making do with what you see. 
 
What are we going to do with the other seven who were there, 
sir? This is the problem. As it is, our facility is for levels 1 and 
2, and the government sensibly decided to make this a level 3 
and level 4 because every member, every resident, is level 3 and 
level 4. And we do not have room for those other seven. We 
can't send them to Assiniboia. They've got 50 level 3 and level 4 
in a level 1 and level 2 home already. And they're going to have 
to leave that building open and in use until we can find places 
for those 50 people. 
 
It doesn't make any sense now to cut back after a decision is 
made and redesign the building at so much extra cost. And 
we've already got 37 people on the waiting-list who are sitting 
in the area at home. 
 
I wouldn't accept this sort of treatment from the Tories or the 
Liberals. There's no way I can accept this sort of treatment for 
the people that I have lived amongst for 18 years, and worked 
with and worked for, without some acceptable explanation. 
 
The NDP has always been, in my opinion, honourable, truthful, 
and compassionate. That's why I joined in the first place. I 
wrote, protesting, pointing this out. The letter was not even 
acknowledged. Sir, we can and we must do better than that. 
Credibility depends upon our reliability. And I am prepared to 
risk my seat in this Assembly to ensure that we live up to our 
obligations in this respect. 
 
I joined the New Democratic Party many years ago because I 
was convinced that, under Tommy Douglas and Woodrow 
Lloyd and Allan Blakeney, this party had done an excellent job 
of running this province. However, I feel it is time for some 
small boy to point out to the emperor that if he goes outside in 
his new suit of clothing, he's going to get frostbite in some very 
interesting places. Where I was raised, we were taught to tell 
the truth and shame the devil. 
 
But I'd like to know where the member from Shaunavon was 
during all this. The member who was so horrified of our 
hospital closures that he scuffled across the floor to hide behind 
the skirts of a surrogate mother. He seems to have been rather 
subdued until the last couple of days, sir. I don't know why, 
maybe it's the nomination coming up that's sort of galvanized 
him a little bit. Why didn't he stay over here and help me if he 
had problems with health care in rural Saskatchewan? He never 
mentioned his problems once, and in the caucus vote on the 
matter, if I remember rightly, he voted for it. He seemed to 
agree with the policy then, sir. 
 
Only when the session was ended and everybody had dispersed 
did he show his true colours. He did not have the courage to 
make a declaration in this House and walk boldly across the 
floor. No, sir, he waited till everybody had gone. No discussion 
with the Premier, no notice to anyone, just a surreptitious press 
conference with his new armour. 
 



February 17, 1995 

 
260 

Despite my loudly expressed doubts about health care cuts, he 
never once approached me to make common cause or suggest 
further debate. I went with him to the Ponteix meeting in his 
constituency where it was explained, and I went with him to the 
Kincaid meeting, to support him at their explanation. There was 
no mention of problems then from him. There were mention 
from the audience, but not from him. 
 
And now he faces the moment of truth; now he faces a 
nominating convention. Now he faces the Liberal candidate he 
defeated in the '91 election, and as I say, he's put that meeting 
off twice. And what's he going to do? I think Shaunavon is 
going to vote for Mr. Ruess. And this makes the present 
member a very sad and desperate man, shunned by the party he 
deserted, and mistrusted by the party he fled to. I doubt if even 
the Tories would want him now — used goods, I think the term 
is, shop-soiled. 
 
There was another chap in this House not too long ago, a few 
years ago, who had a name very similar to the previous leader 
of the opposition there, although he's not related, who played 
the odds and skipped from party to party. And where is he now? 
Does anybody ever hear of him? He seems to have disappeared 
from sight. 
 
But the member from Shaunavon points out in his diatribe on 
Monday that there's no cabinet member south of Highway 1, sir, 
which is true. And I wonder if that's the reason for that 
member's defection, sir. Perhaps it's because he didn't get the 
agriculture portfolio and the opportunity to implement the 
famous McPherson plan for the province, but had picked up his 
marbles and stomped off disgruntledly to play in a corner by 
himself, hoping maybe that he could impress the blonde. 
 
Somebody pointed out yesterday the new arrangements for the 
Liberal seats over there. And one wonders why. Is there some 
power struggle going on that somebody won't accept the back 
row? I don't know. I could say more, but I'll leave it at that. 
 
The member for Shaunavon takes great delight in mocking me 
for what I've written in the press. I assume he's never heard of 
the concept of informed dissent. There are anti-abortionists in 
the New Democratic Party, sir, and pro-choicers. Nobody, but 
nobody, is pro-abortion, I'm sure. I wonder if that is not the case 
in the Liberal Party. 
 
There are people in this party who are against nuclear energy 
development and further mining of uranium; others oppose 
gambling, the casinos, one-armed bandits. Some of the best 
parliamentarians in memory — Whig and Tory in the 18th 
century, Conservatives and Liberals in the 19th century, 
Winston Churchill in the 20th century, and some of the back-
bench Labour members in London, in Westminster — have 
been notable dissenters. If the Liberals get over . . . more than 
two and a half members next time around, perhaps the member 
for Shaunavon will come to understand that, and perhaps the 
press gallery will too. 
 

There is always room for dissent and discussion in a democratic 
party and there always will be, but that dissent has to be logical 
and it has to be backed up by facts and figures. I am very 
pleased that the member has read these quotes from my letters 
into the proceedings of this House and I'd like to give him a 
couple more. 
 
I published a full-page article in the Canadian Medical 
Association journal in 1976 entitled: The Joys of Rural 
Practice, in which I laid out the advantages of rural versus 
urban medical practice. The dean of medicine at the time gave 
copies of this article to all senior medical students in the 
University of Saskatchewan medical school. And in 1990, the 
same Canadian Medical Association journal, which is the senior 
medical journal in Canada, published an article of mine, a full 
page, entitled: Saskatchewan Needs Its Small Hospitals, which 
was written in response to the Schwartz report which had been 
published not too long previous to that. 
 
And I have not changed my tune, sir, unlike the member 
opposite who reeled into a lament, and then sprung a hole in his 
bagpipes and now just drones along. From being a back-
bencher, a member of the government with a direct contact with 
the cabinet, he has skunked off to be a back member of the third 
party in this House with access to absolutely nothing unless 
possibly he hopes to become a latter-day Senator Hazen Argue. 
 
The member asks me what influence I have with the Minister of 
Health. I would like to turn that question back on him and ask 
him what influence he has with the Minister of Health, over 
there in the peanut gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sir, I have a letter here dated February 10, 1995, 
from our new Minister of Health. I'd like to read a couple of 
sentences from it to you for the benefit of the member for 
Shaunavon and the opposition. It's addressed to me personally 
and signed. 
 
 To assist . . . with the task ahead, I write to ask that you 

share with me a brief note with your assessment of 
health reform (in) . . . your constituency. 

 
 I look forward to working with you as we continue 

revitalizing health care in our province. Please don't 
hesitate to be in touch if I can be of any assistance. 

 
I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sir, if the member for 
Shaunavon has a similar letter or perhaps he just has a 
promissory note from the leader of his party. 
 
And if we really want to get down to motives, sir, let me quote 
Edmund Burke, author of Reflections on the French Revolution. 
He was a great dissenter, member of many governments, but a 
dissenter just the same: 
 
 It is not what a lawyer says I may do; but what 

humanity, reason and justice tell me I ought to do. 
 



February 17, 1995 

 
261 

There's much more I could say on this matter, sir, but I shan't. I 
think my point is made. 
 
But I would like to make some suggestions to the member 
opposite on what I think we need by way of medical service in 
the Wood River constituency. All we got from him on Monday 
was second-hand and third-rate rhetoric. Let me give you some 
real reasons based on medical logic, sir. Let's get a proper 
debate started on this instead of just set speeches. There's a 
difference between a series of musical songs and an opera. Let's 
get an opera going if we really want to make some noise and 
have some beautiful music. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sir, in this area there used to be nine hospitals. 
Seven of those have been closed, converted, inverted, diverted 
— whatever you'd like to call it. But as we do not need a grain 
elevator every 10 miles, we do not need a small hospital every 
20 miles. However the closures and the consequences in my 
opinion have not been properly thought out. From the U.S. 
(United States) border south of Mankota to Moose Jaw is 160 
miles — and that's miles, not kilometres, sir. And the closest 
acute care beds are at Gravelbourg which is about a hundred 
miles away. 
 
Originally the department had offered us in Gravelbourg 18 
acute care beds. Since then, all acute care funding has been 
withdrawn from Mankota, Kincaid, and Lafleche, and now the 
department wants to cut us back to six acute care beds. And I 
consider this to be quite inadequate. 
 
(1215) 
 
The alternate route from south of Mankota is through Ponteix to 
Swift Current, a distance of 120 miles, sir. And again that's 
miles, not kilometres. There are no acute care beds at all 
because of the denial of acute care funding to Mankota and the 
closure of Kincaid and Ponteix hospitals. And I know that we 
say that Kincaid and Ponteix are converted and not closed, but 
when you go there at 7 o'clock at night or 7 o'clock in the 
morning and the doors are locked and it is in darkness and 
there's nothing there but a telephone, I fear our constituents are 
going to consider that closed whether we do or not. 
 
I think we need acute care beds every 50 miles or so. And it 
doesn't have to be many — a couple would probably do it — 
which would mean acute care in Coronach, Mankota, and 
Ponteix. Coronach has a special need, sir, because of the 
coalmine and the power plant. These can be very dangerous. 
There's lots of accidents and people need care and attention. 
 
There needs to be more funding at Climax too because of its 
great distance from anywhere and the problems they have in 
winter with blocking of the Frenchman River bridge by snow or 
floods. There are problems like this that simple number-
crunching does not reveal. You have to go there and travel the 
road and look at the countryside and measure the distances on 
your clock to realize what the problem is. 
 
I think we need more flexibility, sir. And I base the distances of  

50 miles on the fact that about 50 per cent of people who have a 
heart attack die within two hours of the onset of symptoms. I 
get these figures from a Professor John Hampton of Nottingham 
University; he's a cardiologist. 
 
Obviously, sir, if I was to drop dead in this House at this 
minute, it wouldn't matter if the hospital was in the next street; 
you'd never get me there. 
 
But with ambulances at highway speeds we could get patients 
to medical care within the hour and allow another hour for a 
doctor to work on them. While the ambulance rides are 
dangerous too, you're stuck — you've got no doctor at one end 
and you've not arrived at the doctor at the other, and you're 
sitting in a tin can which is bouncing along our highways. 
 
And I quote a study by Dr. Black who spent many years in the 
outports of Newfoundland and said that acute cardiac care 
could be given in the outport hospitals just as well as in St. 
John's and the death rate was just as good. They couldn't get 
out; there was just no way. 
 
I see no reason why Dr. Berry — just to quote an example — in 
Mankota could not give intravenous streptokinase under the 
direct supervision of specialists in Moose Jaw or Regina by 
instant phone line transmission of ECG (electrocardiogram), 
blood pressure, and pulse, without actually leaving the 
emergency room. 
 
And on page 6 of this year's throne speech, sir, we talk about 
SaskTel and Internet and the information highway. Let us make 
a start, sir, and link all our small hospitals together and to our 
city hospitals. 
 
It's fine that SaskTel International is working in Europe and the 
Philippines and in Africa. This is tremendous and I agree with 
this, we should do. But how about doing something in 
Saskatchewan as well where our people can actually see it? 
 
There's a tremendous opportunity here to lead the world and the 
people will see it as, the old saw goes: justice was not only 
done, it must be seen to be done. 
 
We can do this. Now people will see it and will accept it. And it 
would bring in a lot of economic development benefits too, 
because if we could get this going, we could sell the system to 
Alberta, Manitoba, Newfoundland, Utah, Florida, anywhere. If 
we could set up this system we could sell it to them and make a 
lot of money and create a lot of jobs and really be at the 
forefront. 
 
Just picture it, sir: say Dr. Unarket at Rockglen, just as an 
example, and he has a puzzling patient in his emergency room, 
an emergency room that has a computer, a TV camera, and a 
telly screen. Perhaps the patient has a rash that is giving 
problems and Dr. Unarket has problems making a diagnosis. So 
he can have the patient there under the TV camera, send in the 
signal to say Dr. Ann Grahame or Professor Roberta McKay, 
dermatologists in Regina, and they can have a three-way  



February 17, 1995 

 
262 

interactive consultation where signs and symptoms and 
treatment can be discussed all at the same time. 
 
They would see the patient on their screen in Regina and the 
patient would see the doctor's screwed-up face on their screen 
in Rockglen. It would save all the trouble of consultations and 
travel. It could be done there at the one session. 
 
I think that sounds sensible, and it's certainly feasible in this day 
when we can have surrogate sex by wearing a pair of goggles 
and a fancy control glove. Let's do it with real people. 
 
And I think that once we get the equipment set up, it's going to 
be very cost effective. All the hospitals have been computerized 
already for accounting purposes and they're going to be linked 
up to each other and to the centre. All we need is a compatible 
program which would do the clinical work. SaskTel has the 
cables. We could use fibre optics. How about satellite link-up 
or microwave. These things are all available in our province. 
We could do it. Whichever is the best we could use. And we 
deserve the best. How about that for real health care reform, 
sir? 
 
And I challenge the member for Shaunavon to make some other 
suggestions. Let him bring something up. On Monday he didn't 
tell us anything. He just complained. He had nothing to put in 
its place. I'm offering this. If it's of value, fine. At least we can 
discuss it. 
 
And imagine how this could revolutionize health care up in the 
North, sir. You could have a portable system. I think all you 
would need would be a nurse practitioner and by satellite we 
could link up with the hospital in Prince Albert, specialists in 
Saskatoon, do a lot of diagnosis without people leaving their 
own village. Just in the same way as we send the TB 
(tuberculosis) vans around and now the breast survey van. Why 
not a portable system? And we could use our nurse practitioners 
only. 
 
Now, sir, is this criticism? And the answer, of course it is. But 
is it positive criticism or is it negative criticism? Is it 
constructive or is it destructive? And if on Monday, you find 
that my seat has been moved from here and I'm holding hands 
with the member for Arm River, you'll know what the Leader of 
the House and the whip think, sir. 
 
The nearest ambulance to Mankota is in Gravelbourg and that's 
over an hour's drive away. And when the ambulance travels, it 
travels for an hour or more empty toward . . . to Mankota and I 
think this is a dangerous delay. 
 
I would propose that an ambulance be stationed in Mankota and 
another one in Climax, possibly in Coronach, too. This would 
reduce the waiting time enormously. If the patient had to be 
transferred, that would be one hour less it would take for that 
patient to get transferred to the city. 
 
And it needn't be terribly expensive, sir. It can be owned by the 
district board or they could lease it and reduce the capital 
outlay. And I propose the Ponteix hospital be open 24 hours a 

day with the same four multi-purpose beds as in Rockglen and 
in Lafleche. 
 
There is a silly semantic game going on out there where after 12 
hours, a patient with pneumonia or kidney infection must be 
transferred out. But there are no beds in Swift Current or Moose 
Jaw, so they have to consult another doctor by telephone who 
gravely advises them to keep the patient in convalescent care 
for another 24 or 48 hours. Now this really is not terribly 
sensible, sir. A patient with pneumonia or pyelitis is acutely ill 
and is not convalescent. They can be in grave danger and to 
classify them as convalescent is simply a semantic game and an 
insult toward everybody's intelligence. Convalescence is the 
recovery phase after the acute care is over. 
 
We have a problem here that . . . I understand that the 
agreement with the coalition for rural health care is not being 
honoured by the boards. I spent several days in the past couple 
of weeks out in the small hospitals, in my small towns, asking 
about this. And apparently the agreement that called for 24 to 
48 hours observation is not being honoured. They're still being 
restricted to 8 to 12 hours. 
 
Again, that's a criticism, sir. But I think that if we honour the 
agreement and allow these people 48 hours observation 
assessment, most of our troubles will be over. I know for years, 
when somebody brings a sick kid into my hospital, I've always 
told him two sleeps because it takes the best part of 48 hours to 
get enough penicillin into a baby to bring the temperature 
down. It takes 48 hours to get over the initial pain of a fracture 
or a pleurisy. And for somebody in a department to say it isn't 
true, is just not acceptable. 
 
But I bring these up to you at this time because these 
suggestions involve finances, and of course the budget debate is 
the focus of provincial finances. And I suggest that some of the 
10 . . . what $20 million that has been announced for rural 
health care go towards solving some of these problems, sir. 
 
There is an initiative that I agree with entirely in the purview of 
health care. It came up in the throne speech. I didn't get a 
chance to speak to it. I'd like to mention the business of 
midwifery right now, sir. Again it'll cost some money so it has 
to be debated in the Committee of Finance. 
 
I learned all my obstetrics from nurse midwives — mostly Irish 
— in Glasgow many years ago. And I specify nurse midwives. 
The system then and there was three years to RN (registered 
nurse) and then a full year to midwife status. And that full year 
was a full year, sir. It wasn't a university year of eight to nine 
months from 9 o'clock in the morning to 5 o'clock in the 
afternoon. It was full time, 12-hour shifts, seven days a week if 
necessary; Saturdays and Sundays were never off. And it was 
all hands-on, real, live women with real, live babies, not 
blackboard drawings and models. 
 
There's a big problem in the western European and North 
American world where sex and pregnancy have been taboo for 
so many years. And this has led to the problem that the ultimate  



February 17, 1995 

 
263 

outcome, labour and delivery, have become medicalized 
unnecessarily largely because women are terrified of the 
process of delivering. And it's a dirty subject and it's taboo and I 
think we have a problem with our attitude to the whole matter. 
Because whenever I want to empty my bladder, sir, or my 
bowel, I don't go and see a doctor. I only go and see a doctor 
when I have problems emptying my bladder and my bowel. The 
uterus empties itself naturally after 40 weeks, generally without 
any interference and without any problems, if we will simply 
stand back and allow it to do it. 
 
And I've had over 30 years experience and delivered upwards of 
a thousand babies and I can assure you that this is the situation. 
But there are times when one needs to get in and one needs to 
get in fast. I've never used a fetal monitor. I've never even seen 
one. And I'm glad to say that the Society of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists of Canada have come down against using fetal 
monitoring in normal pregnancy because it leads to too many 
forceps deliveries, too many Caesarean sections, and too much 
expense and it makes the delivery abnormal and leads to 
problems in future deliveries. 
 
But what is normal pregnancy? What is normal labour? This is 
where the physician comes in. The physician's job is diagnosis 
and treatment. Even our good friend, Dr. Rachlis, agrees with 
that. You'll find it quoted in Strong Medicine. The midwife's 
job is to conduct the lady in labour and assist her to complete 
what is a normal physiological process that started with Eve. 
Women have been having babies, sir, long before doctors were 
invented. And if they hadn't done a good job of it, the race 
would have died out before Hippocrates and Aesclipios were 
even born. 
 
Having said that, sir, I'm convinced that the only sensible place 
to have a baby is in a hospital, where all the dressings, the 
cleaning materials and solutions, the equipment, is gathered 
together in one place for ease of access. And the delivery room 
is designed for this purpose and it's also easily cleaned of the 
incredible mess that you get in even a short and easy delivery — 
our homes are not, sir; they're just not suitable. 
 
(1230) 
 
Most deliveries are simple and they're safe. But each delivery is 
nevertheless a catastrophe just waiting to happen. When a 
catastrophe does happen, it happens incredibly fast, within 
seconds, and there's just no time to wait for an ambulance or the 
doctor. The doctor should be within easy reach at all times 
during labour and he should be supervising it; that's his job. But 
he should be supervising out of sight most of the time because 
this, sir, truly is women's work and they understand delivery 
and pregnancy and childbirth in a way that no man, however 
sympathetic, will ever realize. 
 
When my children climbed trees, sir, I never told them to stop. I 
just sauntered over and stood underneath, ready to catch them if 
they fell. And this is the doctor's job in a normal delivery — 
stand by and ready to catch if there's any problem. 
 

Now on May 12, '94, in question period, the member for 
Shaunavon asked the question about the 52 small hospitals that 
have been closed and converted in the province and the answer 
received was that only warts were removed in small hospitals 
and he accepted that reply meekly as a lamb. Now I don't accept 
that reply, sir. In Lafleche Union Hospital, which is only an 
eight-bed hospital, I did appendectomies regularly. I did 
tonsillectomies, hemorrhoids, tubal ligations, vasectomies, and 
hernias. I also reduced and set most of my own fractures and 
dislocations. The doctors in Kincaid, Mankota, Ponteix, 
Vanguard, and Assiniboia, they did the same with the assistance 
of each other. 
 
Dr. Barretto, a classmate of mine, came to Ponteix in 1968. And 
he and I burned up many a mile travelling 44 miles from 
Ponteix to Lafleche or Lafleche to Ponteix to help each other 
with operations and difficult deliveries any time, day or night. 
Any limitation that there was, or has been, has been imposed 
upon us not by the government, sir, but by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. And our patients, who are also my 
voters, know it. And I believe, sir, that I owe it to my rural 
medical colleagues and to my loyal patients to apologize to 
them for this slack. 
 
I'd like to give you a quotation again from Edmund Burke, the 
18th century statesman and member of several governments, 
that I've already quoted. He told the electors of Bristol: 
 
 . . . it ought to be the happiness and glory of a 

representative to live in the strictest union, the closest 
correspondence, and the most unreserved 
communication with his constituents. Their wishes 
ought to have great weight with him; their opinions high 
respect, their business, our unremitted attention. 

 
He goes on to say, sir: 
 
 Authoritative instructions, mandates issued, which the 

member is bound blindly to obey, to vote, and to argue 
for, though contradictory to the clearest convictions of 
his judgement and conscience . . . arise from a 
fundamental mistake of the whole order and tenor of our 
constitution. 

 
He is talking about the Connaught Constitution of the House of 
Westminster, of course. 
 
Nevertheless, I agree fully with this sentence which, stated in 
modern language, means a parliamentarian's duty and loyalty is 
to his constituents, and that he owes them not only hard work, 
but his best thinking on policy as well. 
 
As a physician, my patients' interests were always foremost in 
my mind. And if the choice came between taking the wife out 
or attending a delivery or an emergency, then my wife knew and 
accepted that that medical or surgical emergency would come 
first. And if you didn't get out, that was too bad. And now that 
I'm a member of this legislature, it is my constituents to whom I 
pledge my loyalty. 



February 17, 1995 

 
264 

To come back to the budget, sir, just for a brief moment. I'm 
pleased that there will be no cuts to education spending in the 
year of '95 and '96. I know that in the budget projection that we 
announced some years ago, there were 4 per cent cuts for '93-
94, '94-95, but none in '95-96. And of course I pointed out this 
fact to the teachers and the principals and the school boards in 
my district. But the way it is, you know, people are sceptical. 
When I reassured them, they said, well maybe; we'll see. 
 
And now I'm pleased that in this budget there are no cuts to 
education spending and that they will see and I shall be very 
happy to demonstrate to them that we have kept our word on 
this. And not only that, but as an earnest of good intention, we 
have announced that there will be a 2 per cent increase in the 
year ahead, '96-97. I think this is another demonstration that we 
are thinking ahead, planning ahead, and informing our 
constituents of our plans so that they can plan ahead too. 
 
Openness is essential to good government. And by this method 
of forward thinking, planning in advance, and informing 
municipalities and school boards so that they can do the thing, 
we shall make the government process understandable to all. 
And this will allow time for our suggestions to mature. And 
perhaps there'll be alternative suggestions can be made by those 
municipalities and school boards, etc., that are affected before it 
becomes too late to modify our costs. There are always things 
that we can do to make things better. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, sir, I will be voting gladly in favour of this 
budget, as I voted in favour of the throne speech. I think we're 
doing a good job and I congratulate the cabinet and the Minister 
of Health, our new Minister of Health, who I knew very well 
many years ago because he was my pastor in Gravelbourg at the 
United Church and my wife and family and I used to go there. 
 
We used to go regularly  maybe not as frequently as he'd like 
 you know, because Christmas comes regularly once a year. 
The joke always used to be: what religion are you? C and E. 
You mean C of E — Church of England. No sir, C and E — 
Christmas and Easter. 
 
But before I sit down, sir, I would like to take the opportunity to 
adjourn this debate, if that meets with the House's agreement. 
Thank you, sir. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:38 p.m. 
 
 


