






















































May 18, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 18, 1995 

 

 
2453 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the minister and his officials once again today. Mr. Minister, 
my colleague from Moosomin, who has been Justice critic 
through this session, asked you a number of questions at the 
end of which you indicated you'd respond in writing to. 
 
Can you give us some indication of how long you believe it will 
take to come up with those answers. He asked you questions 
pertaining to cost, some other issues surrounding investigations, 
that type of thing. Can you give us an idea? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It's hard to say but let me put it this way 
to the member. We'll give you an answer within two or three 
days on the . . . to the extent we're able to. Some things like the 
costs are difficult to calculate and I don't think we can provide 
very good information about that. But we'll do the best we can 
on all the questions and answer them to the extent that we're 
able to, and try and get that to the member in a very timely way. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. How long did it take 
you to compile the costs associated with the Martensville 
situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm told that the Martensville 
calculations took a couple of days, that all had been completed 
and all were . . . just a matter of rounding up the information; 
that took a couple of days. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Good. Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because 
that was an extensive investigation and entailed a lot of 
individuals doing different things, so I would expect that we 
can probably have your answer sometime within a week on 
some of the other issues. I appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, there's another issue which I want to touch on 
which you have not been able to fully answer, at least up to a 
few days ago. And you were asked some questions about how 
long the investigation into Phoenix Advertising would take and 
you indicated there had to be some transcripts prepared for, I 
believe, it's a Mr. Martin in Calgary. Can you inform the 
Assembly where that's at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We referred this matter to Mr. Martin 
with all the material that we had at the end of March — around 
about the end of March. We just can't put our finger on the 
exact date. About three weeks ago, two to three weeks ago, we 
got a request from him for the transcript. The transcript, of 
course, hadn't . . . there was no transcript; it had to be ordered, 
and the department requisitioned the transcript, and we're told  

that it will be ready in two weeks. Yes, about two weeks and 
we'll send it on to Mr. Martin as soon as we get it. 
 
There had been no indication prior to his request that he wanted 
a transcript, and as I say, that happened about three weeks ago 
which would be around about the end of April. So that's where 
it sits. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I find that strange, Minister, given modern 
electronics. You're telling me this stuff isn't on diskette when 
it's done  I presume you're talking about the transcripts of the 
actual trial process which only lasted a few days  that none of 
that stuff is on diskette that can then just be sent over and run 
through a computer and run off on a printer? That's not the way 
it works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, I'm afraid, Mr. Chairman, we're not 
that advanced. The proceedings are recorded on an ordinary 
tape recorder and the tapes have to be transcribed by typists. 
And that's the state of the art in Saskatchewan courtrooms. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Now, Minister, you're going to have to talk to 
some of your colleagues. They figured this out real fast. We've 
been asking department after department what they do with all 
that fancy electronic wizardry that they've bought in the last 
year. And I mean they got laptops and they've got stuff that 
won't end, coming out their ears, all purchased by SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). And this is 
all the finest stuff too, Mr. Minister, so I think you better get to 
the front of the line and talk to some of the rest of them. 
Because they're doing very well, believe me — very, very well. 
 
Well that being the case then, Minister, what you're saying then 
is that you don't expect any report back probably within the next 
four or five weeks. Would that be what your expectations are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well we're not going to delay it. We'll 
send it along as soon as it's finished. And we will do the best 
we can. I don't know what I can add to that. We'll just do the 
best that we can. And I undertake there'll be no delays at all so 
far as the department is concerned. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — What will be the process, Minister? That will 
come back to your deputy, I would presume. He'll brief you of 
it. Will you then have to brief cabinet or will this become public 
immediately upon receipt by the department? What will be the 
process in your mind of how the release is done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I have said publicly that when we 
get the report we'll release it. Now if there is an election call, I 
don't expect cabinet to meet, but I don't know. I'll have to ask 
my Premier about how all that works. But I have said publicly 
what I just told you. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you. Minister, given the remarks that 
you made in this House quite a few years ago now in a similar 
situation dealing with the Cabri Credit Union, were you . . . and  



May 18, 1995 

 
2454 

I think you're aware of your remarks — there's no need for me 
to repeat them back to the House once more — about how you 
felt about only one individual being singled out when, as we 
say, the givers of the money were not also investigated 
thoroughly. 
 
Do you believe, given your own feelings on this issue, that the 
mandate with Mr. Martin is sufficient to cover off your 
concerns of some years ago as it would relate to the Phoenix 
situation? Do you feel the mandate has enough breadth to cover 
off the concerns which you voiced in this legislature some years 
ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The answer is, I feel comfortable. But 
let me try and explain why I feel comfortable. In these kind of 
cases, I'm told by the prosecutors that charges are generally laid 
against the party or the parties, the persons who are the most 
culpable. And the Crown looks to see who initiated the scheme, 
and who most benefited from it. 
 
And they don't necessarily charge everybody who had any 
connection with it at all. So it's . . . the charges . . . I think I can 
properly say that it . . . the charges are laid against the person 
most responsible for getting the events moving that are the 
subject of the charge. 
 
And that was what led them in this situation to charge the 
person who was ultimately convicted and not to charge the 
other. Now we have asked Mr. Martin whether, in his opinion, 
charges ought to have been laid against Phoenix. And that's 
what we await. 
 
But the prosecutors, in making the decision they made in this 
case, were following a long-established practice that I have just 
described to the member. I want to say to the member, and I 
want to say this just with all the sincerity that I can, there is no 
political influence applied at all in this situation. That the 
decisions were decisions made by the professional prosecutors 
without any interference from anyone else. 
 
Now in the Cabri situation, you know that's . . . I can't 
remember my exact words but I remember the thrust of them. 
And there, there was a situation where one person had been 
charged and not others who had been involved in the events. 
And just applying the test that I just applied, I think that what I 
said at the time was an appropriate thing to say. 
 
Who got the events moving there? And so on and so forth. Now 
you know I'm not raising that again. I'm not criticizing anybody 
when I say that. But I am merely making the point that I'm 
comfortable in this situation that the department proceeded in 
an appropriate way. If Mr. Martin says otherwise, well so be it. 
But at the moment, I'm comfortable. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well you see, one of the problems that 
people in the public have with this, Minister, is that it seems 
that the mandate is very narrow — very, very narrow. What you 
said in the Cabri case was that it would seem that if the credit 
union manager was found guilty of the offence of accepting a  

secret commission, it should also be an offence to offer a secret 
commission. Okay? And the similarities are striking. But the 
problem that seems with the mandate is that yes . . . and I 
believe you're correct in asking Mr. Martin to find out whether 
the prosecutors erred or not in their summation of what should 
be done there. 
 
(1815) 
 
But the bigger question arises; on the one hand we have — and 
that was recognized by the judge — a relatively small amount 
of money involved here. Because you're a public figure, when 
you get into breach of trust, there is an added onus put upon 
you. And I understand that very clearly from other movies. But 
we're also dealing with an advertising firm that does, not tens of 
thousands of dollars, not hundreds of thousands of dollars, but 
potentially I guess over the term of time, you could look at very 
large figures of advertising with government. 
 
And that is what gives the whole thing . . . I guess if these 
people had been off in Timbuktu and had never had any 
relationship to government advertising no one would care, 
really, beyond the fact that you had this obvious scheme and 
breach of trust involved. But the simple fact is, because they are 
related intimately in different ways with government, through 
previous personal relationships, through different things, then 
you have an aura of things that are not, in the public's mind, 
totally satisfied by being very narrow. 
 
And I don't want to get into any personal names here or . . . not 
my place tonight in going through this, but I can say to you if 
Mr. Martin's report is so narrow that it simply looks at the issue 
of whether one particular prosecutor made the proper case, the 
other, bigger questions will not be answered, sir. They will not 
be answered. 
 
And the fact that many, and we don't know how many, other 
members may have also done advertising contracts with that 
particular firm, that political parties may have done advertising 
contracts with that political firm . . . or with that particular 
advertising firm, none of that, none of that, as I understand — 
and you can correct me if I'm wrong — none of that bigger 
question is being answered by this particular investigation by 
Mr. Martin. Am I on the right track there, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, the member is perfectly right. The 
member knows perfectly well that the police just don't engage 
in fishing trips, checking out everything to see whether there's 
anything wrong anywhere. I mean they act on the basis of 
information that comes to them in one way or another, and if 
that information suggests that a criminal offence may have been 
committed, then they'll investigate. But they don't just go 
around on a fishing trip, as we normally say, just to sort of 
check out the whole situation and see whether there's anything 
wrong. And so when we referred the matter to Mr. Martin, we 
were . . . I'll quote from the letter: 
 
 We are asking that you review this file and provide us 

with your opinion and assessment regarding whether  



May 18, 1995 

 
2455 

 Phoenix Advertising or any of its employees should 
have been charged in relation to these transactions. 

 
And that's the question. As you say, it's narrow, but I think it's 
appropriate in the circumstances. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Minister, I'm going to put this to you, 
and I'm going to use myself as an example, okay? On the 
allegation of . . . and, Mr. Chairman, if the members want to 
visit, can they go do it somewhere else? It's very difficult to 
converse — if you wouldn't mind. 
 
Mr. Minister, in my case, an allegation was made about some 
things, and as I understand it, all of the records pertaining to 
myself as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
the period of time between 1987 and 1991 were removed from 
this building, taken away, gone through, looked over. No one 
has ever said that I did anything wrong, but there was an 
allegation made, and I and a whole lot of other people had that 
happen to them. And as far as I know, those records have never 
been returned. I'm going to leave this place, probably in a few 
days, return to private life, and I don't know what the process 
will be about my records. 
 
But an allegation was made in a bigger scheme of things, and 
my stuff was all removed from here, I presume with a warrant, 
and that's the problem I have in resolving this thing; that one 
individual does some business, maybe inappropriately, 
according to the judicial system — convicted, but no one else is 
looked at. And yet in my case I had my stuff taken even though 
it was just a sort of a general allegation, and to this day remains 
in the hands of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
and your prosecutor. 
 
And that's the thing I have difficulty squaring, and why the 
mandate perhaps was not larger, and that then everyone have 
the cloud of suspicion either lifted or not. 
 
And that's a very difficult thing to square in the minds of the 
public, Minister, when you define these things in such a narrow 
way. And then it raises all sorts of questions and you get people 
maybe making silly statements. But they think about the 
comparison. 
 
And the law, your prosecutors, the RCMP, I guess, have every 
right to do that. They can come and take my records because 
someone made an allegation. And I guess if someone had made 
maybe a further allegation, is what you're telling me, then that 
could have happened also to a whole lot of other people. Is that 
the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It's all very well to talk about the 
member's case, because there's no charge. But there are other 
charges going on so I have to, I suppose, be careful of what I 
say. And I've learned that one must be very careful about what 
one says in these circumstances. 
 
I say to the member that in order for the police to pick up 
records, as the member has just advised happened in his case,  

they have to obtain a search warrant from a judge. And that 
requires a certain level of proof, or certain proofs to be offered 
to the court, usually in the form of affidavits, which set out in 
some detail what is the information on the basis of which the 
police feel that a search warrant is justified or required. 
 
And the courts then apply the tests that they apply to those 
applications and then either issue or not issue a search warrant. 
The system works like that. 
 
I think that is meant to screen out frivolous or vexatious 
allegations and ensure that the allegations have enough 
substance to meet the threshold test of the court in determining 
whether or not a search warrant should be issued. But I have no 
knowledge of the member's particular case at all. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I can appreciate that, Minister. Nor should 
you have any knowledge of my records being removed from 
this House. But I don't mind telling the public that that 
happened. I have nothing to fear from those records being 
looked at. I find it strange that it has gone on for as long as it 
has, that my records . . . I'm going to leave this place and that 
stuff's still not going to be back here. And I don't like to leave 
any business like that. Unfortunately, I guess that's going to be 
the case and it is somewhat bothersome. 
 
But I'm just saying to you, when you release this report and if it 
stays that narrow, then I don't think you're going to defuse the 
issue. I really don't. And I really wondered at the political 
wisdom and at the legal wisdom that you perhaps applied by 
keeping that as narrow as you did. It's one thing to be perceived 
and one thing to be. And I'm not going to say any more about it, 
but I believe that I wouldn't want to be in your shoes the day 
you release that particular report because I don't believe you're 
going to answer all the questions that need to be answered. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you a question in this House some weeks 
ago and you did not have a reply at that time. I asked you if 
there were any conflict of interest guidelines that were followed 
by your department, individuals, that type of thing. It was no 
more than that, no less than that; just simple, because I did not 
know. And you did not get back to me on that issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm sorry. I apologize to the member for 
not having conveyed that information. I remember the question. 
 
There are no specific guidelines that exist as such within the 
prosecutions unit. But there's a lot of jurisprudence on the case 
of conflict of interest so far as lawyers are concerned — and 
prosecutors — and we apply that law. In addition to that, there 
is a code of professional conduct governing lawyers and the 
way in which they conduct themself, and there's a public service 
code of ethics as well. So between those three sources we have 
a fairly comprehensive code for sorting these cases out. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So if it was thought there was anything 
controversial at all — and I don't understand the processes 
inside there — but the chief prosecutor would bring it to the  



May 18, 1995 

 
2456 

attention of somebody or there would be some discussion. 
Obviously you wouldn't, as people in the legal community, go 
in and out of . . . and people go from private practice into that 
role and back out again and that sort of thing. So what you're 
saying is there would possibly be a discussion if something 
looked contentious. And the recourse that is there is tied to 
professional conduct standards by the Law Society. Would that 
be sort of the ultimate governing body? It would not be a 
government thing but it would be a Law Society type of issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think the governing source would 
probably be the jurisprudence about when prosecutors are in a 
conflict of interest situation. But that's not to diminish the 
importance of the code of professional conduct for lawyers 
because that is a very serious thing. And as the member says, 
that's laid down by the Law Society and administered by them. 
And it governs our ticket, you know, our licence to practice. So 
it has considerable weight. 
 
The other thing that . . . in answer to the first part of the 
member's question — lawyers come into the department and 
they come with a background in private practice, and conflicts 
of interest situations are usually readily detectable. They 
wouldn't be asked to prosecute a former client, for example, that 
kind of thing. So we keep track of it to the extent that there is 
knowledge of it, and it's a relatively small unit so everybody 
knows each other pretty well, and most situations are readily 
identifiable. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And I suspect, Mr. Minister, you would 
expect there's a lot of onus on the individual to identify 
situations where there might be that potential conflict and they 
would then inform somebody higher up the ladder that there 
was a possibility . . . what, up to the deputy minister perhaps, or 
would it have to go that high? Where would you identify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — These matters would normally be 
decided by the director of public prosecutions and there'd be no 
. . . I can't imagine circumstances in which it would go higher. 
That would normally be made at the level of the director. 
 
(1830) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. I want to just for a 
minute go back to the Martensville scenario. I believe you told 
the Assembly earlier today that there was in excess of $800,000 
expended over the duration, and that included the subsidy 
which you're now giving back to the community. 
 
Does any of the potential litigation that is evolving . . . is there 
anything there that could add to that liability? Any of the civil 
actions that are currently before the courts directly pertain to the 
Government of Saskatchewan, or are they all limited to the 
Martensville police force? Is there a contingent liability that's 
sitting there waiting to potentially happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There are a number of actions 
outstanding, civil actions claiming damages from the 
government. And I don't know how many there are — five, six,  

seven, something like that. 
 
Our legal advice is that none of those actions are well founded, 
so we haven't set up any fund or allocated any funds on a 
contingency basis for that, and we are of course defending all of 
them. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — What you're saying then to the Assembly is, 
other than the cost of your defence and whatever that may 
entail, you don't anticipate any further costs. 
 
Going through your budget here, which area does that . . . 
where would that be picked up out of? This obviously is an 
over-budget item. You didn't plan on being sued and having to 
defend yourself, and giving Martensville money. Where does 
this enter into the budgetary process of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — All of these actions are being defended 
by our own staff and they are all employed under the legal 
services subvote. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So that would be your salaries, operations, 
grants, that type of area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The legal services item is in subvote 
JUO4 on page 87 of the Estimates and the bulk of the cost 
would be under civil law and salaries because, I repeat, all of 
these actions are being defended by Department of Justice 
lawyers. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I notice that your total budget there for the 
coming year has been up by approximately $800,000. Would 
that primarily be tied to the actions of the Martensville case, or 
are there other large cases that would up that budgetary 
requirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — None of it relates to the Martensville 
case. Most of the increase there is accounted for by the 
conversion of temporary prosecutorial positions to permanent 
positions. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, so you had to obviously have people 
around more. Is that because you're being sued more or because 
you're prosecuting more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, neither. These are people who have 
worked for the department, some of them for years, and they 
were classified as temporary employees or contract employees, 
temporary employees, and we're making them permanent 
positions and bringing them within the regular employment of 
the government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So instead of farming out, for instance, drug 
prosecutions which was done a lot in the last few years, those 
minor type of events, you're not farming that out to the private 
sector any more; you're actually bringing people back on to redo 
that as it was prior to the mid-1980s? Is that what you're telling 
me? 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2457 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We don't farm out many prosecutions. 
There are, however, contract prosecutors who are attached to 
the department and there is a flow of work to them as 
circumstances require, when the regular staff can't handle it. 
 
The conversions were, I think, from temporary to permanent 
and contract to permanent. Yes, I included both categories. But 
there are still a number of situations in which we farm the work 
out to contract employees. We haven't done away with them; 
we've just taken the ones that were employed full time as 
temporary or contract employees and converted them to 
permanent employees. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — How many individuals are we talking about 
here then that would make up this $800,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Sorry to take awhile, Mr. Chairman. But 
there were 17 conversions from contract prosecutors to 
permanent prosecutors. And I think I gave the impression to the 
member that that explained the whole difference, and I was 
wrong. I was grossly simplifying the situation because they had 
been contract employees and they were paid anyway, and now 
they're being paid as permanent employees so the extra money 
involved is just minimal. 
 
In addition we have hired two additional prosecutors. We have 
increases in witness fees for doctors. We have out-of-scope 
salary increases. We have professional dues, increases. I can 
provide all this information to the member. It does go on and on 
though about . . . a small increase in civil law, again for 
professional dues and out-of-scope salary increases. And in 
public law and policy, which is included under this subvote, 
there is $330,000 for aboriginal initiatives in this current year, 
as well as dues for lawyers and out-of-scope salary increases 
and that sort of thing. 
 
So that's a fuller answer, and I can provide all the details if the 
member wants them. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. I'm just going to finish 
off with a question. I thank you for your answers, and to your 
officials, and leave it at that because others wish to ask 
questions and time is moving on. 
 
Are any of the people that have been hired moved back into 
permanent positions, any of the ones which when there was a 
downsizing in this area some eight, nine years ago, are any of 
these the same people being brought back into permanent 
positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I wish to 
welcome you here tonight and your officials. I haven't got too 
many questions; it won't take too long. I firstly, Mr. Minister, 
want to congratulate you for being returned to Justice minister. 
 
As we know, you were under investigation for something that 
was of a criminal nature, but they chose — which I was glad of  

— they chose not to have you charged and you returned to your 
position. So that's fine, and I'm glad for you. But you weren't as 
lucky as I was. I was under investigation and I got charged and 
convicted and the whole bit. And I was charged with breaking a 
law that wasn't even a law, so you can understand how I feel. 
 
Just a few questions . . . I don't want to comment on that, Mr. 
Minister. I will be touching on a few questions that does pertain 
to some of these charges later on, just in a few minutes later. 
And I know and I'll respect anything that you can't answer. I can 
make the comment, but if you can't answer it, I'll not push you 
at all, Mr. Minister, if it's related to something that you can't 
answer. 
 
Just to your office and under Department of Justice, who makes 
the decisions to actually lay a charge? Who does that final 
decision come down to on a criminal charge? Who actually 
makes that decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In the normal case it is the police who 
will make the decision about what charge will be laid. There 
will be cases in which they will make that decision in 
consultation with prosecutors from the department. That's the 
answer. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Minister, when . . . as you . . . as 
minister when are you notified that anybody has been charged 
specially? I suppose some of these . . . all these little charges 
that happen, everyday somebody breaking into a store or 
something, they wouldn't be bothering with those. But of a 
more serious nature, when are you notified, as minister, of 
somebody being charged? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Almost invariably I learn about it from 
a television program or a newspaper. For example, the two 
persons who are charged in Regina with murder over the last 
couple of days, I learned about that the same way that the 
member did, likely. 
 
On some high-profile-type cases where I'm likely to be asked 
questions about them, and charges against members of this 
House would be an example, I am usually briefed by my deputy 
minister, and usually on the day that the charge is laid, or 
perhaps the day before so that I will be able to . . . I think the 
purpose is that I'll be able to deal with any questions that may 
come from the media with respect to those charges. 
 
(1845) 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Minister, would you call of a serious 
nature when a lawyer or a judge or an MP (Member of 
Parliament) or an MLA . . . would they be more important to be 
notifying you, those kind of people? When they're charged, 
would you be notified ahead of time? Like I understand you did 
know about the last 11 that were charged because you said from 
your office door that there was three more but you thought the 
media knew. So that means that you knew that. So are you 
informed on these more complicated or more serious charges? 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2458 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The test is not that the people are 
important, but rather that the people have such a profile that I'm 
likely to be asked questions about it. 
 
I think in that circumstance, if I recall correctly, the charges had 
been laid before I was briefed about them. And I think I was 
briefed on the same day that the charges were laid, or perhaps 
the day after. Yes, I am advised by my deputy it was the day 
after the charges had been sworn and laid. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Minister, I was charged with a criminal 
charge on November 4, 1993, and indirectly we were talking to 
a judge who is now a judge in New Brunswick. And he 
informed us that you can rest for sure — and I know that maybe 
this is not in your case — but he informed us without any doubt 
whatsoever that there would never in Canada ever be an MP, 
MLA, judges, lawyers, mayors of larger towns, and people in 
important public positions, would never be charged without a 
nod from the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well that's just not correct. I mean it's 
certainly not correct in this province and never has been 
through succeeding attorney generals. The member's been in my 
office and you see there the wall of pictures going back to the 
time that Saskatchewan became a province, 1905. And I can't 
speak for all of those people, but I do know the tradition dating 
back to the days of Bob Walker, when he was the attorney 
general, and the member's information is simply correct. 
 
I've just given you an example of that. I was briefed with 
respect to the most recent charges, the ones you referred to that 
I commented on outside my office door the day after the 
charges were laid. And that's just routine, that's just how it has 
been in this province for a long time. 
 
And I think we do it properly. We just simply have to keep the 
political people out of the administration of the justice system. 
If we don't do that I think we're asking for a lot of trouble. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I'll accept what 
you're saying and I believe you when you say that. But I know it 
hasn't always been that way. I didn't spend five and a half years 
as Legislative Secretary to the last minister of Justice, Mr. Gary 
Lane . . . and he always told me he didn't. He said the same 
thing as you. But it sure wasn't that way before. And I had lots 
of connections, being involved in Justice for those years 
through Gerry Williams and myself and we know that Justice 
ministers have been notified. 
 
But anyway, if you didn't, I'll take your word for it and that's 
fine. I'll accept that. 
 
I just want to ask one more question on this particular 
procedure. Who did lay the charges in the Martensville case? 
Was it the city police all involved 100 per cent, or was the 
RCMP, or did Justice completely lay that charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — All the original charges — I think there  

were 160 of them in all — were laid by the Martensville police 
and the department never became involved until after the 
charges were laid. People started to be arrested and bail 
applications started to be made and that's when the department 
became involved. We later then quickly formed up a task force 
and got involved with it and events proceeded from there. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Minister, I understand what you're 
saying but I've been told by, and I'm going to name them, 
Inspector McFadyen, Mr. Leitch — I don't know his title, I 
think he's a sergeant now — Mr. Couprie and Inspector Thorne 
that their department as police never, never lay a charge. That 
we always give our information to the Department of Justice 
and then it's up to them whether they lay the charge on the 
information. 
 
Is that . . . so does that . . . it kind of contradicts what you're 
saying, but maybe it's different in certain circumstances. Maybe 
you could explain because I was told very clearly with 
witnesses from these police. So could you explain that, please, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The charges are laid by the police. Now 
in complex cases, and particularly commercial crime cases, they 
will get the help of a Crown prosecutor in drafting the charge. 
But the decisions are police decisions. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Well I'm just going to touch briefly on how 
I was charged because that's the one I'm interested in, of course, 
and mine's over with. So I'll tell you how it worked with me. 
 
I was in the RCMP barracks on Dewdney giving a statement to 
a Mr. Couprie in relation to a constituent over something 
entirely with nothing to do with MLAs or anything to do with 
that whatsoever. It was a three-hour interview and there was 
several ministers that was called in. It was over quarry rights. 
 
So just leaving the building, Mr. Couprie said an Inspector 
Thorne would like to talk to you but it's not requested because 
there had been no arrangements made. And I said, well 
certainly. So I sit down in Mr. Thorne's office and he asked me 
what I knew about the 500 to $800,000 missing from the 
Conservative caucus funding. And I knew nothing about it at 
that time. I find out later that many of my colleagues did, and 
some people did, but I never knew. And this was the day of 
moving after the election, in November of '91, because I was in 
Regina that day responsible for the moving from the 
government offices to our opposition offices. 
 
And he said, well I was told if I could ask you some questions 
pertaining to that, that I could trust you to give the right 
answers. But I told him I knew nothing about it whatsoever. 
And when I was leaving he said, and I have something to check 
out with you, Mr. Muirhead, he said. That while the election 
was on, there was a complaint made that you misused your 
communication. And he told me a little bit about it, and he 
wasn't too concerned, and I sure wasn't. But he said, I'll call you 
in and you bring in either a picture of this parade equipment or 
bring in all the equipment, and we'll talk about it. And he didn't  



May 18, 1995 

 
2459 

get back to me till December 31, 1991. As soon as he seen this 
picture brought in, two feet by two feet, he says now I 
understand what you were doing — it was a picture of me 
riding in the parades that were enlarged. 
 
And we talked for a little while and he said, I want to give you a 
warrant statement. I never had one in my life, I didn't even 
understand it, and I wasn't in such a situation before. And he 
said that you don't have to do it, you can have a lawyer here, or 
you can leave at any time or whatever. And me being so proud, 
and figuring that there's nothing that I can't say, I'll just tell the 
truth and that's it. And so we had an interview. 
 
And it was done very quickly. In fact you're able to read what 
he said and I said in three and a half minutes — very slowly. 
And that was the extent of the interview. And when we finished 
he said, now I understand this, Mr. Muirhead. I'll be 
recommending to Justice that there'll be no charge whatsoever 
because I can see there's no intent. 
 
And he said, I'm also going to recommend to Justice that they 
get in touch with the Board of Internal Economy and have these 
lists and their whole directive cleared up so people can 
understand the rules and the regulations like you do, Mr. 
Muirhead. Because I told them I was on a committee back in 
1981 from our caucus in setting up this Board of Internal 
Economy in the first place. He says, I understand that you really 
understand this. So he said, that will be the end of it. Goodbye, 
and that's it. 
 
Now without any more . . . no more police work, zero police 
work. Because when I got my disclosure, after I was charged, 
all disclosure was prior to that date. 
 
Now how come when I'm called in Mr. Leitch . . . and this is 
maybe not . . . I shouldn't say how come. I'm just making this 
statement, and see if you want to comment on it or not. Mr. 
Leitch kept phoning me. Would I come in and give a statement 
like they were asking all MLAs on this big scenario — the one 
that's in the courts now. 
 
And I was advised not to, but I wanted to get it over with 
because I was going to a hospital for six weeks of treatments. 
And so I phoned him one morning after harvest and I said, I'll 
come in as soon as I can come in. He said, well this afternoon at 
2 o'clock. And I said, I'd been advised by the caucus lawyer that 
I should come. I'd go ahead and go as long as . . .I asked him if I 
was going to be charged or not and whether it's a warrant or a 
witness statement and I should . . . as long as I get a tape of it. 
So that's the arrangement we made and we did it. 
 
So when I went in and we were about an hour and I wasn't able 
to help them too much and I went to leave, and they said, I'll get 
you your tape. And Mr. Leitch went out and came back. And 
while he was gone, Mr. Skead or Snead, his name is — I'm 
sorry I'm not pronouncing it right — handed me my charge. He 
says the Justice department has decided to charge you on what 
happened back in 1988. So the police are not agreeing with you, 
Mr. Minister, that they say the Justice department  

definitely charged me. And Inspector McFadyen said that he 
was dealing with Eric Neufeld whether they should charge me 
or not. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I had a part-time prosecutor that has told me 
in this last year that he knows in the prosecutor's department, in 
the prosecutor's department, a part-time prosecutor if there ever 
has to be . . . he'll be named. That they were discussing the 
investigation of Mr. Koskie. And they said, we're told that if we 
have to charge Mr. Koskie, we can pull the Muirhead file. 
 
So something's not just quite right here that all these things can 
happen. I hear these things and I know they're factual, I can 
bring them forth but they're not agreeing with you  the 
statements that I hear that it's nothing to do with Justice whether 
you get charged or not. 
 
I mean I just don't understand the conflict here. Why RCMP . . . 
When Mr. Thorne — or sorry when Mr. Leitch  took me to 
the elevator, I wasn't a very happy man holding this charge in 
my hand — something I felt I was very innocent of — and he 
says, Mr. Muirhead, get off our backs. He said, it's completely 
Justice doing this. 
 
So who's misleading who, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — What can I say? The fact of the matter 
is that the police did lay the charges, and I just . . . I can't 
account for what the police said or the explanations they gave. 
I'm sorry. I'd like to help the member but I just can't. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — That's fine, Mr. Minister. I've always 
appreciated you and your forthwithness, and I have to accept 
that. Then I have to take in my mind that somebody has misled 
me because what I'm telling you  I believe you, you'll believe 
me  that it's the facts. So somebody has misled me and the 
RCMP. 
 
Going back to whether there . . . I heard you say to the member 
from Thunder Creek that to get files and what not out of this 
building — members’ files — there'd have to be a court order. 
Do I understand that right, Mr. Minister? Did I hear that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, there has to be a search warrant 
unless the records are voluntarily given over by whoever is in 
possession of them. But the normal way would be to obtain a 
search warrant first. 
 
(1900) 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Minister, will you do this for me? 
Would you find out if there was a search warrant ever issued to 
take my files from this building? 
 
Because I'm told the contrary, that the RCMP came into this 
building, which they're supposed to first talk to the 
Sergeant-at-Arms; never mentioned to them they're supposed to 
have a court order, they're supposed to do this, and they have 
several things they have to go . . .  



May 18, 1995 

 
2460 

But my file was given over, and I'm not going to name the 
person who turned the file over, but this individual said to me 
very clearly that I thought it was my duty to turn it over. And I 
say that she didn't do any wrong because she thought it was. 
 
But I want you to find out for me — at a later date if you have 
to, that's fine — did anybody have a court order to take my files 
out of this here building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — None of my people that I have with me 
tonight know the answer to the question, but I'll find out the 
answer and communicate it to the member. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. See how it came 
about with me is a Mr. Hilton Spencer, who was a candidate 
against me in 1991 election, and he reported to Inspector 
McTavish three weeks and two days before voting day that I 
had misused my communication fund, but nobody bothered me 
till after the election. 
 
Then I went through the story about Mr. Thorne, and I told you 
about that. But I don't want to hit any more on that right now, 
except I just have this I'd like to say here. The independent 
candidate for 1991 election in Arm River, Hilton Spencer; 
Liberal candidate for the 1991 election in Arm River, Rev. 
David Ashdown; Rev. Larry Brotherton from Davidson; Dale 
Claypool of Regina; and Janis Patrick, employee in legislative 
accounts, all perjured themselves in the court case which 
resulted in myself . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. The member is making statements that he 
ought not to do about persons who are in the employ of the 
Legislative Assembly, and therefore the member, I must warn 
him, must cease. And to set the record straight, the member 
should withdraw the comments that he has made about any 
employee of the Legislative Assembly. I ask him to do that 
now. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will do such, 
but maybe she should go and take back what she . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I would ask the member to simply say 
that, I withdraw any allegations against any employee of the 
Legislative Assembly, and leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I will withdraw the 
statement that I've said about any employee of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
But this individual that I want to mention now is not in this 
Assembly, so I shouldn't be stopped from saying this, that when 
my transcripts were printed, Mr. Minister, you will find out that 
Eric Neufeld, the prosecutor in my case and in many other past 
and present MLA cases . . . but he knew, he knew very well that 
people were perjuring themselves to convict an MLA. And it 
doesn't make me happy that some RCMP in this province and 
Eric Neufeld knowingly knew that people perjured themselves 
on a stand to convict an MLA. 
 

Now I know that you can't, or probably wouldn't, even comment 
on that, but I'm just telling you that and I wanted it on the 
record. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I want to refer the member to 
Beauchesne's, section 493, and in particular subparagraph 3, 
where it states: 
 
 The Speaker has traditionally protected from attack a 

group of individuals commonly referred to as "those of 
high official station". 

 
This section goes on to say that it covers senior public servants. 
The member is making allegations and is attacking a senior 
public servant. We must protect the rights of those public 
servants. They must be immune from attack in the House as is 
suggested in Beauchesne's. And therefore I ask the member to 
withdraw the comments that he has made respecting this senior 
public servant, and to do so now and without any further 
comment. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — No, I will not. 
 
The Chair: — Well I will give the member another opportunity 
and just to remind him that these are the rules that we follow. 
The rules are there to protect those who are in the employ of the 
government, to protect them from attack in the House, and I'm 
satisfied that the individual that you named falls within that 
definition. And therefore I ask the member one more time to 
withdraw. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — A point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — There is no point of order. I ask the member to 
withdraw the comments that he has made. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Chairman, this is not fair when I've had 
. . . This has happened for 17 years that a people attack public 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — No. No, no. I ask the member again to recognize 
and to observe the rules of this House, which are there to 
protect, in this case, certain persons, including senior public 
servants. And I'm satisfied that the person that you mentioned is 
in fact a senior public servant. And a person such as that must 
be protected from attack. 
 
And therefore I ask you again, I ask the member again to, in 
respect for the rules that we have, just out of respect for the 
rules we have . . . and the member is one with a long history in 
this Chamber and in this institution, and I know that he has a 
great deal of respect for the rules. And out of respect for those 
rules, I ask the member to withdraw. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I withdraw any 
statement I said about Eric Neufeld. 
 
The Chair: — That's satisfactory. I thank the member for that. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2461 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have one 
more thing I want to discuss, and I'll do it as quickly as possible 
because I know the agenda for the night. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know how familiar you are, and your 
staff, with directive 4 pertaining to The Legislative Assembly 
Act, especially section 56 regarding communication. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I'm 
not familiar with it at all, and none of my staff can just recall 
immediately what it says. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Well, Mr. Minister, that does appal me. We 
just had myself charged on that, pertaining to directive 4, and 
we just had many MLAs, past and present that are now in the 
court, and they're using directive 4 on the opening sentence. 
 
You're an MLA yourself, Mr. Minister. You must have bought 
something since 1986 through the communication fund. Surely 
you as the Minister of Justice or somebody here must know 
every rule about . . . everything about directive 4, or there's no 
way there could have been a charge. One of the prosecutors is 
sitting right behind you. He'd have to know something about it. 
How could I get charged on it on directive 4? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I guess, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
member, that that demonstrates that the political people don't 
get involved in any investigations or prosecutions. Because I 
may have read it in my capacity as an MLA, but I have no 
immediate recollection of the numbers or anything like that. I 
have a fair working knowledge of the communication 
allowances and what's covered, what isn't. But I don't have any 
knowledge nor any circumstance in which I would have 
occasion to review the section, because I don't get involved in 
either the investigations or in the prosecutions or in the appeals. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Minister, but directive 4 under the 
communication Act has nothing to do really, out of this 
building. It's a directive that was made by the Board of Internal 
Economy. And you must have been called in by the Clerk, as I 
was when I was elected in 1970s, and explained to me what the 
communication fund was. And then in 1982 it become . . . there 
was a Board of Internal Economy put together. You must have 
certainly read it in your black book. But we won't labour that 
any more. If you don't know anything about it, well you don't. 
 
So I'd just like to leave this . . . this is a guideline, directives, 
and laws that I received from . . . information from all 
jurisdictions, many jurisdictions in Canada, like several 
provinces and the House of Commons. And I'm not going to go 
through all . . . It's one page, and I'll have a copy sent over to 
you, Mr. Minister. It's saying what the Act is and how it came in 
'76, and then went on in '79 to a change, and then '82 and '88 — 
twice, I believe, in '88. I won't get into that; I'll send you a copy 
of it. I know that your staff have copies of them because I have 
given them to the prosecutor's department, this same paper. 
 
But I do want to put on the record what they're saying, how  

they determine this here Act to be. I'm going to start . . . only a 
third of the page left and then I'll leave it and you can maybe get 
me an answer for it. You can maybe get someone to . . . 
 
Because that seems to be the problem all over. I haven't talked 
to a lawyer that agrees on this thing here yet. So if lawyers are 
having trouble agreeing on whether this is law or not, well how 
. . . we are going to have little trouble in the courts. And we got 
many MLAs, past and present, are going to go through this 
now, especially some of the lesser charges. It's very, very 
serious. 
 
However, this is after talking about: "Thus, on May 19, 1988, 
Directive # 4 became law." And there's where I think the 
problem came in — it says, law. 
 
 However, it is unfortunately drafted in the form of a 

guideline, as 1981-pre May '88 directives had always 
been. The "Not acceptable" list, for example, is not 
sanctionable as a "law", as no accompanying legislative 
sentence establishes a command to do something or 
prohibition from doing something directed to an 
identifiable entity, thus it remains simply a list. To be 
enforceable as a law, a statement should have preceded 
the list to the effect that: 

 
 "No member shall claim the following items under their 

communications allowances: 
 
  (like) material of a blatantly partisan nature . . . etc." 
 
 This sentence (above) now states to whom the "list" is 

directed (members), what it is that the member shall (or 
shall not, as is the case) do, but even it still fails to 
define "who" is to make the judgement call as to what 
constitutes material of a blatantly partisan nature — the 
RCMP? the Speaker? the Board? a Judge? the Clerk? 
the member? If a judgement call is to be made, it should 
not be set out in a list. The list should specify exactly 
what it is that is prohibited. Any necessary judgement 
calls should specify who is to make the call, and set out 
criteria which defines a prohibited action or establish a 
threshold activity beyond which an action is prohibited. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, this is a very, very important document and 
it affects many, many futures of people in this province, not on 
the more serious cases but some of the lesser cases, and I hear 
it's even happening in Mr. McLaren's case right now. So what 
I'd like to do, Mr. Minister, is have a copy of this sent to you 
and if your department can put an answer to me in writing, I'd 
appreciate it, and if they can't just tell me that they can't. And 
that's all the questions I have, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, we'll look at the paper 
and consider it. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you very much. 
 
(1915) 



May 18, 1995 

 
2462 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome 
again this evening, Mr. Minister, and officials. Indeed, Mr. 
Minister, I wish to talk about gun control. Nothing too heavy 
tonight on gun control, Mr. Minister. I simply want to table 
some more petitions that arrived today after question period so 
that we can get these on the record. 
 
Also I would like to just comment on the fact that we've had 
another positive day or last couple of days on the question of 
gun control with the statements coming out of New Brunswick. 
I believe that will be good news for all of us who are opposed 
to Allan Rock and his initiatives with the statements from Frank 
McKenna of New Brunswick coming out in opposition to the 
general registration of firearms. 
 
Also I have a news clipping here which might be of interest to 
the minister. I would hope that it would be of interest to Allan 
Rock and to Morris Bodnar and all those on the committee who 
tried to tell us that the chiefs of police were all in favour of gun 
control and registration of firearms. Because this clipping 
comes from The Estevan Mercury which the chief of police 
there says he has never been contacted by the chiefs of police 
association to determine what his stance is on gun control. 
 
And he further goes on to state that he's opposed to it. The 
board of police commissioners in Estevan has also come out in 
favour of opposing Allan Rock's initiatives, which is in direct 
opposition to the association that supposedly represents the 
associations of boards of police commissioners. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I believe that perhaps for Mr. Rock things are 
unravelling a little bit. I'm not sure that he expected that and I 
believe that for the firearms owners of Saskatchewan and 
Canada that's indeed good news. 
 
The fight is not over by any means though. We haven't backed 
him off in the House at all, although he is talking of making 
noises about making some changes at the end of the day with 
the way that the regulations . . . or the Bill is going to be written 
to allow for regulations. Any changes could simply be stuck 
back in again after the legislation is passed and that will cause a 
great deal . . . continue to cause a great deal of concern amongst 
the people of Canada and the shooting fraternity, Mr. Minister. 
 
So if you wish, I'll give you the opportunity to respond to those 
comments and to Mr. McKenna's comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I was very excited to hear the radio 
reports this morning about Mr. McKenna's statement and I am 
very, very pleased that New Brunswick now sees the proposed 
licensing and registration scheme in the same way that we do in 
this legislature and as they do in our sister provinces on either 
side, as well as the two territories. 
 
I have always wondered how New Brunswick could possibly 
support this legislation considering that it has more guns per 
capita than any other province in the country. And this proposal 
of the federal government must fall upon New Brunswick in 
even harsher terms than it does on the Prairies. At least it would  

certainly have the same kind of impact and stir the same sort of 
reaction, as once again we've got the federal government 
coming back to the lawful users of firearms with yet another 
layer of gun control, as though they were any part of the 
problem. 
 
And as the member knows — we've attended all sorts of 
meetings together — it is just outrageous to our people to be 
pointed at as though they were part of the problem, and if they 
had this further regulation imposed on them, that would be part 
of the solution. But I was glad to see that. 
 
I have not been encouraged by what I've heard Mr. Rock say 
during this week. It seems to me that he is merely saying he is 
prepared perhaps to compromise on some items that were 
clearly throw-away items in the Bill in the first place. I don't 
think he was serious about some of the search and seizure and 
penal powers that were in the Act. I think he inserted those in 
order to be in a position to later compromise on them and 
withdraw them and appear to be flexible. 
 
As far as I am concerned, he is inflexible on the heart of the Bill 
which is the problem, and that is the licensing and registration 
system. And until I see him blink on that, I will just see him as 
being an individual who is aptly named. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Indeed, Mr. Minister, he certainly is, and 
I have commented as such in some of my reports that I have 
written, much to the chagrin of some of the Liberals in my area. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to thank you for sending over the list 
of litigation files for your department and for the Government 
of Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, though, part of the list is 
missing. Not in the names of the files; I'm sure that they're all 
complete — what is missing, though, is the information on the 
costs associated with each of these cases, with each of these 
litigations that are proceeding. 
 
Would it be possible for you to supply those particular costs? 
You have done so in the case, I believe, of the one file dealing 
with the Martensville case. Can you also provide the costs 
associated with each one of these files, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — These cases are, I believe, all being 
handled by employees of the Department of Justice, and they're 
salaried employees in every case. And we have never tried to 
keep track of their time, as between different files that they 
handle and different bits of advice that they give. So it's not 
correct to say there's no cost because there are the salary costs 
and the office costs and that sort of thing, but there are no 
cheques we have to write in relation to any of these particular 
actions. They're all handled by our in-staff lawyers. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So in the case 
of all of these files there are no outside counsellors employed in 
dealing with any of these? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think there are five where there is  



May 18, 1995 

 
2463 

outside counsel that are employed. I just don't know which ones 
they are right now but I think that five of them have been . . . 
have had outside counsel retained. And it's usually in such a big 
action that the department can't easily handle it so that outside 
counsel are retained. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could provide the information as to which cases those are, 
who the outside counsel is, and the costs associated with such. 
We'd also like information, if you would, please, on whether 
each of these individual matters have been resolved. I know that 
some of them are . . . it's whether they've been active in the last 
12 months is listed here, yes or no. But they may have been 
active within the last 12 months and have been settled. Can you 
please indicate whether or not they have been settled, and if so, 
what the settlements were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — All of the cases that are on this list are 
not settled. They're active. And we may or may not be able . . . 
be successful in settling some of them, but at this stage we're 
just not able to say. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd like 
to go on to another issue and that deals with Indian land 
entitlements and some of the settlements. I'm not exactly sure 
just how involved your department would be in this, whether it 
would simply be Indian and Metis Affairs or whom it might be. 
But it deals with some compensation matters for the treaty land 
entitlements to the RMs (rural municipality). Would your office 
be involved at all in those kind of arrangements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, but if you're talking about the tax 
loss compensation arrangements for specific claims, I am able 
to give a lot of information about it. So if the member wants to 
take a crack at me, this might be a good time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Indeed that is exactly what it is, Mr. 
Minister. It deals with RM 95, Golden West, who have turned 
down an offer of settlement which I believe is in the range of 
five times their assessed tax values and they have just flatly 
turned it down. The letter says: Please be advised by the RM of 
Golden West No. 95 have rejected your tax loss compensation 
offer as outlined in your letter of May 9, 1995. And this is to 
the regional director of Indian and Northern Affairs, Mr. 
Minister. Can you give us any further information on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, I can. We met yesterday with the 
president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and the vice-president of SARM together with a 
person from the rural municipality of Golden West. I met 
yesterday with my colleagues, the minister of Government 
Services and the minister responsible for the Indian and Metis 
Affairs Secretariat, and we went over this issue. 
 
We as a province have taken a very strong position on the side 
of the rural municipality and the SARM, and have tried to assist 
the situation and induce the federal government to come to 
some more reasonable position. It's really unconscionable  
the proposal made in the letter to which the hon. member refers  

is really unconscionable. This matter has been settled — I use 
the wrong term — has been dealt with by the federal 
government twice. At one time their deputy minister, the then 
deputy minister, made an agreement, a specific agreement, that 
the tax loss compensation would be handled in specific claims 
on the same basis as the treaty land entitlement lands — 22 
times the assessed value. And that's in writing, and the federal 
government . . . as soon as that deputy minister was transferred, 
they just disowned that agreement and they refused to follow it. 
 
Then they settled it again. When Pauline Browes was the 
minister, she wrote to the SARM and specifically laid out an 
offer which, while not 22 times, was still far more generous 
than the five times assessed value that is in that letter. 
 
So I don't know why there's a problem here. I think it's just 
budgetary. It's a federal government going back on its word, 
twice given, and it's unconscionable. 
 
We agreed yesterday that we would continue to help resolve 
this situation. We strategized about what could be done. We 
made some tentative arrangements and we intend to follow 
through and be of all the help we can. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again it seems 
like it's another one of these Liberal plots to totally ignore 
western Canada in favour of eastern Canada at our expense 
while we pay the bills. I believe that the RMs need to have 
sufficient compensation to maintain the infrastructures that they 
have in place around the treaty land entitlement lands that are 
turned over to the native bands, who are entitled to that property 
through the treaty land entitlement settlements. 
 
If we had settled our treaties properly in the first place, we 
wouldn't have to be dealing with them a hundred years later in 
the manner that we are. And we need to settle these properly 
and the RMs need to be compensated properly and the federal 
government is not . . . seems to be not prepared to do that. And 
I would certainly encourage the provincial government to do all 
they can to get a . . . to reach a satisfactory solution for the 
RMs. 
 
Dealing with another issue of the federal government, Mr. 
Minister. You just presented and passed eight pieces of 
legislation in this House dealing with French translations of 
eight of our Bills and two of those Bills were very large and 
very significant pieces of work I would have to assume. 
 
Can you give us some indication as to the cost associated with 
those translations, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — As the member will know, there were 
eight Bills that were presented and passed today and the cost 
involved in the translations was about $40,000, of which the 
federal government will pick up 75 per cent under the 1988 
agreement. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2464 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another issue, 
Mr. Minister, from the Southeast Saskatchewan Surface Rights 
Association from their annual meeting. They passed a number 
of resolutions calling on you as the Minister of Justice to do 
certain things. And the second of their resolutions dealing . . . 
the first one which deals with you, Mr. Minister — states that 
the Minister of Justice be asked to implement a policy requiring 
a surface rights performance bond of no less than 10 per cent of 
the cost of drilling each well. Have you given any consideration 
to this particular resolution from the surface rights association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — My department, along with other 
departments, have been considering for some time now this 
bundle of issues of which the proposal that the member just 
referred to is one of them. We have been in consultation with 
this association as well as others across the province trying to 
improve and update that law. And the work goes on. I can't say 
when it will bear fruit but it will bear fruit as soon as it's 
finished. And we are moving the project along as expeditiously 
as we can. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
issues in my corner of the province is orphan wells that are 
drilled and then left abandoned, and it's up to the landowner in 
some cases to bear the costs of the abandonment. And those 
costs can be significant, especially when we take into 
consideration some of the rules and regulations in place under 
the Minister of the Environment's department. Those can be 
quite onerous at times on the landowner if the landowner is the 
one left holding the bag to pay the bills, Mr. Minister. 
 
So indeed this type of a bond should be posted for at least up to 
a certain level. Perhaps you could have a cap per company that 
they would have in place, because hopefully not all of their 
wells would be abandoned at the same time and that they would 
have to maintain that bond at that certain level. 
 
The second request that they have, Mr. Minister, is to 
implement a policy of consulting the association on all 
appointments to the Saskatchewan Surface Rights Board of 
Arbitration. What is your department doing about that particular 
request, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We have, as I know the member knows, 
made appointments in the past of people who are representative 
of or drawn from those associations. I think we're already 
meeting the requests, that's what I mean. We don't have a 
formal process of consultation but there's a good deal of 
informal consultation because at the end of day the board has to 
have credibility. And the best way to get that is to appoint after 
discussions, and we try to do that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. My last 
question dealing in this particular area — and I may get into 
your globals a little bit — but it deals with requesting the 
Minister of Justice to require the Saskatchewan Surface Rights 
Board of Arbitration to render a decision within 30 days 
following a hearing. Have you been making any progress on 
that particular issue? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — That's one of the issues that we're also 
considering. There are a number of procedural issues, of which 
that is one. And when I last met with the association, which was 
about a month ago, I was quite positive about that group of 
procedural issues. It seems to me that's something we can do 
quite quickly. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
certainly encourage you to do all that you can in this area 
because we have a situation here where there are two property 
owners, that that owns the surface and those that own the 
property below, and both need to have protections for their 
properties and access to their properties. And some form of 
mechanism must be in place to allow each to have the fair value 
of their properties. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, have you provided us with the information 
related to all of the travel associated with your department, with 
yourself, from the globals, for all of the travel? Where did you 
go and who accompanied you on those particular trips, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, we provided all that information to 
you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Including a 
breakdown of all of your trips, both in and out of the province 
and who accompanied you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, my travel was included. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I'd 
like to thank you and your officials for your cooperation and 
your answers this evening. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Justice 
Vote 3 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — If the minister would like to thank his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I would indeed, Mr. Chairman. I'd like 
to thank all my officials for coming again tonight as they have a 
number of times in the past, and I really appreciate the support 
that they gave to the committee. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems like my 
colleagues got the job done without me while I was riding  



May 18, 1995 

 
2465 

elephants. But certainly I want to thank the minister and his 
officials for the deliberations over the past few weeks and few 
months. And I guess we'll just take it as a given that he may not 
agree with everything I've said, and I certainly haven't agreed 
with everything he's said, but I think that's the name of politics 
and trying to address the issues and bringing out each individual 
point. So thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you to your officials. 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 
Vote 33 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — One last bid. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, a question came to my office the other day and what 
I'm interested in is, this individual has worked in the public 
sector on a student summer employment program for the past 
couple of years, reapplied, has still yet to hear whether or not 
they have a job, and what I'm wondering, what the normal 
policy is for individuals. 
 
If a person has worked in the public sector through the student 
summer employment program, is going back to university, do 
those individuals get preference to start with? Are they notified 
and sent applications for the new program? What's the criteria, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The process is completely random. They 
don't have any dibs because they had the job last year. So each 
year they reapply and each year they go through the same 
process. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the last question is, what policy is used to 
inform students whether or not they don't have a job? I guess 
that's what it is. If you've got a job, then that's no big deal, 
because usually the information gets out. But for students who 
are still waiting, have applications in in a large sector, there 
should be something in place that would inform them that all 
the jobs available have been filled, and unfortunately they 
weren't one of the students that happened to fall on the raffle 
this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The member may want to hear the 
answer to this vitally important final question. 
 
About half the positions have been filled; the other half remain 
to be filled. So nobody's been turned down yet. We're still in the 
process of filling them. So the person who made the inquiry is 
still eligible and still has some hope. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, would it be appropriate for those 
persons who still are waiting for a job, to at least inform them 
that there are some jobs still coming available and that they will 
be considered, versus just to leave them out in the open as they 
try to plan their schedule for the summer? 
 
Is there some kind of notification process that informs students 
about the fact that while they're still waiting, there might be still  

an opportunity for them if some of the jobs still aren't open, so 
that they're not kind of sitting there and maybe letting go of an 
opportunity that comes along. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We have about 5,500 applications for 
employment. So if we were to call them or write them it would 
be a very time-consuming and expensive process. But we do 
encourage them to phone us to ask about prospects and ask 
what the situation is. 
 
And again, by this answer I would encourage students who have 
applied to give us a call and we'll bring them up to date. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, isn't it election time? Maybe there's 
a few more jobs you could pull out of the hat like the magician 
today. 
 
But as well, Mr. Minister, I'll get that name and I'll call that 
individual. Who do I send them . . . or have them contact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I suggest Ron Wight. Ron Wight. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd like to thank 
all of my officials for coming down tonight and helping us wrap 
up these estimates. I appreciate the effort that they make and 
their patience in waiting for the House to come to their turn. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again thank you 
to the minister and his officials for their time and efforts. And 
certainly we wish them well this summer. I don't know, I saw a 
gentleman today who was just picking up a pile of golf balls. 
Maybe you're looking forward to that. But enjoy the beautiful 
weather. Thank you. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
 
The Chair: — The last time that the secretariat was before the 
committee was on March 31, and so I'll ask the minister to 
reintroduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening 
joining me is Marv Hendrickson, deputy minister; Ernie 
Lawton, assistant . . . oh, there he is, assistant deputy minister; 
Donavon Young, assistant deputy minister of Metis Affairs; and 
John Reid, executive director of policy and planning. 
 
Item 1 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2466 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and her officials. I guess the first question I'd like to 
raise is, I was quite conveniently corrected at a meeting in 
Maidstone about who was the minister of Indian and Metis 
Affairs, but Mr. Lawton . . . and unfortunately at that time I 
didn’t realize that when . . . the fact that when Mr. Mitchell had 
returned to the post of Justice minister . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I think the member just recognized the 
error that he made and I'll ask him to pay attention to that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman, for mentioning the name of 
the minister. But the Minister of Justice had been returned and I 
was expecting that Indian and Metis Affairs would have moved 
along with him, but Ms. Crofford actually continues to have it 
and . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now the member seems to have 
acquired a habit here and I'll just ask him to be cautious about 
the use of members' surnames, please. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's just that I'm having 
a hard time hearing myself with the drone that's over there. And 
I notice that the officials are having a hard time hearing. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now I think the member from 
Moosomin makes a good point. And the Chair doesn't need the 
help of the Leader of the Official Opposition to make rulings 
here. And will the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld please come 
to order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member knows 
where she's from. 
 
If we could just keep it down and allow the proceedings of the 
committee to proceed. And I know that the member from 
Moosomin would like to proceed with his questions and I'll ask 
that the committee members allow him to do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, the 
question that arose at the meeting in Maidstone regarded land 
entitlement and the request by the Thunderchild Band for some 
land within the Bronson forest. 
 
And of course, two major concerns: number one, part of the 
concern was the fact that some of the park area may be part of 
that land entitlement that may be requested by the Thunderchild 
Band. And the feeling I got from most of the people I talked to 
at the meeting was, at least have the park area free, or not part 
of the land entitlement. By the end of the evening, most of the 
people at the meeting were suggesting that they didn't want any 
of the Bronson forest involved in a treaty land entitlement. 
 
I'm wondering, Madam Minister, where things are today. 
Because I guess one of the major concerns that was raised was 
the fact that there was an 18-month period to arrive at some 
kind of solution regarding this treaty land entitlement and that 
was now expanded or extended for another 18 months. 
 
And so I'm wondering, Madam Minister, where we are today.  

What discussions are taking place? Is the department 
endeavouring to address the issue of, first of all, the regional 
park that's in the Bronson forest, and then secondly, the overall 
question of the Bronson forest? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Apparently this issue was gone through 
in some detail with the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) yesterday. And this 
has been about two years that this discussion has been taking 
place with the stakeholders in the area. And one of the reasons 
why the process has taken so long is that we are trying to reach 
a congenial, mediated settlement to this particular issue. 
 
I would mention that the Thunderchild Band has been very 
reasonable in their approach to the stakeholders involved and 
have committed themselves to a long-term co-management 
arrangement where the area would continue to be dedicated to 
the existing uses rather than any dramatic change in the use of 
the area. It's not really part of the park, but what park holders 
are concerned about is access to the forest which is part of the 
claim. So we're optimistic that as people talk and understand 
each other's positions and issues that this issue will work itself 
through. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I just want to reiterate the 
fact that certainly there wasn't anyone who didn't feel that the 
Thunderchild Band wasn't doing everything within their power. 
And they seem to have a good working relationship, which was 
positive. 
 
I just want to also acknowledge that in the area of the world that 
I come from, we do have a provincial park and we do have a 
native reserve that's just down the road a few miles. And we do 
have individuals who have cottages in the park; we have 
individuals who have cottages on the reserve, on the lake there. 
And it seems to be a fairly good working relationship. 
 
And I think, as the ongoing discussions follow through, at the 
end of the day I think most people realize that eventually we 
need to learn to work together and there was . . . as long as 
there's a feeling that, and an understanding, that the 
Thunderchild Band will respect the rights of other individuals 
to use parts of the Bronson forest for their nature trails or for 
even for their cottages — they've got access — those are some 
of the things, major concerns, that were being addressed. And I 
just would encourage the department officials to continue to 
work and maybe be, if you will, the mediator that may be 
needed just to address the questions. 
 
I have one other further question and this comes with regards to 
taxation of . . . and the taxation problem that has arisen as the 
land base is eroded by RMs. And this specific issue I have here 
comes from the RM of Golden West No. 95, and they received 
a letter indicating that there was a compensation package, a 
lump sum of some $96,000. 
 
It was their feeling, and it's the note that I've received, is that 
they feel the compensation is not adequate enough to address 
many of the problems they're facing. I'm wondering, Madam  



May 18, 1995 

 
2467 

Minister, where . . . where the Indian and native . . . or 
Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs sits today as far as the 
ongoing discussions regarding compensation for land that 
becomes or is turned into reserve status. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's the provincial government's 
position that we certainly support the position of the 
municipalities that there has to be adequate tax loss 
compensation as was previously committed to them by the 
federal government. And I would urge all members of this 
House to support us in our efforts to make sure that the federal 
government honours those commitments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — I think, Madam Minister, in view of the fact that 
the current federal government continues to cut back funding, 
maybe you're going to have to work just a little harder. I know 
there was some agreements and have been a diligent process 
prior to the last federal election where a lot of . . . there seemed 
to be a good understanding. And I trust that at the end of the 
day we can arrive at that same understanding. And I would 
encourage you and your officials and any of your government 
that are involved in this discussion to continue to pursue this 
matter with the federal government. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
Madam Minister, officials, we've received some 
correspondence in our office from the reeve of the RM of 
Lakeland No. 521. Mr. Lionel Roy writes to our office 
regarding the federal government's proposed co-management 
plan with the Montreal Lake Indian Band. 
 
The ratepayers of the RM of Lakeland are extremely frustrated 
in the manner in which the federal government has dealt with 
this entire matter. Mr. Roy was seeking funding to conduct an 
impact study on this co-management plan as to what effect it 
would have on the RMs of Lakeland and the surrounding 
districts. 
 
Our leader has forwarded this issue to your office and we were 
wondering, Madam Minister, just what actions you have taken 
in this regard. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have clearly indicated to the federal 
Minister of Indian Affairs that all of his actions in this regard 
have been unacceptable, not agreed to, certainly with no prior 
commitment by the province to be involved in any such process 
with him. 
 
There's been a number of factual misrepresentations of the 
actual circumstances as far as the province's involvement. We 
told them a year ago we weren't interested in their plan and we 
have reiterated lately that we're not interested in their plan. 
 
And the province is prepared to do, in that area, what is within 
the province's jurisdiction to do. And we would only do that  

with the involvement of the affected stakeholders, and certainly 
not through any kind of arbitrary and unilateral action as 
proposed by federal Minister Irwin. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It seems 
that the federal government is in for a significant amount of 
well-deserved criticism this evening. 
 
Madam Minister, were you able to provide some funding for 
this area to provide for the impact studies that would be 
requested by the reeve as they deal with the RM of Lakeland 
and the surrounding districts? It only seems fair that if the 
federal government is prepared to fund the Montreal Lake 
Indian Band that the governments also fund the impact study 
that would be necessarily done by the reeves, RM, and the 
district surrounding that. 
 
Can you indicate whether or not you've been able to find any 
funding for that type of impact study? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We are currently working with the 
other stakeholders, and the departments of government will give 
support to those other stakeholders regarding concerns that they 
have about potential impacts and what not. But it is the federal 
government's responsibility when they're dealing with claims 
that are particular to their responsibilities. 
 
It is their responsibility to involve people properly and to give 
support to the process properly. So again I would suggest that 
you refer your members to the left there, of the Liberal Party, 
and get them to do a little work on this issue before they create 
unnecessary tensions in the community. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Indeed it is the federal Liberals' responsibility and it's hopeful 
that their provincial brethren would see fit to provide some 
assistance for the people of Saskatchewan in dealing with this 
particular issue. But it would seem that they are much more 
interested in playing old-time politics than they are in actually 
dealing with the day-to-day issues of the province, and in 
particular, dealing with the day-to-day issues of the legislature. 
 
Madam Minister, since the federal government is more than 
prepared to fund one area of the impact study or the 
co-management plan in dealing with the Montreal Lake Indian 
Band, surely, though, it's incumbent on the provincial 
government, in the absence of the federal government or in the 
presence of the federal government on the opposition side, to 
provide some assistance for the residents of Saskatchewan so 
that they can provide an impact study that would show their 
side of the story and the impacts that this co-management plan 
might have on their jurisdiction. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, we've conveyed our 
disagreement with this process to every relevant federal 
minister and it is SERM and municipal services . . . SERM is 
the lead department in dealing with this issue; municipal 
services also works on it, and we also provide support. So my 
suggestion would be that if there's someone who feels they  



May 18, 1995 

 
2468 

aren't having the support they need, we do have the technical 
capacity and the ability to give that support they need. 
 
But meanwhile, at the political level, we are totally rejecting 
this process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. We'll 
pass on to Mr. Roy and the RM of Lakeland that you're 
prepared to provide them with some technical assistance on this 
matter. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — If the minister would like to thank her officials? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, I'd like to thank the 
members opposite for their thoughtful and relevant questions. 
And I'd like to thank the very capable officials from SIMAS 
(Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat) for all the 
support they've provided. Thanks very much. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to express my appreciation 
to the minister, and join her in thanking her officials for their 
time and efforts. I've actually really enjoyed dealing with this 
issue, raising the questions over the past number of years, and 
the responses and the way the officials have worked in 
addressing this situation. Thank you very much. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — The last time that this was before the committee 
was April 20, so I'll ask the minister to reintroduce his officials 
to the member of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 
me I have Terry Scott, the assistant deputy minister; Doug 
Matthies, who's with the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation; and Norm Ballagh from ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan); Peter Rempel from lands and 
regulatory management; Jack Zepp and Sandi Kennedy from 
administrative services. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials, once again. 
 
Last time we were in committee I had asked you some questions 
pertaining to a legal question involving Crop Insurance. And 
you were to bring back to me an explanation of why that 
dragged on so long and also the amount of money that your 
legal firm — I believe it's Olive, Waller & Waller — had spent 
on doing this case over a protracted period of time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The amount of money spent in 
'94-95 on this case was $14,201 in legal costs. Again as I 
explained earlier, this case has dragged on because we have not 
been able to arrive at a settlement. I believe it's going before the 
courts again very shortly. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So I understand that since you and I 
discussed this in estimates last year, the taxpayer of the 
province has now spent another $14,200 in legal fees for an 
unresolved case. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'm thankful, Minister, that we don't 
have too many of these laying around because I'm sure there's 
something in your budget in Agriculture that could use the 
$14,000 rather than pursuing a low level employee of Crop 
Insurance, for some reason, for three years, on a settlement 
that's probably only a couple of times bigger than what you 
spent on legal fees. 
 
And I don't know why in the world you would want to 
perpetuate this drain on the taxpayer over something that, from 
what I've heard of it, is very, very minor. I mean this guy wasn't 
even an upper management type of person. He was way down 
low. And I don't for the life of me understand why you can't 
settle it. What you're going to tell me then is that you're simply 
going to let all of Waller & Waller keep charging the taxpayers 
of this province legal fees and let this thing go on indefinitely. 
Is that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There is a pre-trial conference set 
for May 29, 1995, so we would certainly hope for a settlement 
at that point. If not, then it will proceed through the normal 
legal channel. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that's sad, but I'm not going to belabour 
it. I suppose next year in estimates somebody will have to find 
out what happened there. Hopefully somebody will take the bull 
by the horns and get the thing settled. I mean it just should not 
go on, in my view. It's not fair to the individual. It's not fair to 
the taxpayer that your government would drag this person 
through the courts for this amount of time over a very small 
issue. 
 
I want to go now to questions surrounding your announcements 
of a successor program to the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) program. You've pulled out of GRIP. It's being wound 
down. The money's been all taken away, and there was  



May 18, 1995 

 
2469 

to be a successor program. 
 
And I think you would be very interested in that because of the 
problems on the east side of the province with water. We had 
snow the other day again, up to six inches I'm told in certain 
places, lot of potential acres. In fact they say up over millions of 
acres potentially not getting seeded in the proper amount of 
time. 
 
Can you tell me about your successor program and what 
safeguards you see built in in case there are large areas of the 
province that can't be seeded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we've gone 
through the successor program in the last set of estimates; I can 
go through it again. What we have is a NISA (net income 
stabilization account) that's enhanced, whereby grains and 
oilseeds producers will contribute 4 per cent and have that 
matched. There will be a one and a half per cent start-up fund 
which will be government money that's not matched. 
 
We have the sector program for crops and oilseeds which will 
provide protection if gross . . . or net revenues for the province 
drop. And we have crop insurance which again would probably 
apply to localized drought area  crop insurance  or flood 
areas. We're certainly aware of that area. There is an unseeded 
acreage option and so on for crop insurance. So those 
essentially are the safety nets that are in place at this time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well really, Minister, the first two don't 
count because if you don't have any product to sell you don't 
have any revenue to make payments on. So if you don't get your 
crop seeded, you don't have anything to make a NISA 
contribution with. So that's sort of immaterial to the discussion 
here. What you do is have crop insurance I guess, and that 
would be about it if you don't bring in a crop. 
 
What is the flood protection? Where I come from we don't have 
that problem very often. Can you tell us what kind of protection 
would be available for people in a lot of the rural areas on the 
east side of the province if they can't get that crop seeded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we're certainly much more 
familiar with floods where I'm from. There is an option that 
farmers can take for acres that they don't get seeded. It has a 
premium of about 75 cents an acre and the coverage is $25 an 
acre. There's a 20 per cent deductible. In other words, it has to 
be more than 20 per cent of your acres not seeded in order to 
qualify for that. That's available in Crop Insurance and has been 
for a number of years. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So the $25 has a deductible attached to it — 
20 per cent. You're looking at about 21 bucks an acre then, net. 
Is that what you're saying would be available to a producer if he 
couldn't get that land seeded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, actually there would be $25 
. . . if he didn't get anything seeded, he would get $25 an acre 
for 80 per cent of his acres. So I guess that, if you worked it the  

other way, would be the calculation that you did. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Do you believe that's sufficient in light of 
your own experience? We've had a lot of calls from producers 
in the last two weeks asking us to raise questions in here 
pertaining to this issue. They don't have the GRIP program any 
more, which they did understand. 
 
Some of these people had guarantees of, you know, upwards of 
$150 with some of the crops that they grow. And now they just 
don't have a whole lot, and they're very concerned that $25 an 
acre doesn't do much more than pay the taxes and some of the 
very small essentials. 
 
Do you think that there's any chance of the federal government 
being prepared to look at a better program, given the 
circumstances both Saskatchewan and Manitoba face? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — With leave, Mr. Chairman, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you my son, Travis, who is up in the west gallery, 
and his friend, Rylan Peters. They've just returned from a very 
important soccer game. Travis is in grade 2 and he's here to 
watch the agricultural estimates. And so I want to introduce 
him. Although Travis is embarrassed right now, I know he's 
going back to the office soon and then we'll be going home to 
bed. So I wanted to introduce him before he left. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Well the Chair joins the member for Regina 
Elphinstone in welcoming Travis and his friend. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly, they picked the best 
time to come and watch the most interesting part of the session. 
 
The member makes excellent points on crop insurance. Crop 
insurance agreement expired last year — our federal-provincial 
agreement. We have a one-year extension, so in the next year 
we will be looking at crop insurance and how to amend and fix 
it. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2470 

I do believe that crop insurance is better designed for drought 
and hail than it is for flood and frost. And there may be some 
ways that we can improve the program in the future. And 
certainly we will be talking to the federal government on 
possible disaster aid if indeed that arises. It's very difficult to 
assess the nature of the disaster in the east and east-central 
portion of the province until we see what happens to the 
weather in the next week or two. 
 
But certainly, a $25 an acre option is something that farmers 
have. I might point out to the member that if you didn't get your 
crop seeded under GRIP, you had no GRIP coverage at all. 
 
So it's certainly been a long-standing problem with the east side 
of the province, and it's one of the hazards that we contend with 
in that area of the province, is floods and frosts. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — For what it's worth, Minister, an observation I 
have when you're dealing with the federal government. I almost 
believe it's beyond the capability of any one western province to 
have an effective insurance program. My view is that I'd like to 
buy insurance on basis of my own operation. Most of us these 
days have fairly high cash flows and fairly high debt loads and 
insurance is a viable cost as long as you're getting something 
out of it. 
 
An option certainly could be a western Canadian risk area, 
because if the more people you have in a risk area the easier it 
is to provide insurance. It's just a mathematical equation. 
 
I would encourage you or anyone else that's around here after 
the next election to seriously look at that option with the federal 
government. Why one particular province — in our case, with 
the majority of the farm land in Canada — would want to try 
and undertake that type of protection . . . is very difficult, very 
difficult indeed. You've got to put your treasury at risk to do it. 
And it's been done in the past. 
 
And I think maybe the other provinces have come to the same 
conclusion and maybe the federal government would see it as a 
way for them to also save on the premium side of the costs. 
 
I'm wondering, can you bring us up to date where you are with 
your discussions with the red meat industry vis-a-vis NISA, and 
some of the those questions that seem to keep popping up both 
here and Alberta, particularly in the unhappiness that a lot of 
people in the red meat business have with the proposed plans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly NISA is in effect for 
red meats for this year, not at the enhanced level of grains and 
oilseeds, but at the 2 per cent matching contribution level. 
 
There is, as the member points out, some concern amongst the 
red meat industries, most particularly the beef industry, with 
regards to the American market. Again our best legal opinions 
are that this program will not trigger a countervail or should not 
trigger countervail under the agreements that we've signed. In 
fact by parcelling out and leaving pieces of the industry out, 
that increases the possibility of trade sanctions. 

We certainly sympathize with the stockgrowers in regards to the 
American market. That's a very important market to us, and we 
just, I think, have a difference of opinion about whether or not 
this program is more likely to cause that border to be closed. 
We believe there's a danger that the border may be closed at any 
time, as we saw with wheat and durum, even though there were 
no violations of trade agreements. There was political pressure 
and the border was closed. And that's always a danger with the 
American market. 
 
We need to continue to work with the Americans, to have our 
federal government press for having the Americans live up to 
the agreements that they've signed. If we accomplish that, then 
this program should not be a problem. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, in the last month since we last met 
in committee, I have heard almost nothing come out of your 
government vis-a-vis the proposed Crow pay-out. Mr. Goodale 
seems to be off doing his thing again and there has not been 
resolution of some of the issues. And yet I've heard nothing 
coming from the Saskatchewan government on the issue. I 
believe it was April 20 the chairman said that we last talked 
about this. 
 
Why have you been so silent concerning Mr. Goodale and the 
federal Liberals when obviously a lot of people would want 
resolution of some of the issues that are in front of us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well obviously I agree with the 
member, that farmers want resolution of this issue. We have 
pushed, and I have talked to Mr. Goodale privately and by 
letter. And my position has been that they need to make a 
decision very quickly. 
 
Producers know that the freight rate is going up on August 1, 
and they know that there's some sort of inadequate 
compensation package. But they don't know who's going to get 
the money, they don't know when they're going to get the 
money, and they don't know how it will be distributed. And 
that's very unfortunate. 
 
The legislation, I think, is coming before the federal parliament. 
Certainly we are concerned that the amount of money is not 
adequate to begin with and we have been pushing for a decision 
as quickly as possible as to how it's going to be paid out, and 
we'll continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I would encourage you to do that, but I 
think you're going to have to get more forceful than you 
certainly have been the last month. 
 
My experience with Mr. Goodale is that if you don't stamp your 
feet and do a little yelling and screaming once in a while, he 
doesn't pay a lot of attention to you. He's sort of typical of the 
way that Liberals handle western Canada. 
 
And confrontation, Minister, I would say in this regard right 
now, might be the order of the day, because that shipping date 
is coming closer and closer. We're on fast forward here now.  



May 18, 1995 

 
2471 

There's crop being seeded right now and people just don't know 
what's going to happen. 
 
To me it's just categorically unfair of the federal government to 
drag us to the very last day before there's any decisions made. 
And maybe not even on the last day. We may be through 
August and September, I'm told, before things become 
apparent. You'll be into your A quotas, A contracts, and who 
knows where it's going. 
 
We've got grain companies running off. I notice Sask Wheat 
Pool and others talking to Seattle. We've got all sorts of to-ing 
and fro-ing in the industry and nothing concrete coming out of 
the federal government. They seem more concerned with selling 
CN (Canadian National) Rail than they do with resolving the 
Crow problem. 
 
And for the life of me, I don't know why you're being silent at 
this time, because now is the time to express very strong views. 
And I have heard nothing come out of your government over 
the last month. 
 
Can you tell us what . . . do you have an action plan over the 
next four or five weeks in order to push this issue before the 
House of Commons shuts down at the end of June? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well we certainly will continue to 
push the minister. I think the member is absolutely right — this 
is an unacceptable situation. We certainly fought this for the 
last number of years, saying that paying some compensation for 
the producers would be fraught with dangers and that there 
would be very difficult administrative problems with it. 
 
We certainly encouraged that at least $7 billion was the amount 
of money; we fought very hard for that. We ended up with $1.6 
billion, which is not acceptable. We ended up with no plan as to 
how to pay it out. We have a budget that says yes, on August 1 
freight rates are going up, and yes, we're going to have 1.6 
billion paid out somehow, somewhere, some way — and that's 
not acceptable and I agree with that. 
 
The question is, how do you get the best results talking to the 
federal government? We can do it in a confrontational manner 
and probably do ourselves some political good in the process, 
or we can do what we've chosen to do more, is work with their 
officials and with the ministers in attempting to make the case 
that they need to make a decision and that we need it 
drastically. 
 
We will certainly try to turn up the heat. Certainly in the eastern 
side of the province we have an added problem to that, is that 
he's now announced that on August 1 they're changing the 
pooling point one year sooner than they had planned, which is 
fine, and there's going to be some compensation. But again, we 
don't know what the compensation is going to be, how much, 
when, and to whom. 
 
The producers are already getting seed in the ground, or should 
have had their seed in the ground. It's very difficult to make  

decisions when producers in some areas . . . and where I'm 
from, the freight rate on feed barley is going to go from $12 a 
tonne to $40 a tonne  we know that  on August 1, but we 
don't know what compensation is coming and really it's too late 
to decide that I don't want to seed barley at this point in the 
game. So it's obviously not fair. 
 
We continue to make that point and if the member has any way 
of raising a higher profile I would appreciate it. The farmers are 
now on the land; they don't have the time or the energy to be 
protesting down to Ottawa at this time of year. We need to do 
that on their behalf and we continue to try to do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I was listening to some of the questions earlier and 
they were regarding the flood situation on the east side of the 
province. 
 
Is there any consideration, has your department given any 
consideration, to any relief over and above the $25 an acre that 
could be purchased in crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, there are no provisions in crop 
insurance, and as the member knows, it's a federal-provincial 
agreement which requires a change to policy in order to do that. 
 
We'll be talking to the federal government about what might be 
done for disaster if it occurs somewhere outside of crop 
insurance, but I think we've had experience in the past where 
we've tampered with crop insurance in order to try to cover up 
other disasters or income problems, and that's created big 
problems within the crop insurance program. We still believe 
that crop insurance basically should be an insurance program 
and if there's income support or other support above and 
beyond that, it can't be done through the crop insurance 
program. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, have you considered then 
any ad hoc help or any other help in any other way where it 
doesn't involve crop insurance? Has your government been 
involved in any consideration of this or in negotiations with any 
other level of government in regards to helping out that flood 
situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly we are working at 
what possible solutions could be. Again, we won't know what 
the damage is there until at least June 21 at the crop insurance 
seeding deadline. Certainly there will be some land in that area 
that will have damage and won't be seeded. That's almost 
certain. 
 
But by far the greater portion of it, if we get decent weather and 
if we get an open fall, will be fine. But if we get more bad 
weather and further delays, then there will be a much larger 
problem. So it's difficult to have any concrete solutions when 
we can't measure the problem at this time. 
 
(2030) 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2472 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, the last time you were here 
in estimates, or one of the other times, there were some 
questions I believe I posed in the area of Ag Credit Corporation. 
And my understanding at that time was that you or your 
department was going to in fact send some figures, which I 
don't recall receiving, and that regarding the number of loans at 
ACS, dealing with now both in spring seeding and — what was 
the other one? — there was spring seeding and the one that was 
before the spring seeding loan. And also I think it was the 
interest-free cash advance on livestock. Do you have those 
numbers with you now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes. As regards to some of the 
questions that the member asked last time, as we had recorded 
them, one of the questions was the total of all production loans 
outstanding December 1, 1994 — is $293.4 million. That's the 
total amount outstanding as of December 31 on the production 
loans. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Darrell, can you table them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, I can table these. I'll just read 
into the record. There's 519 customers have been granted 
write-downs for interest only; 64.8 million was written off to 
3,097 customers. I'll just table these for you or get the page to 
make a copy. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, just . . . I think probably the 
sheets that you have, that you're going to send across to me, 
probably have all the answers that I'm requiring. Because there 
were figures as far as the amount of write-downs and dollars of 
write-downs? So we can move on then while I'm waiting for the 
sheet. 
 
The rules for any write-downs in ACS — do you have a 
standard set of rules or criteria as far as who gets the 
write-down? And are the rules the same for everyone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We attempt to treat the ACS loans 
on a best business basis. We try to operate in the best interests 
of the taxpayer and the farmer. Essentially write-downs are 
done on a basis of the repayment ability, what our security is. 
So in other words, if somebody's offering us a settlement of 
$20,000 on a $40,000 loan, if that's all he has the capability of 
paying and if we were to go to court and try to collect and in 
our judgement we would end up with no more money, then we 
will take the settlement. So that's the basis that we try to operate 
on and obviously every farm is different so the settlements tend 
to be different. But we attempt to operate on the basis of the 
best business decision and that's the basis for dealing with the 
individual cases. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, at what point was there any 
policy changes in regards to the write-down of ACS loans? 
Because I believe it was in the last session that I asked him the 
same questions. And I believe your answer was there was no 
deviation. Like the only way you could get a write-down is, in 
fact, farmers exiting, and there's a list of criteria that you could 
give me. So I assume now that there's been a policy change  

from the last time you were up in estimates in the last session to 
now. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we did make some slight 
change in policy and it's been in effect I think October, 
November of '93. So we've for the last year taken a slightly 
different approach. Essentially the ability to let people remain 
farming was one of the policy changes. And I think that was 
made at an earlier date. 
 
Essentially we are treating them more on a businesslike basis. 
For instance, there are producers who have . . . we have security 
on the home quarter. We cannot realize on that, many times, for 
a good number of years. The security will survive a bankruptcy, 
but there's a time factor involved, and so it's more a judgement 
of what the best business basis for the corporation is. And in 
assessing that basis, we haven't really changed the basis of the 
policy but we have sort of changed our measure of the time 
value of money, which has resulted in, I think, results that 
farmers can live with and continue farming with in a better 
manner. And hence I think we've gotten a speed-up in the 
settlements in the last year. 
 
But it's also a factor of better crops and better prices for 
products that's enabled us to settle up a good number of 
accounts in the last year. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would . . . you know, 
I'm just hearing you tell me that you're taking a slightly different 
approach, but you know, the basis of your policy's the same. I 
dare say that it sounds like the policy has completely reversed 
itself. In fact before, the farmers had to exit farming, there was 
hard and fast criteria; a few fell within this criteria, and now in 
fact I think if you're doing fairly well on retrieving some of the 
loans, it's in fact because your government has softened its 
stand somewhat. Perhaps going into election, you realize that 
the only way some of these people are going to stay on the land 
is to in fact start striking a few deals with the farmers. I think 
that's probably a better way to go. 
 
I don't disagree with you. I'm just surprised that so few people 
know that there's been a shift in the policy, such a dramatic shift 
in the policy. And I'm just wondering, have you made this 
known to the farmers? Or to all farmers? Any farmers that in 
fact deal with ACS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well obviously we make our 
policy known to producers who are in difficulty and who come 
in to talk to us about their situations. Again this isn't, I think, a 
dramatic shift in policy. We found that the policy criteria that 
we had were forcing us to do things that weren't in our best 
business interest. And therefore  that was the goal from the 
beginning and our policy wasn't quite meeting that goal  so 
we changed the policy in order that it would meet those goals. 
 
And certainly we attempt to treat all farmers the same who are 
in difficulty and try to work within a framework of policy. 
Again, realizing that every farm is different, the settlements are 
often different in nature. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2473 

Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, what . . . essentially 
what I'm asking you is not have you informed those people that 
have come in and asked for a deal to be made, but in fact have 
you considered . . . or have you sent a letter under your own 
name or just sent a letter out to all participants in ACS loans to 
in fact consider making a deal with your department? Have you 
given that consideration? 
 
Or have you more or less just sat back and waited to see who 
actually comes in in the dying minutes of their farming career to 
see if they can strike a deal or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well obviously, we don't contact 
people who are able to make their payments because there are 
no deals for people who are able to make their payments. We 
expect our customers to pay us the same as we always have. 
 
The only time that we're prepared to make a deal is when 
producers are in financial difficulty and then we're prepared to 
work with them. And we always have been prepared to work 
with producers, and any producer who comes to us and says I'm 
having difficulty making my payments, we certainly then sit 
down with them and go through their numbers and look at . . . 
then put forward options for them to deal with the difficulties. 
 
So certainly, again remember that most of our customers are not 
in financial difficulty, are not getting write-down. It is only the 
customers who are in financial difficulty who we need to deal 
with on write-downs. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just see this as 
something that could be unfair for the farmers. Because I 
suspect there's a number of farmers who aren't going to be 
coming in and asking for such a deal to be made. I mean these 
are still proud people out there. They don't really want help, but 
if they're right up against it . . . I mean you're only dealing with 
the ones that know full well that if they can't strike a deal with 
you, in fact they're finished. 
 
But yet I've had several calls in the past six months to twelve 
months from people who are saying that they can't get any break 
from ACS. And of course if some are and some aren't, I just 
think that's unfair for a government to have a policy of only 
those people who happen to walk into an ACS office and ask 
the right questions to find out in fact if they can strike a deal or 
not . . .  
 
And I'm just wondering why you won't consider perhaps letting 
several others know. The very fact that these ACS loans are out 
there today means that people had to lengthen them, otherwise 
wouldn't they basically all have been paid off by now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, the loans were extended in 
1987. It's a 10-year loan, so most of them will be completed 
paying out in '97. Most of them are being able to make their 
payments. 
 
Again we have many producers who come to us wanting deals 
or write-downs. Again our policy is on the best business basis  

that we do that. So if somebody has the assets and have the 
income flow, even though, I mean, they're obviously not in 
great financial shape, as any other lending institutions, we 
continue to demand the payments. 
 
We may stretch them out over a longer period of time to help 
them. And if we have any delinquent loans we obviously 
quickly do follow-up and try to point out options to producers. 
But we are not doing a general write-down for all ACS 
customers, and that's not our policy nor do we intend it to be 
our policy. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But in fact, Mr. Minister, if you're 
operating on a best business basis, what you're not seeing are 
those people that are . . . perhaps their families are doing 
without many things at home. You know, if the people are bent 
on ensuring that they can make their payment, something else is 
suffering. 
 
If in fact they've extended that loan in 1987, what would make 
one farmer who had to extend it in '87 a lot better off than 
another farmer? So I mean, to me it only makes sense that 
anyone that had to extend their loan or that, you know, or that 
your ACS managers know have had some problem, why 
wouldn't you offer the same deal to everyone? I mean that's 
what government should do, I think, is give every taxpayer the 
same break. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well if we gave everybody the 
same break, obviously we wouldn't help the farmers who are in 
financial difficulty. And there are many reasons for people who 
extended a loan in '87 to have different circumstances, most 
particularly in the agricultural sector, depending on the weather. 
 
People who have had good crops are generally able to keep up 
to their loans and make their payments. People who have had 
bad crops, or hail-storms, or some other circumstances, are in 
difficulty. And in those cases, we have a choice of pursuing 
them through courts and trying to get settlement and ending up 
with only a portion of the recovery; or making some settlement 
with them whereby we can get the same amount of money 
without going through all the collection and court procedures. 
And that's the policy we're following. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But you see, Mr. Minister, the problem 
that I have with the policy is because yet it's only those people 
that are hearing from neighbours or other farmers around the 
province, in fact, that they can get any sort of a write-down at 
all. Because I know several people in the south-west don't think 
there's any chance of a write-down; they still believe they have 
to exit farming. 
 
And when I take a look at . . . This was a newspaper article, and 
I'll send you over a photocopy of what I have here. We'll table 
it, I guess, so that the official opposition can get a copy of it. 
But here's a newspaper article that came out on March 23 in the 
Kamsack Times. It's about a fellow — are you familiar with the  



May 18, 1995 

 
2474 

article? — he helps to restructure farm debt. 
 
And so this is the point I'm making. I'll just read one bit out of 
here: “Often, as a last resort, Fraser is contacted, farmers having 
heard of him through word of mouth.” 
 
You see that's the problem. If you're in government you're in 
government for everyone. You know you've heard of this guy or 
what he can do through word of mouth. He interviews . . . This 
is in the third column about half way down, Mr. Minister. 
 
 He interviews the client in order to assess the problem 

and bases his fee on the time it takes to make an 
intervention. 

 
 For example, many farmers took advantage of the $25 

an acre loan from Ag Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan in 1987. But many are unable to pay it 
back, until a year ago they (that meaning the lenders — 
ACS) went on a collection binge. Now they're willing to 
settle these loans. 

 
See there's the problem, Mr. Minister. I suspect people that get 
the Kamsack Times are well aware of the government policy 
and no doubt . . . And in fact I think it states somewhere in this 
article — oh, sure it does — he gets 75 calls a day with people 
wanting their ACS loans restructured or dealt with. 
 
But you see, in Swift Current or North Battleford or, you know, 
pick another area in the province, they don't get the Kamsack 
Times and they don't happen to know about this fellow that can 
get a deal from ACS. And they don't happen to . . . you know, 
most of those people aren't reading Hansard; they don't know 
what you're telling me here tonight. 
 
You know I follow agriculture closely. I didn't realize until I got 
this newspaper article that ACS was in fact willing to settle 
some of these loans, because I was just going on what you told 
me in the last session — in fact there were no deviations from 
the criteria, that in fact you had to exit farming. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, is why I'm saying that I think that you 
should perhaps be making it public as to the new policy that 
ACS is following. Why wouldn't you agree with that? I just 
think it's fair to the taxpayers of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well if the member opposite wants 
to know ACS policy he should read the notes that he got from 
last year's estimates. Certainly he should have better access to 
ACS policy than reading a newspaper article. 
 
Many of Bill Fraser's clients — and I just talked to Bill Fraser 
on the phone, I think yesterday or the day before — most of his 
clients right now are people with outstanding Canadian Wheat 
Board cash advances that they are unable to pay back, not ACS 
loans. But if this article implies or the member's implying that 
there's some kind of general write-down available for farmers, 
that's not the case. We continue to collect the loan from 
producers. 

And the only case where we don't collect loans is where the 
producer is unable to pay. And you can't get blood from a stone. 
And as all other lending institutions have done — the Royal 
Bank, Farm Credit Corporation, and credit unions and others — 
when farmers are in financial difficulty and can't make a loan 
there's a farm debt review process that's available, there's 
mediation services that are available. 
 
Lending agencies find that it's in their best interest to sit down 
with the farmer-client and other lenders and arrive at some 
settlement, rather than to pursue collections through a court 
case where you know you're not going to get the money in any 
case. 
 
That's essentially what the policy is. And if we can realize the 
best return we can and still leave the producer on the land with 
some chance of recovering and making his living from the land, 
that's the obvious best happening for everybody. But there is no 
generally available write-down for ACS. There's no point in 
writing a letter to all the ACS clients and say, come in and see 
us, because if they have the ability to make the payments, we're 
going to collect them. If they need extensions or whatever to 
handle the payments, we'll deal with that. But there isn't a 
general write-down available to ACS clients. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, I'm not talking about a 
general write-down. I'm talking about making sure that those 
people that are in financial difficulty are in fact all being dealt 
with fairly. But I won't debate the issue with you. I can assure 
you that I'll be sending a lot more people your way now instead 
of me handling their calls. I think it's incumbent on you to 
explain the new policy to them. 
 
Can you, Mr. Minister, give me the legal costs of ACS for each 
different loan. What was it? The $25 an acre and the spring 
seeding and the livestock cash advance. Do you have the legal 
costs of what it's been costing ACS and in fact which law firms 
are representing ACS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We don't have the legal costs 
broken down on the different loan types. I can give you the total 
legal costs and the firms to whom we paid the legal bills. The 
total legal cost is $348,969.93. But we don't have it broken 
down by production loan or spring seeding loan. So we just 
have it in total. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I assume that that's just for 
this year or last year. I was wondering if you could give me the 
breakdown for the last three years. 
 
I recall — this was only a few years ago — when I saw some 
figures that showed the amount of money that the legal firm 
then was collecting was just about right on par with what they 
collected . . . as to what they charged to collect it. It was just 
about 50 per cent. I don't know if that . . . if I was looking at the 
right figures; you could clarify that. 
 
But what I'm asking here tonight is to give me a breakdown 
over the last three years — not an aggregate — but you must  



May 18, 1995 

 
2475 

have it broken down unless the same law firm is doing the 
livestock cash advance loans and all the other loans. Then it 
should be easy to give me a breakdown as to, you know, the 
total amounts collected in each of those loans and the law firm 
that worked on each of the loans; in fact what their charges 
were. Just so I can see if, in fact, the monies that we're spending 
on legal work makes some sense. In fact if it wasn't, then of 
course your new policy makes a fair amount of sense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I don't have a three-year 
breakdown on loans. I do have it on legal fees. We do have two 
years’ data on legal fees here. For '94-5, it's $348,969.93 which 
is the number I just gave you. A year earlier, it was $474,107.76 
and I would say that the year before that was, I'm assuming, was 
higher. We have gone through a good portion of some of the 
bad loans and some of the litigation that we've gone through. So 
it is dropping. 
 
I don't have a breakdown of, as I said, which loans, legal fees 
for each individual loans. Some of the analysis done suggests 
that we're getting about 17 or $18 in collection for every dollar 
in legal fees that we spent. But I don't have . . . That's from the 
recollection of one of the officials here. I don't have a 
breakdown between exactly which legal fees . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don't have it here or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It's not available. I don't think that 
we can get the breakdown on legal fees. We've got the legal 
fees that we paid to each firm and it would be very difficult to 
go back and sort out which loans which fees applied to, and try 
to calculate it that way. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, can you table the documents 
that you were just quoting from? I don't know what else is on 
the document but if you could table those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes I can table these documents. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, could you give me the 
average premium that was paid for, say, a thousand-acre farm 
on the 1991 GRIP program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, miraculously, 
although we're doing estimates for '94-95, we have the numbers 
that the member's asked for. The average premium in 
Saskatchewan in 1991 for GRIP was $6.43 per acre. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I'll just ask members to just calm down 
just a tad. The member and the minister are having a bit of 
difficulty concentrating, and so I'll ask you to just come to order 
and allow them to proceed undisturbed. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So then if we're looking at, say, a farm 
with a thousand seeded acres, and I guess that's a common-
sized farm today, and we're looking at, say, $7,000 in GRIP 
premium, then the amount of money that in fact was allowed to 
be deducted . . . Mr. Chair, there's such a roar over there, if we 
could get some of the members to visit outside perhaps. 

If there were $7,000 roughly per farm on the '91 GRIP, now 
when these people were allowed to opt out . . . and the reason 
I'm dating it back to '91, this will become relevant in a moment, 
Mr. Minister. But in fact really what these estimates are . . . 
really looking at the first term — or perhaps the only term, the 
term of your government, not just the year under review; I've 
noticed a lot of latitude here for all members of the House in 
this last bunch of estimates  so if we're in fact looking at this 
thousand-acre seeded farm and to opt out of the 1991 GRIP 
program, or 1992 GRIP program, the deal was that they had to 
pay back any monies received under the GRIP program less 
four times the 1991 premium. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right. So for . . . well you could easily 
be looking at deducting amounts of 20 or $30,000 off of the 
amount that somebody would have to repay, any extra monies 
on '91 GRIP. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, if the producer's premium 
was $7,000, he would have to pay back to the GRIP program 
everything above $28,000. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Right. So could you then tell me what . . . 
Did you look at each and every district, or do you have the 
figures for each crop district as far as the amount of producers 
that dropped out of the program? And in fact what I'd like to 
know from you is, if there is certain areas of the province where 
you noticed a lot more farmers dropping out of the program 
than other areas, you know, say risk area 4 in my area versus 
risk area 16 or risk area, you know, 20 or . . . did you ever do a 
breakdown on that? And in fact if you did — I see one of your 
officials with some notes there — if you could table that 
breakdown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, we don't have a breakdown by 
crop district. There were 5,010 producers who bought out of the 
program. 
 
They were likely in areas where they didn't get huge pay-outs 
from it in '91, because if you didn't get a large pay-out in '91 
you were able to get out without any cost. If you got a huge 
pay-out in '91 it would cost you money to get out. So I would 
surmise that it likely was in areas like mine where we didn't get 
very big pay-outs in '91, where producers got out. But I don't 
have any evidence of that and I don't have any breakdown here. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But in fact, Mr. Minister, if we take a look 
at these 5,010 producers that did get out of the program, then in 
fact they would have done quite a bit better, and I know I have a 
letter here that you sent out to the producers February 3, 1995. 
Firstly it talks about, “As part of developing these safety nets 
we have consulted with producers about how to wind down the 
present GRIP program.” And that's why I was asking the earlier 
questions. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2476 

That's my concern as to winding this program down and having 
the surplus that was there — and I've raised this; I won't debate 
it with you — but many times I raised with you the fact that I 
believe both governments, federal and provincial, should have 
left their monies in the program regardless. I know what your 
answer is going to be, is that, you know, the program was 
designed or developed under certain criteria. 
 
The fact of the matter is it should have been left there because it 
was in fact, Mr. Minister, it was first of all brought in from 
other budgets. All right? It wasn't money that you should have 
had to have found in any upcoming budget; it was money 
already budgeted for. I think it was only fair that those monies 
stayed in there. 
 
The producers had to live through program changes. In fact 
program changes that they didn't make. And when they signed 
in with the GRIP programs, it wasn't the producers that were 
forcing any changes. In fact it was the minister of Agriculture 
before you that in fact brought in . . . I guess it was the member 
from Rosetown that brought in the retroactive legislation 
against the farmers and forced changes upon them. So I think 
it's only right given what farmers had to go through. 
 
And you recall the 14,000 farmers in a rally in Saskatoon, the 
farmers on the steps of the legislature, and rallies all around the 
province. Now it wasn't those people that asked for changes to 
the program; it was the government. So then for the government 
to take the money out of the pot at the end, I don't think was 
right. And I don't care what you tell me about how the program 
was designed initially, I just don't think that was fair. I don't 
think it was just to the farmers. So now when we're looking at 
the winding down of the program . . . Mr. Chair, there's a dull 
roar in here and it's hard to concentrate. 
 
In fact, in winding the program down — and we have a surplus 
in GRIP, only the farmers' share — then what I think we have to 
look at is who should get that share. Now in fact your letter 
states that all producers who participated in the program will 
share in the producers' portion of the surplus distribution based 
on their share of total producer premium contributions. 
 
So essentially, I guess, what you're saying is that anyone who 
was ever in the program will get a share of this surplus money. 
Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That's correct. Based on the 
premiums that they paid into it. That's correct, each producer 
will get a pay-out based on the share of premiums that they paid 
into the program. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, but we're not talking about just 
producers that are active in the program today. Are you talking 
about all producers that were ever in the program, or just the 
ones that are participating today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — All producers who were in the 
program based on their premiums that they paid into the 
program. So if they were in the program in '91 and paid  

premiums in '91, they will get their share of the surplus based 
on the share of the premiums that they paid in, which will be 
only the premiums for '91 if that's the only year they were in the 
program. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I will ask the members of the 
committee to come to order. I'm having difficulty following the 
member asking questions and the minister responding. And I 
will ask members to exercise a bit of jurisprudence in their 
conversations and to allow the proceedings of the committee to 
take place in an orderly fashion. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, thank you a great deal, Mr. 
Chairperson. The producers then that dropped out of the 
program in . . . well in the spring of . . . and I have it here, I 
have letters from . . . that you sent out to the producers, July 7, 
1992 in a press release. So those producers that in fact . . . there 
was what, three, three times, four times, that deadline was 
extended? Those producers that did opt out and in fact did have 
a reduction in their buy-out of . . . you know, it could easily 
have reached 20 or $30,000, I take it, four times that '91 GRIP 
premium, so then how are you calculating when we're paying 
out the surplus of today? Are you taking into consideration 
those people that, even though they were paying in premiums, 
but they dropped out and took advantage of that four times the 
1991 premium amount to deduct . . . how are you actually 
arriving at an amount for them? Or are you even considering 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — All we do is take the total producer 
premiums paid in and take each producer's share that he paid in. 
So if a producer paid in one-thousandth of the premium, he 
would get one-thousandth of the surplus. That's the calculation, 
regardless of what year he paid the premium in. It's the total 
premiums paid, divided by the total premiums in the program, 
and that gives each producer's share. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You see, Mr. Minister, the problem that 
people can have with in fact that kind of a pay-out . . . If we 
take a look at the south-west where they grow a lot of durum 
. . . and I know that the way it worked in 1991 — supposedly a 
larger pay-out. But in fact a number of people had a large 
carry-over of durum into 1992. That carry-over was valued on 
the 1991 GRIP program, so they lost a great deal of money, 
probably enough that they couldn't afford to drop out of the 
program — couldn't afford to stay in, but they couldn't afford to 
drop out of it. 
 
Now do you see my point here, is just how negatively affected 
they are when you're saying to the people, we're going to pay 
out the GRIP surplus to everyone and you're including people 
that already have breaks of perhaps 20 and $30,000. And on the 
other side of the coin, people that live in my area of the 
province, perhaps with their carry-over of durum, really were 
unfairly treated. It might have cost them 20 or $30,000 that they 
never received. So how do you justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the 
carry-over of durum is irrelevant as the member well knows.  



May 18, 1995 

 
2477 

We measured under the old GRIP program every bin in the 
province of Saskatchewan in the fall of '91 and the calculation 
was based on what you grew in '91. So whether you carried it 
over or dumped it in the ocean is irrelevant to the argument. 
 
It was the producers in the south-west who did best under GRIP 
because under the old GRIP program you got paid for not 
growing a crop and they were lucky enough not to grow a crop 
in '91 and got a huge pay-out. We changed the program so you 
were better off to grow a crop, and up in our area we were 
unlucky enough not to grow a crop for two or three years. And 
so I don't know what point the member's making. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well the point I'm making, Mr. Minister, 
is that . . . firstly, I'd like to know who gave you the advice that 
we should have this surplus money paid out to all producers? 
Tell me who gave you that advice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We consulted with the . . . and got 
advice from our Farm Support Review Committee, which the 
member knows has been doing work since '91 in farm support. 
And we consulted with the National GRIP Committee members 
from Saskatchewan. There obviously are a hundred different 
ways that you could work it out. I think this is as fair a way as 
you really could come to distributing the surplus. In my mind 
it's simple and it is as fair a way as any that you can design for 
redistributing the surplus. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would say it's not 
fair. If in fact someone has already got a 20 or $30,000 write-
down — for lack of a better word — a write-down on what they 
would have had to have paid back to get out of the program 
versus people that couldn't afford to do it — and I could give 
you a list as long as your arm of people that . . . durum growers 
that got huge, huge bills in the mail that following fall. They in 
fact couldn't buy their way out of the program. And now you're 
not even going to share the surplus monies with them? 
 
You want to share monies . . . and that's why I was asking what 
area of the province? I mean is there some areas of the province 
— I don't want to accuse you of playing favouritism with your 
own people or even looking at it for political reasons — but are 
there areas of the province that you felt it was best to make sure 
that they received a share of this surplus money, when in fact 
they bought out and had a huge break before — 20, $30,000 
break? 
 
Now you say it was the Farm Safety Review Committee that 
suggested it be handled this way. Well I got my facts from some 
members of the Farm Safety Net Review Committee who are 
saying they don't feel it was fair. And in fact they have raised 
that with you on a number of occasions, that they don't feel it 
was fair. And I believe you've had one or two members step off 
the committee because they didn't feel it was fair. So how can 
you say it was up to them? It was up to you, was it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I don't know the point the 
member is making. If they couldn't afford to get out of the  

program, the only reason they couldn't afford to get out was 
because they'd gotten more than four times what they paid into 
it in the first year. 
 
So it was people who had the large payments in the first year 
who couldn't afford to buy out of it. So if you were going to 
adjust it on the basis of what you got out of the program and 
who'd got the most out of it, those people obviously wouldn't do 
that well. It would be a very, very complicated and almost 
impossible exercise to measure what each person got out of the 
. . . and what they paid in. Everybody got back more out of the 
GRIP program than they put into it, or almost everybody. And 
there may be exceptions to that but they certainly are very few 
and far between. 
 
To determine who got the most out of the program and have 
some very, very complicated mechanism of paying it out would 
have also delayed the pay-out and that if we weren't sure 
roughly what the pay-out would be to farmers  it wouldn't be 
roughly equal  we wouldn't have been able to forgive the 
premiums or the '93 overpayment because we might have been 
in a position of having to collect that later. 
 
(2115) 
 
So I still think that that is a fair method. I believe Alberta who 
now . . . Incidentally, 95 per cent of the producers in Alberta 
have opted out of GRIP, this great program that the opposition 
parties say we should go back to; 95 per cent of the producers 
in Alberta have opted out of this program and there's now a 
small surplus in there and they're looking at copying our method 
of redistributing that surplus, including paying back to the 
farmers only the portion that the farmers paid in. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Are you saying that in Alberta that they 
were also having deducted four times their amount of premium 
for the first year that they were in the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Producers in Alberta had a buy-out 
option, although not the same one-time buy-out option that 
Saskatchewan producers had in '91. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well can you tell me what their buy-out 
option is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — They would have to pay back any 
money in excess of the premiums. That's the buy-out option that 
was there. They would have to pay back any money in excess of 
their premiums in order to buy out of the program. That's the 
standard buy-out option. The buy-out option was offered one 
time in Saskatchewan  because of the changes to the program 
 was an option whereby they would only pay back a quarter 
of . . . only pay back if they got more than four times what they 
paid in. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well then, I mean if they have an entirely 
different buy-out option to what Saskatchewan producers had in 
the spring of 1992 when you were extending the deadline up 
until I think it was July 20, or the three or four times that you  



May 18, 1995 

 
2478 

extended the deadline, how can you use Alberta as an analogy 
of what should happen here? You know I think that's unfair 
because we're getting back to this point I made earlier, is that in 
the spring of 1992 there were people that were getting 20, 
$30,000 — perhaps more — break than what they got in 
Alberta, or what people could get today. In fact I maintain that 
there's got to be other reasons, and only you can tell us what 
they are, Mr. Minister, as to why you feel that these people that 
already received a fairly healthy buy-out option are in fact 
sharing in surplus GRIP dollars today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well again, there were 5,000 
producers only who bought out of the program. Some of those 
received a break. Again, the reason that they could buy out . . . 
and again I think there were probably more in my area than in 
your area because they got a smaller pay-out in '91. But that 
assumes they got more out of the market-place. And that's why 
they had a smaller pay-out and that's why they could buy out of 
the program. 
 
So I mean the program was designed to help producers who 
didn't get money out of the market-place, and now you're saying 
that well, if they got more out of the program, therefore they 
shouldn't share in the surplus of their premiums. That doesn't 
strike me as making a lot of sense. 
 
I don't know what you're . . . I'm not sure where you're coming 
from and how you're viewing this as unfair. People who bought 
out in '91 will obviously get a smaller share because they only 
paid premiums for one year. So their share of the premiums is 
obviously smaller than somebody who paid premiums for four 
years. 
 
But from a point of view of simplicity and a point of view of 
being administratively possible and a point of view of being 
fair, we think we've picked the best method for redistributing 
the surplus. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, as far as being 
administratively complicated, I don't think it is, because 
everyone's dealt with on an individual basis anyway. I mean you 
have that on computer. Your officials could give a print-out on 
any one producer in the province. So I don't agree with you that 
it's administratively a problem. 
 
In fact as you said, as I just heard you tell me, that in fact there 
were more people that probably bought out in the spring of 
1992 in your area than mine. That's exactly what my concern is, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Should the producers in your area, at election time, be getting a 
share of the surplus monies that in fact they probably don't 
deserve because they already received benefits from a buy-out 
option that the people in the south-west didn't get, by and large? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well a buy-out option was 
available to everybody in the province. Some producers took it 
and some didn't. I just don't follow the member's logic here at 
all. 

Mr. McPherson: — But, Minister, how could you not follow 
the logic? There were people that received 20 and $30,000 
buy-out options, a write-down, in the spring of 1992. Those 
people now, I don't believe . . . and I've had several calls on 
this. I've had members of your Farm Safety Net Review 
Committee say that those people already got their break. Why 
should they share, Mr. Minister, why should they share in 
getting part of this surplus when it's already small because you 
and your government kept millions and millions of their dollars 
to help balance your books. That's what they're saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well there are two very different 
arguments, and one about how the surplus should be 
redistributed. Again, this was distributed the way all tripartite 
programs were redistributed. This is exactly what Alberta is 
saying, if you read The Western Producer, which I just read at 
the back of the room. It's exactly what Alberta's doing. They're 
going to pay back the producers based on the premiums that 
they paid in. If you get to how you distribute that surplus, it 
seems to me to be logical. It was an insurance-type program. 
You paid in premiums to get protection. You got some money 
out of the program or you got some money out of the 
market-place, hopefully. And therefore we're redistributing it 
basis the premiums that producers paid in, and that seems to be 
the fairest way and the simplest way to do it. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 — authorized by law. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Item 1 — authorized by law. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2479 

Vote 146 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I certainly 
would like to thank the oppositions for their questions and their 
cooperation, and the officials for very good answers and very 
diligent work. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I also want to thank 
the minister and his staff for providing the answers as best they 
could and thanks so much. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to 
thank the minister and his officials. It's always interesting in 
agriculture in this province and those officials have been 
through some good times and some bad. And I suspect the 
coming years will not prove any different, Mr. Chairman, so 
good luck in the future. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you to the minister and his officials. 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Items 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2130) 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Swenson: — One question here. The line dealing with 
members of the Legislative Assembly superannuation plan  
with the changes coming into effect for the Premier and the 
others that were under the old plan, are there any changes in 
that particular line, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, no, there will be no change in that line because the 
members are not receiving a pension. So the line will remain as 
it is. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 

Servicing the Public Debt 
Government Share 

Vote 12 
 
Item 1 — authorized by law 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176, 177 
 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive — authorized by law. 
 

The Chair: — If the minister wishes to thank her officials? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 
officials and I'd like to thank the members opposite for their 
questions. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
thank the minister and her officials for the several times that 
we've had the opportunity to discuss the finances of the 
province, and good luck to you all in the future. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hereby 
move resolution no. 1: 
 
 That towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
1995, the sum of $94,396,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hereby 
move resolution no. 2: 
 
 That towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
1996, the sum of $3,149,895,000 to be granted out of 
the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave 
of the Assembly, I move: 
 
 That Bill No. 77, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending respectively on March 31, 1995 and 
on March 31, 1996, be now introduced and read the first 
time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave  



May 18, 1995 

 
2480 

of the Assembly, and under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill now 
be read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to Maintain Financial Stability and 
Integrity in the Administration of the Finances of the 

Province of Saskatchewan 
 

The Chair: — I would ask that the Minister of Finance please 
introduce the officials who have joined us here for 
consideration of this Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. On my immediate left is Bill Jones, the deputy 
minister of Finance; behind Bill is Jim Marshall, the executive 
director, economic and fiscal policy; behind me is Craig 
Dotson, associate deputy minister, budget analysis division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Could I ask the members to 
take their seats, please. Order. Can I ask the member to take his 
seat, please. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, 
and your officials. Maybe the obvious hilarity which the 
government members are displaying right now is the reaction 
that most people in this province have to the minister's 
legislation. 
 
The opportunity was obviously before the government to come 
forward with something of substance, given what has transpired 
particularly in provinces on either side of us, and instead the 
government has chosen to come forward with a piece of 
legislation that really is nothing more than, in my view, a 
political ploy to try and get through an election campaign 
without the honest to goodness goods attached to it, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
So obviously the government members treat this Bill the same 
way that the public will, with laughter, with derision, with 
absolute contempt. And that's probably the way it should be 
treated. Because there's nothing here that will prevent 
government in the future, in my view, Mr. Chairman, from 
doing what has made the public of this province and this 
country very sceptical of the political process. And that is not 
put in place legislation that truly, truly puts some roadblocks in 
the way of politicians from spending the taxpayers' money in a 
foolish way. I don't believe this government had any stronger 
mandate than one ever given in this province, either through 
plebiscite or election, to do what needs to be done. 
 
And that's why, Mr. Chairman, we brought a piece of  

legislation before this Assembly that would truly protect the 
taxpayers and would say to government, it is in the best 
interests of all — best interests of all  to have legislation in 
place that would truly protect the interests of taxpayers. And 
instead the government has come forward and said, well over 
the term of four years we'll have a balanced budget providing 
some natural disaster or whatever doesn't occur. 
 
And I say to the minister, and she can answer the question, why 
in the world would you not want to be in step with Manitoba 
and Alberta and other jurisdictions that clearly have realized 
that the taxpayers of this country are sick to death of 
government being able to either directly or indirectly tax them? 
 
And you see, Madam Minister, because of the way the 
Government of Saskatchewan is structured with such a huge 
Crown corporation sector, there's many ways that you can 
structure the funds of this province to meet the obligation of a 
four year . . . of a four-year balance but not meet the obligation 
that you owe taxpayers. And that is a true shame, with the 
mandate that you have, with the plebiscite to back it up, with 
the power of your majority, to not want to follow the wishes of 
the taxpayers of this province. Your polling says it; our polling 
says it; the Liberal polling says it — they all agree. 
 
And instead you take the easy way out and I do not understand 
— and I understand politics, Madam Minister, as well as most 
in this province — why you would not want to follow the 
wishes of the people and why you would take this expedient 
way, why you would want to get around the wishes of the 
people of this province. They expect more out of you; they 
expect truly to have more out of you. 
 
So I say to you: the only question that has to be answered here 
tonight is, why do you not want to be in step with the reality of 
the 1990s? Why do you want to get the cheap and easy way 
out? Is politics so important to the New Democrat Party, is 
politics so important to you, that you would find ways to weasel 
around instead of enshrining in legislation and law protection of 
the men and women of this province that have to pay the taxes 
that fund government. 
 
And that's what we're all here for. There's no other reason — at 
least there shouldn't be, in my view — than to protect and do 
the bidding of the families of this province who pay the taxes. 
And why you would not want to protect them from yourself or 
any other government that comes along in this province I do not 
understand; when you have such a powerful mandate in your 
hands, why you ignore what everyone says? 
 
Madam Minister, why should we pass this legislation, this 
weak-kneed piece of legislation, that will only make the 
cynicism of the taxpaying public grow larger instead of having 
the confidence that they should have in their politicians? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I won't give a lengthy answer but I do want to give 
him some sort of answer because he's asked a very serious 
question. 



May 18, 1995 

 
2481 

We heard from people in the province that they wanted us to do 
something, pass legislation to ensure that we would never return 
to the 1980s and the problems of overspending and tax cuts of 
the 1980s. 
 
We looked very carefully at other jurisdictions that had 
balanced-budget legislation to see why, in many cases, it hadn't 
worked. And one of the reasons sometimes balanced budget has 
not worked in places like the United States is because it is so 
strict, so restrictive. It is so difficult for governments to actually 
help people when they need help, that it occurs, as it did in 
California, that after passing a series of referendums restricting 
what the government could do, what it could spend, people 
found in California their schools were having to close in April 
because they had run out of money. And in 1992 and '93 the 
state of California, with the approval of the people of 
California, set aside their own legislation. 
 
So what we believe the legislation has to be is it has to ensure 
that there is requirement on the part of the government to 
balance the books, but it also has to have enough flexibility that 
the government can act and the legislation can be practical. 
That's why we provide that you have to lay out a four-year plan 
to balance the books and a four-year plan to manage the debt. 
 
Now you mention our legislation relative to other jurisdictions. 
There actually are safeguards in our legislation that exist 
nowhere else. Because what we looked at is how could you 
potentially, and how have other jurisdictions, gotten around this 
sort of legislation? 
 
What happens often is government simply change their 
accounting practices. So yes, they're balancing their books, but 
they've changed their accounting practices so that they move 
things off budget; the most common way of getting around 
balanced budget legislation. This legislation prevents 
governments from changing accounting practices. 
 
It does cover the Crowns. The debt management plan has to 
cover all of government so you can't, for example, take big 
dividends from the Crowns, force the Crowns to borrow more, 
because your debt will go up. So it actually does cover the 
Crowns. 
 
And the other loophole that has been closed is in jurisdictions 
like Alberta. In Alberta you could change your accounting 
practices to get around their legislation, as you could in 
Manitoba. And in Alberta and Manitoba you could sell major 
assets and merely put the money into spending and balance your 
books, but not truly balance your books. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan you cannot sell a major Crown and 
merely spend the money. If that were to occur, and we're not 
advocating it, you'd have to put it to the debt. 
 
So it's a piece of legislation we spent a lot of time thinking 
about and working on. We think it's reasonable and practical. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, you know it simply  

isn't true that anybody's going to change their accounting 
system. I mean the public accounts committees of this country 
have been moving to accrual. It's been a recommendation of the 
House of Commons, everybody has followed suit, and that's 
going to be the standard practice. And that will be it. 
 
There's no such thing as anybody changing their accounting 
system to get around balanced-budget legislation when they've 
all finally come to agree on the same thing. So that's a red 
herring. Throw that out the window; that doesn't exist anymore. 
 
And most provinces, Madam Minister, don't have the Crown 
sector that we do. If you had brought this legislation in and 
followed the auditor's requirement that the 40 per cent of 
government that does not appear before this Legislative 
Assembly would come in here, I would totally agree with you. I 
would totally agree with you. And you can give me all of the 
song and dance you want about the Crowns. Until the Crowns 
hit the floor of this legislature and we understand their capital 
budgets, their depreciation allowance, and how they set their 
rates in a public way, your legislation simply doesn't wash. It 
simply does not wash. 
 
So I say to you again, Madam Minister, why don't you make an 
amendment then at least if we're going to go with this four-year 
stuff — to say in future the Crowns will come before the House 
and that we'll truly know the picture of the province of 
Saskatchewan. At least when we set a four-year budget it isn't 
60 per cent each year; it's 100 per cent of what we're dealing 
with. 
 
And if you had done that, maybe you would have confidence 
from people instead of an advertising campaign that goes every 
day in this province from groups that say you brought forward a 
wishy-washy political document rather than a true taxpayers' 
document. 
 
Why will you not amend it then to bring forward the Crown 
sector to the floor of the House and at least give us some 
confidence that we're looking at 100 per cent of the picture 
instead of only 60 per cent each year? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, as I've mentioned before in this legislature, the 
Crowns are quite different than other parts of government 
because they operate in a competitive environment. And you 
can't have SaskTel forced to release all kinds of information 
when competitors do not have to do the same. 
 
I would say to the member opposite though, the summary 
financial statements which we produce cover the Crowns, and 
the debt management plan covers the Crowns. So I would say 
that the Crowns are covered in terms of the accounting of the 
government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I only have one final 
comment, and I'm just going to put on my soothsayer's hat here 
a little bit. I'm going to predict that in the next four years, 
whoever forms the government of this province is probably  



May 18, 1995 

 
2482 

going to divest themselves of SaskTel and SaskEnergy and parts 
of other Crown corporations. I'm going to predict that. And 
whether it's you or someone else, you're going to be faced with 
the realities of the 1990s. And that'll be quite a leap of faith for 
New Democrats, but I predict that. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I also predict to you that the pressure to 
do what is right in the next four years will come down square 
on the head of any government in this province, and that is 
balanced-budget legislation that protects the taxpayers of this 
province from politicians, of whatever stripe they are. And until 
that's in place, I don't believe, I honestly don't believe, that 
some of the major issues in front of us, whether they be debt or 
employment, job creation, reducing our welfare numbers, 
keeping our hospitals, keeping our schools, will be addressed 
until that's in place. The public want it and they want it 
desperately. And I don't know why, in the face of overwhelming 
support, you would not want to give the public of this province 
what they sent you here to do. Why you would not want to take 
your mandate and bring in true legislation instead of a political 
charade, I don't know, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I guess I would agree with the member that was just 
up speaking. In fact I don't think the legislation has nearly the 
teeth in it that you're trying to let on to the House and to the 
people that it does. In fact I question whether . . . just how 
much you are committed to some of the principles that you've 
laid out, when in fact we look at a four-year plan, your 
four-year plan, to have balanced legislation. 
 
What it could give you is the ability to manipulate, run three 
successive deficits, having the people believe that in fact in the 
fourth year you're going to have it all balance out over a 
four-year term. 
 
Now if that's the case, if that's how this could play out, I know 
the public would have some concern that perhaps what you 
would then do is go to the polls before that fourth budget came 
down. In fact it would give you the ability to do what the 
former government, the members here, were doing in 1986 
where in fact they said the budget's going to come in at a certain 
level. I think they . . . well as the Premier mentioned yesterday, 
they missed it by some $900 million. 
 
So I'm not sure what assurances you've really given the people 
of the province that in fact you won't do the same. The only way 
that in fact you could do that is by having set election dates, so 
that people know that on a certain date in June, every four years 
for an example, we're going to be going to the polls. And that 
way there's no reason why you wouldn't have the budget passed 
each and every term, and each and every year. Have you given 
that some consideration, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I think that a lot of people who have thought about 
this vis-a-vis Saskatchewan have concluded that because of the 
nature of the economy here, where there can be swings in 
prices, and swings in crops, that it's only reasonable to allow  

the government a period of time in which to balance the books. 
Dale Eisler had it right: it's actually returning to Keynesianism 
where you in tough times, yes, you might run a deficit for a 
year, but then you make it up in the surplus for the year after. 
 
What I would say to the members opposite is that there is 
support for this legislation. The Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce issued its own press release and the headline was, 
"Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce Welcomes Balanced 
Budget Legislation." And they talked about the fact they think 
the legislation is very positive. The president of the chamber 
says she especially likes certain checks and balances and this 
legislation also meets with Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce policies. For example, the government cannot 
change accounting methods midstream. Any monies from the 
sale of a Crown corporation cannot be used for the general 
revenue purposes and any budget surpluses go towards the debt 
reduction fund. 
 
They also conclude on a very interesting note. The 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce also believes that this 
would be an appropriate step for the federal government to take 
in order to eliminate the federal deficit and come up with a plan 
to repay the federal debt. Balanced-budget legislation 
undertaken by provinces and at a national level would go one 
step further in improving both the business climate and how we 
are perceived by the international financial market-place. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Madam Minister, what I'd asked you 
is what assurances you could give to the people or what 
amendments perhaps you could make to the Bill to ensure that 
governments — your own or future governments — in fact can't 
manipulate the process. 
 
And I'm suggesting to you the only way you could have this 
happen is to perhaps have set election dates so we can be sure 
. . . We're allowing you, Madam Minister, that ability for these 
swings supposedly if in fact . . . you know, as I've heard other 
members refer to the need for some latitude in the event of a 
major drought. 
 
Well firstly, I don't think any farmer in Saskatchewan would 
ever for a moment think that your government's going to help 
them anyways — but in fact you would have the latitude and we 
are all in agreement to that, give you that latitude. But what if in 
the fourth year . . . what's to stop your government from doing 
exactly what the former Conservative government did and in 
fact not be truthful with the people of the province and run a 
deficit which I believe missed the target by some $900 million. 
I'm just asking you why you wouldn't consider an amendment to 
that to allow . . . you know, just to tighten it up. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I would say to 
the member opposite is that the ultimate judge of whether or not 
a government is doing a good job in managing the finances is 
going to be the electorate. And I think this government has said 
consistently that we can put in place laws that say you have to  



May 18, 1995 

 
2483 

have a four-year plan. You can't manipulate accounting 
practices, which is occurring in other jurisdictions in Canada 
right today. You can't just sell off assets and spend the money. 
 
But nobody can legislate virtue and if the government . . . if you 
want to get good government, people have to look very 
carefully at who they elect and ask very serious questions. 
Because in the end, it is the people that are going to decide and 
determine. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, you talk about the 
ultimate judge. What I'm saying here is that the ultimate judge 
wouldn't really know whether or not they're being dealt with 
fairly unless in fact, they can have some assurance that the 
budget in that fourth year will definitely be passed before you 
go into an election. 
 
Now I don't see where in your Bill, you're giving that assurance. 
Because as the Premier alluded to a letter from a former 
Conservative Finance minister where — I forget what the 
amount was — $265 million deficit ended up being whatever, 
1.1 or 1.2 billion . . . I'm sure the ultimate judge at that time felt 
that they were given a decent amount of goods. That they could 
actually believe in the figures that were given in the letter from 
then Finance minister to the member from Riversdale. 
 
So I'm saying, I don't see anything in the Bill to actually stop a 
problem like that and would you consider an amendment to 
ensure that that can't happen? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we would not consider the amendment but there are 
safeguards in the Bill. Unlike when Lorne Hepworth was 
minister of Finance, what occurs now is when you have to lay 
out a financial plan — a four-year financial plan — you have to 
lay out all your numbers. Here's our spending. Here's our 
revenue. Here's our economic assumptions. And they have to be 
scrutinized by international financial agencies. 
 
And the agencies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, not in the 
detail that we do today. No government in this province has laid 
out plans with this sort of detail ever before in the history of the 
province. 
 
And the financial agencies comment on those plans and if they 
say those numbers are wild, they can't work; the government's 
credibility is undermined. And they have done that with 
Mazankowski's last budget. They said these are wild numbers, 
they can't work, they're rosy. With Paul Martin's last budget — 
we'll give him credit — they said these are reasonable forecasts. 
 
So you have to lay out the plan. Then if you run a deficit, you 
have to come back with a new plan showing how, over the three 
years left, you're going to balance it. And again your numbers 
have to be scrutinized. 
 
So unless — again I come back to my main point — unless the 
press and the opposition is totally asleep, a government trying  

to manipulate is going to be caught, and the electorate is going 
to be alerted and the electorate is going to do what they should 
do, which is fire that government. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I won't debate this 
point all evening with you. Because as you said, you wouldn't 
make the amendment anyways. I'm only stating to you that I 
think, Madam Minister, that it could have been handled easily. 
We wouldn't worry about whether the press or opposition 
parties would have to catch something that . . . perhaps dealing 
with financial institutions. 
 
You could have had this in the legislation, and in fact you could 
have made it easy and lived up to other campaign promises that 
were being made at one point, and that's having set election 
dates. 
 
You choose not to do that. I won't debate any longer. I think 
that you should have it in there; you don't. Fine, we'll move on 
to another point that was raised here this evening and that had 
to do with the debt elimination schedule. And I know that 
you've quoted from chamber of commerce. I don't know who 
all, Madam Minister, you've been quoting from tonight, but in 
fact I think you know, everyone in the province, or probably 
everyone in the province, feels that a debt elimination Bill, a 
balanced-budget legislation was necessary. 
 
And it is supported. I can tell you right now I'm going to be 
supporting this Bill when we sit down here later. I'm just saying 
I think there's some problems with it; I wish you would have 
dealt with it. If you don't, well I can assure you that the next 
government will make some of these changes which I think are 
needed and perhaps we'll be able to make them soon — sooner 
rather than later. 
 
I see no problem though, with you . . . you were talking, Madam 
Minister, about having the first — I think I'm losing my voice 
here tonight — having the first budget to come down with a lot 
of detail in it. So why couldn't you have done some detail, in 
fact, putting out a debt elimination schedule. I don't know if 
people feel completely at ease with you having the latitude to 
spend some of these monies on program expenditures, for 
example. 
 
I mean either you're going to have it in your budget . . . you 
know, what you can do with programs or not, but in fact what 
we're talking about is having a set schedule that they've had in 
other provinces. I'm sure that these same groups that you're 
quoting from and saying that they support your legislation are 
also very supportive of knowing a date in the future when 
they're going to be debt free. Why wouldn't you consider this? 
 
I understood that I had put a question to the minister and I was 
waiting for an answer. I didn't realize that she was going to not 
give answers this evening. 
 
But in fact, there's other problems that we could see with the 
Bill, and that's one where you're saying you needed some 
latitude in the event of emergencies or unforeseen  



May 18, 1995 

 
2484 

circumstances, to have some latitude to deal with those. And 
I'm wondering, Madam Minister, have you considered having 
some clear definitions of what would constitute an unforeseen 
circumstance? 
 
And I raise it for this reason. I recall back in 1992 in the 
summer where we had quite a drought in the south-west corner 
of the province. And in fact on behalf of the farmers and 
ranchers in south-west Saskatchewan, I had requested some 
help or aid to make sure that they could see their way through 
that given year. And the government wouldn't even consider it. 
 
But I'm not so sure now in election year, especially if your 
government decided not to call the election this spring but in 
fact go in the fall, that in fact where there's a flood area, you 
wouldn't see that as an unforeseen circumstance that would 
perhaps need some resolve. 
 
But is that something that we can only expect in an election 
year, or in fact only in certain ridings? I think that you should 
be giving an answer to the people of the province as to what we 
can expect to be . . . and when these kind of unforeseen 
circumstances could be expected, how you deal with them. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. First of all in response to his earlier question, the 
legislation requires the government to come out with a debt 
management plan. We have included in this budget a four-year 
debt management plan in which in this past year alone more 
than $500 million is actually taken off the debt. 
 
Now with respect to emergencies, emergencies are very clearly 
defined. They have to be significant events. They have to be 
identifiable events and unanticipated  so something that is 
major, you can see, you can identify, and you couldn't 
anticipate. 
 
And if you're going to call that an emergency you have to give a 
special report to the legislature identifying the event and 
identifying the costs associated with the event. 
 
So it's the sort of thing that would be quite unusual in the 
province and there's nothing in recent memory that would 
qualify for an emergency provision. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The only . . . well not the only other 
concern but one other concern I would have, Madam Minister, I 
noticed in your Bill, and in fact in your press release, you made 
the statement — wherever it is, here we go — and it was 
alluded here this evening, that the sale of Crown corporations 
couldn't be used just for whatever reason the government of the 
day thought they would use the monies for. In fact they would 
have to go into debt. 
 
And I'm not sure in reading the Bill here right now that I see 
that; in fact I don't see anywhere in the Bill where it really says 
it's going to go to debt. And perhaps let me even expand on this 
example where I think it was SaskPower that had about $10 
million worth of shares in, I think it was Wascana Energy —  

the minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) I guess 
could help out here — but there were a substantial amount of 
shares held by Crowns that were sold. 
 
And in fact if you were to go out and ask the people of the 
province what they would want done even with the shares that 
are being sold, they would say, well they should be . . . 
everything that's sold should be applied to the debt. Have you 
given consideration of this? I think that's it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what the legislation says is that if you sell a Crown 
corporation or a major part of a Crown corporation, you cannot 
merely take the money into the General Revenue Fund for 
spending. And that's a serious issue because in the 1980s that's 
one of the things that happened in the province. A whole list of 
Crown corporations were sold and the deficit of the province 
continued to rise because the money was simply spent. 
 
So that would no longer be possible. You would no longer be 
able to just transfer it across and spend it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2215) 
 
The Chair: — If I might be allowed an opportunity from the 
Chair, I think I speak on behalf of the Deputy Chair when I say 
that we both appreciate the help that we have received from the 
Clerks, the knowledge and guidance during proceedings of the 
committee; the Sergeant-at-Arms for his excellent help in 
maintaining decorum at times; the pages for their attention; the 
ministers, the opposition critics, and all the members for their 
cooperation in ensuring a productive and relatively harmonious 
environment in the Committee of the Whole and the Committee 
of Finance. 
 
Thank you, one and all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to Maintain Financial Stability and 
Integrity in the Administration of the Finances of the 

Province of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 



May 18, 1995 

 
2485 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 10:20 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act 
Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 
Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Teachers' Federation Act 
Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 
Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Act 
Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 
Bill No. 12 — An Act respecting the Application to 

Saskatchewan of the Convention on Protection 
of Children and Co-operation in respect of 
Intercountry Adoption 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Interior Designers 
Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Department of Health 

Act 
Bill No. 61 — An Act respecting the University of 

Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 26 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Assessment 

Appraisers and to enact certain Consequential 
Amendments to The Assessment Management 
Agency Act 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Assessment Management 
Agency Act 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 
Bill No. 54 — An Act to establish an Aboriginal 

Courtworkers Commission 
Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 
Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984, and to make a Consequential 
Amendment to The Municipal Board Act 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 
1979 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 69 — An Act respecting the Interpretation of 
Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing 
Enactments/Projet de loi no. 69 — Loi 
concernant l'interprétation des textes et édictant 
les règles les régissant 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Changes of Name/Projet de 
loi no. 66 — Loi concernant les changements 
de nom 

Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the keeping of Vital 
Statistics/Projet de loi no. 67 — Loi concernant 
les services de l'état civil 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Regulations/Projet de loi no. 
68 — Loi concernant les règlements 

Bill No. 70 — An Act respecting the Solemnization of 
Marriage/Projet de loi no. 70 — Loi concernant 
la célébration du mariage 

Bill No. 71 — An Act respecting Victims of Crime/Projet de 
loi no. 71 — Loi sur les victimes d'actes 
criminels 

Bill No. 73 — An Act respecting Elementary, Secondary and 
Post-secondary Education in 
Saskatchewan/Projet de loi no. 73 — Loi 
concernant l'enseignement élémentaire, 
secondaire et postsecondaire en Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting Non-profit 
Corporations/Projet de loi no. 74 — Loi 
concernant les sociétés sans but lucratif 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to Maintain Financial Stability and 
Integrity in the Administration of the Finances 
of the Province of Saskatchewan 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 77 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Years ending respectively on March 31, 
1995 and March 31, 1996. 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:26 p.m. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would just 
like to say a few words of thank you before we move the 
adjournment motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, I just want to say, on behalf of the 
members of the government caucus — this possibly being the 
last time that we meet in this particular configuration in the 
Assembly — I want to say a special thank you to all members 
of the Assembly, first of all, for the hard work and endeavour 
that each and every one of you has put into making the last four 
years productive and worthwhile. 
 
A number of people have decided not to seek re-election. To 
them, I want to say thank you and especially to you, Mr. 
Speaker, for your tolerance and good humour in the many days 
when we may have had disagreements. And I really do want to 
wish to you and to your family the very best in your retirement. 
Although, knowing you personally and working with you as an 
elected member for almost 20 years, I know that your retirement 
will be anything but retiring. And my understanding is that you 
are looking forward to volunteer work both in  



May 18, 1995 

 
2486 

Saskatchewan and other parts of the nation and world. And I'm 
sure that you will do great things with your extra time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say as well to Mr. 
Goodhand — we've recognized his work earlier today  I just 
want to add my personal thanks to you. 
 
I know there were a number of times when he has turned the 
corner with the mace and we've been misbehaving. On this spot 
he has attempted to lean over just a little bit to clip us, I think, 
as he turns the corner with the mace, but we've been able to 
avoid it at every turn. But I do want to say to you, sir, thank you 
for your hard work and the work that you do every day in 
securing the building. You've done a great job. 
 
I would also like to take just a few moments to thank a few 
other people. First of all, to the benefit of the Assembly, the 
Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk; her Deputy Clerk, Greg Putz; and Clerk 
Assistant, Meta Woods, who has joined us in this session. I 
want to say also to the secretary to the Clerk, Monique Lovatt, 
and the secretary to the Clerk at the Table, Pam Scott, this is a 
great group of people. 
 
(2230) 
 
All the way back to the early days when I was first elected in 
1978 and Gwenn Ronyk, who was then, I'll say, a younger 
Clerk, assisted us on a library committee that travelled across 
Canada. And this becomes a very close family over the years 
and those people who have not had an opportunity to serve in 
the Assembly will not understand the closeness that develops, 
not only between caucus members, but also between other 
members of the Assembly. And I know that the Clerks have 
played a big role in bringing us closer in many, many ways. 
 
I'd also like to thank the Legislative Assembly employees — 
those in the personnel and administration staff — Linda 
Kaminski and the other staff who work in that area. In the 
journals we would like to thank as well the Clerk Assistant, 
Rose Zerr, and the assistant journals clerk, Teena Embury; in 
the financial services area, the director, Marilyn Borowski and 
staff. 
 
I'd also say that the public who have watched — and believe it 
or not there are people who watch the proceedings of the House 
with great interest — that would not be possible without the 
broadcasting services director, Gary Ward, and the other 
technicians who work in that area. 
 
I would also like to thank the members, on behalf of the 
members of the Assembly, the hard work that goes into visitor 
services. The director, Lorraine deMontigny, who works very 
closely in getting people into the galleries and lines us up for 
introductions every day. Thank you very much. 
 
Finally, I would like to say special thanks to Legislative 
Counsel and Law Clerk, Bob Cosman, who works not only  

with our members of the Assembly but with the opposition. 
And maybe it's logical probably, developing legislation, private 
members' Bills, actually works closer with the opposition. And 
in our nine years in opposition, I know that that office worked 
very diligently in helping us out in many areas. 
 
Finally the pages, who have carried many, many books for us 
and have very much been involved in the working of the 
Assembly. It is our honour to have had you to work with us for 
the past months. 
 
And finally, I just want to say again to all the individuals who 
are elected — some for short terms, some for long terms — I 
know that when we leave here, although we have had tough 
debates, long debates, we leave here as friends and comrades 
and look forward, whether successful in the election or not, to a 
long association in one form or another because our paths will 
cross a number of times in the days, weeks, and years to come. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place. If there are 
other comments, and then I would have the House entertain a 
motion of adjournment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 
certainly an honour and a privilege to stand in this Assembly 
this evening at this hour and to make a few remarks on behalf 
of my colleagues. First of all, to extend a number of thank you’s 
to people who have worked so hard to not only work in this 
Assembly, but who have given of their time and energy to serve 
the people of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when a person comes to extending thank 
you’s, sometimes you enter into that extension of thank you’s 
with a little bit of a reserve because you often wonder, who are 
you going to forget. And I will attempt to, with the notes I have 
in front of me, make sure I do not leave out anyone. If I do, it 
certainly isn't because it was intentionally done. 
 
I would like to thank the employees of this legislature who have 
made our jobs in this Assembly so much easier. And let me 
begin, Mr. Speaker, by including you and extending a heartfelt 
thank you to you and, in your absence, the Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, if we were to look at your job and if we 
were to assess it, and if we were to assess the performance of 
the Chair on the basis of 1 to 10, there might be quite a variance 
in this Assembly as to where that assessment may have finally 
arrived and been achieved. But I would say, Mr. Speaker, that 
while we've had our differences of opinions, I believe you have 
endeavoured to really represent the Chair and represent it well 
over the past three and a half years. And I can only wish you 
every success in your future endeavours and in your retirement. 
 
To all the Chairs of the various committees we say thank you 
for your hard work and your diligence. To the security staff, to 
the library staff for their expedient and informative service to 
this Assembly and to the individual caucuses; to the Dome  



May 18, 1995 

 
2487 

Cafeteria, the ladies downstairs, the individuals downstairs who 
have kept our engines fuelled for some of the fiery debate we've 
entered into in this House; to the hard-working pages who have 
joined us in this Assembly and been so diligent in their work 
and efforts, we say thank you. 
 
To our Sergeant-at-Arms, Mr. Goodhand. Mr. Goodhand, we 
certainly . . . in some ways we look at your retirement — and 
for those of us who may be getting there sooner than we think 
— we're almost thinking it would be nice to be there already. 
But we appreciate the work you've done for the past number of 
years. We thank you for your endeavours and your work in this 
Assembly and we wish you well in your retirement. I don't 
know, did you slug Iris's golf ball off the tee yet? I'm not sure. 
But good luck in your golfing. 
 
To the Clerk's office, to Gwenn and Greg, and Margaret who's 
joined us this session, we say thank you. And to all those who 
have worked in the back rooms, whether it's in broadcast 
services, Hansard, tour guides, janitorial and maintenance staff, 
and certainly to our Legislative Law Clerk, Mr. Bob Cosman, 
and the law counsel staff. 
 
And I noticed as well there's a comment here, I think our staff 
were . . . just felt that they didn't want to be left out, and they 
say here, especially the clever and efficient research staff, 
particularly those working in the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
caucus office who put the information in here. We certainly say 
thank you. I'm sure the government members say thank you as 
well. 
 
We would like to as well thank the media. Now I guess we 
could rate their performance on a scale of 1 to 10. We'll let 
them be the judge tomorrow when they make their remarks. 
And everyone who I may have missed who have helped to keep 
this legislature running smoothly, we say thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, might I also add a very sincere thank you to those 
in this Assembly who have chosen not to seek re-election. The 
fact that you chose to run in the past, the fact that you were 
elected, has shown that people had confidence in your abilities 
to come here and represent them well. And I don't think there's 
anyone, regardless of which side of the House they're sitting, 
cannot at the end of the day say they did their best; and that 
their constituents will thank them in the future for their hard 
work and endeavours. 
 
And I think each and every one of us in this Assembly certainly 
want to pay our tributes and thank you because your presence 
here has made this a better place to work in. And we say thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, when a person's giving their thank 
you’s and when a person's making comments about the wind-up 
of a session, there's a number of things you can get into. You 
can certainly make it a political speech. We could certainly talk 
about a number of the issues. 

I appreciate the fact that the Government House Leader chose 
not to really get into politics and maybe I'll make that choice as 
well tonight — not to get into the real nitty-gritty of politics. 
 
I think as I've learned in the past, as I've learned in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, there are times to really get into political rhetoric and 
there are times to just sit back and appreciate the moment. 
 
And I would have to say that whether or not, as the House 
Leader indicated, the Government House Leader indicated, the 
configuration in this House is definitely going to be changed 
and quite a different face-lift after the next general election . . . 
Whether it's before we have another session of this House or 
not, the Premier, as I understand, only knows — or does he?. 
Maybe others have already been clued in as to that date. But I 
can say that I have enjoyed being here, and whether or not I'm 
back here to join with the number of others who will be 
re-elected, I would like to indicate that it's certainly been a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly to represent my constituency. 
 
I can add, Mr. Speaker, that certainly this place has many 
differing views. But we live in a great country. We certainly 
live in a wonderful province. And I think one of the things that 
we can be thankful for and we can really respect each other for 
is that while we have very differing views in philosophy and 
opinions, we do not turn around and start using our fists to take 
out our differences and to get even with the other guy. 
 
We have shown respect. We may not have agreed with the 
responses; we may not agree with party views; but we still have 
shown respect, and respect each and every one for their views 
and for their understanding and for the positions they have 
taken. And I say thank you to each and every one of the 
members for having shown that. 
 
And I can only conclude by suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that I 
would wish each and every one well as this House is dissolved 
and as we approach the next general election. I look forward to 
being back in this Assembly, but I'll let the constituency that I 
represent make that choice. And I thank you again for the 
opportunity, on behalf of my colleagues and on behalf of 
everyone, for this opportunity to speak this evening. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members of the Assembly, I'd like to take a few minutes to 
express on behalf of the member from Saskatoon Greystone, the 
member from Shaunavon, myself, and our legislative staff as 
well, our appreciation to all of the people who have been so 
helpful to us in doing our jobs by doing their jobs. 
 
To the hundred or so individuals behind the scenes who have 
worked hard during this past session to ensure that things 
moved along smoothly and efficiently as possible, I extend my 
gratitude for the professional and competent manner in which 
you do your daily work. I am personally very grateful for the  



May 18, 1995 

 
2488 

valuable guidance they have given me when I asked for 
direction on matters of procedure and protocol that were all so 
new to me when I first came to this Chamber just 15 months 
ago. Their knowledge and experience has been very valuable to 
me in my education as a legislator. 
 
I'd like to acknowledge the Speaker and his staff for keeping 
this House operating in a seemingly flawless manner. His 
Solomon-like rulings are thoughtful and fair, and I think we've 
been very fortunate to have had such a fair-minded person to 
adjudicate our proceedings. 
 
I'd also like to thank Gwenn and Greg and Meta for their work, 
and to the pages for their daily work that makes it easier for us. 
 
In the Legislative Assembly Office, we are very fortunate to 
have Linda Kaminski and Marilyn Borowski. They and their 
staff are all very committed and capable people. 
 
And our thanks go also to the broadcast staff, director Gary 
Ward, and technicians, Kerry and Ihor, for the unenviable job 
they have watching us do our job for hours on end in their small 
glass booth. 
 
The legislative library staff have been of great assistance to me 
and to our staff again this session, and their ability to locate 
obscure information is indeed admirable and sometimes very 
remarkable. 
 
Although they are unseen, the staff of Hansard perform an 
important task by transcribing the procedures in this Assembly 
and in its committees. We want them to know also how much 
we appreciate their diligence and attention to detail. 
 
To all the security personnel, both the commissionaires at the 
front desk and the nattily attired security people outside this 
Chamber itself, we extend our thanks for the many long and 
sometimes boring hours you spend sitting and watching us rush 
to and fro from this place. And of course a special word of 
thanks and best wishes go to our Sergeant-at-Arms, Bill 
Goodhand, as he launches his retirement. 
 
The cafeteria staff are another group of people whose 
contribution to the functioning of this building often goes 
unnoticed. How good it is to see Joan back here, looking 
wonderful after her serious illness. 
 
And finally to the visitor services personnel who make such a 
wonderful first impression on the thousands of visitors we have 
every year. You represent our province very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is truly an honour and a privilege to serve the 
people of this province by representing them in this august 
Chamber. It is an experience that few people ever come to 
know firsthand. I hope all members appreciate how blessed we 
are to be given the opportunity to sit here as the elected 
representatives in this bountiful and beautiful province. It is an 
experience that I will treasure for all of my life and one that I 
hope to repeat very soon. 

All the best to all of you. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I wonder if members would permit the 
Speaker to say just a few words at this time. Since I put in 
midnight for the ending of the session in the pool . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take it as read. 
 
The Speaker: — Someone said take it as read, but not this 
time. 
 
I want to say just a few words about this place and about the 
members. As I think most of you know, I've spent 20-some 
years in this legislature and I think I will leave this place with 
mixed feelings. I'll be glad to go and some of you will be glad 
to see me go. 
 
But I will also miss the place which I have come to know over 
the last 25 years. I served as a back-bencher in 1971 and 1975 
and then had the privilege to serve in a number of capacities in 
the Blakeney cabinet for seven years. 
 
And then I had the privilege — and I say it was the privilege — 
of serving as a back-bencher in opposition. That was a very 
good learning experience. And then you gave me the honour 
and the privilege to serve as your Speaker. 
 
(2245) 
 
And let me say that I am not sorry that I have been your Speaker 
for the last three and a half years, although there have been a 
number of times in the first two years where I did walk into this 
Chamber with the thought of resigning that afternoon. I want to 
thank particularly Gwenn Ronyk for convincing me to stay on 
and to learn with you people the role of the Speaker. And it's 
not an easy role, I can assure you. I'm not asking for any 
sympathy because I asked for the job. 
 
I hope that I have served you people fairly but that I have served 
you with some toughness, but that I have done so for the 
betterment of this institution. 
 
I think that this institution is a great institution. And I hope that 
all members who presently are going to be running for 
re-election will be a model for the new people who come in. 
This place must continue to keep its dignity. And I hope that 
you will be a good model for those who come in. 
 
I had an excellent person to model myself after because he had 
such a great reverence for this place. And that was the boss I 
worked for for seven years in his cabinet. And I hope that we 
will continue in that fashion and obey the rules that you 
yourself set down. 
 
I want to tell members that I'm going to have lots of time on my 
hands in the next little while, and that I have made copious 
notes on certain individuals in this House and pertaining to  



May 18, 1995 

 
2489 

certain things that happened in this House. But I will put an 
embargo on my writings for the next 30 or 40 years, so not to 
fear. 
 
Now I think this is just an excellent place in which to serve. As 
one person once said, it's a very noble profession. And we are 
honoured and we are privileged to be able to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And at this time I would like to thank the people of Saskatoon 
who saw fit to elect me five out of six times. And I hope that 
I've been able to serve them well in all the capacities in which I 
was able to do so. I want to thank them very sincerely. 
 
I want to very quickly run over some of the other people. I think 
I would be remiss if I did not thank, for example, the security 
people, and certainly Bill Goodhand. I want to thank the library 
people, the Hansard people, visitor services, and financial 
services. 
 
But most of all I want to thank the people of the Legislative 
Assembly Office. They've been just a tower of strength to me as 
the Speaker. Though we've not always agreed on how the 
decisions should be made, they certainly have a vast volume of 
knowledge to which . . . to help the Speaker in making his 
decisions. 
 
Let me thank my personal staff also. I want to thank Darwin 
Burgess who was with me for two and a half years, served me 
very well, and then moved on to something else because he 
wanted a new experience. 
 
I want to thank Margaret Kleisinger, who has recently joined 
my staff. But most of all I want to thank Debbie Saum. She has 
certainly taken over the running of my office and has done it 
very, very capably, and I want to thank her for the generosity of 
time that she has devoted to her job. 
 
Let me also thank the pages for their work that they've done for 
the members in the Assembly. They've served, I think, with a lot 
of dedication and a lot of extra time. And I know from talking 
to them, they've certainly enjoyed their experience. 
 
Let me finish by simply saying thank you to everyone. I will 
remember many of you personally, and I do want to wish you 
well. Those of you who are not running again, I want to wish 
you well in your endeavours. And those who are running, on 
both sides of the House, good luck. And abide by the wishes of 
the people. Thank you very kindly for giving me the honour in 
which to serve you as your Speaker in the last three and a half 
years. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by  

the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 
 
 That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this 

sitting day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time 
set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government, 
and that Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven 
clear days’ notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:52 p.m. 
 
 


