






















































April 12, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 12, 1995 

 

 
1541 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of people from the Tompkins and 
Gull Lake area of Saskatchewan. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. l; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Indian Head, 
Sintaluta, Lipton, Qu'Appelle, Odessa areas of the province. I 
so submit. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order, a petition regarding the proposed 
amendments to the firearms control legislation presented on 
April 11, 1995 has been reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and is 
found to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
And according to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and are found to be in order: 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding toward the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of petitioners petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm  

 ownership. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 51 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Energy and Mines: (1) 

how many oil drilling licences were granted in 1994; (2) 
how many oil drilling licences were granted so far in 
1995; (3) how many natural gas licences were granted in 
1994; (4) how many natural gas licences have been 
granted so far in 1995; (5) what is the average length of 
time between application for a licence and the licences 
being granted; (6) what is the greatest length of time an 
oil or gas company can expect to wait before being 
granted a drilling licence; and (7) why are some 
companies experiencing much longer waits this year 
compared to previous years. 

 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day 51 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Saskatchewan Power Corporation: the 

number of employees who have participated in the 
Queen's University national executive MBA (Master of 
Business Administration) program or are currently 
enrolled in this program; the names, positions, job 
descriptions, and salaries for those employees; the total 
cost to the corporation for this program; and the total 
cost to the employee for this program. 

 
I so submit. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 51 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Social Services: (1) the 

number of employees who have participated in the 
Queen's University national executive MBA program, or 
are currently enrolled in this program; (2) the names, 
positions, job descriptions, and salaries of those 
employees; (3) the total cost to the provincial 
government for this program; (4) the total cost to the 
employee for this program. 

 
Thank you. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
introduce a school group that's visiting here today in your 
gallery and introduce them to you and to the members of the 
legislature, a group from Lang which is a neighbouring town of 
Milestone, my own home town. It's 16 students are here from 
grade 4 to 6. They're accompanied by the their teachers,  



April 12, 1995 

 
1542 

argaret Rose and Jai Lyn Fleischhaker, and chaperon, Tim 
Vanstone. 
 
They've had a tour of the building and they'll be watching 
question period and we'll meet afterwards for juice and pictures, 
and I'm just very pleased to welcome them here today. And I 
want everyone to join me in a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members 
will recall that on April 3 this Assembly recognized the 
contribution of Saskatchewan peacekeepers who have served 
with the United Nations in many parts of the world and I think 
it was a very important event. 
 
Well in, to some degree, conjunction with that, we have some 
special guests in the gallery who are doing a lot of work to 
recognize the 50th anniversary of the United Nations and I'd 
like to introduce them, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 
the members here. 
 
There's first of all Mr. Douglas Roche, the Chair of the 
Canadian committee for the 50th anniversary of the United 
Nations. Please rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Hon. Allan Blakeney, 
honorary Co-Chair of the Saskatchewan committee for the 50th 
anniversary of the United Nations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — And Mr. Michael Hayden, 
Saskatchewan representative of the national committee. Mr. 
Hayden. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, we know the 
important role that the United Nations and our peacekeepers 
have played in the world in keeping the peace. We are honoured 
to have these three gentlemen here today for the contribution 
they're making in promoting the 50th anniversary of the United 
Nations. And I would like to ask all members together one more 
time to join in extending a warm welcome to them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, we too would like to welcome the special 
guests from the United Nations and the Saskatchewan 
peacekeepers as well to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
And special note is to welcome former premier Allan Blakeney 
to the legislature. A number of years ago I had the pleasure of 
meeting Mr. Blakeney in my home town of Eston,  

Saskatchewan, when I was very young and impressionable. 
Fortunately my grandfather was with me that day. But we 
would certainly like to take the opportunity to welcome him to 
the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too, 
on behalf of the third party, would like to welcome the Hon. 
Allan Blakeney and Douglas Roche and Michael Hayden to our 
legislature this afternoon. And I want Mr. Hayden to know that, 
no, I have not forgotten the book that you've loaned me. It's just 
been a number of years since I've seen you. It was a pleasure 
having you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd 
like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
Assembly, a very special person. His name is Rodney Fayette. 
He is a work experience student, one of many in the Regina 
Catholic school district. He goes to O'Neill High School, and he 
is working in my office this month. I ask members of the 
Assembly to join in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Passing of Margaret Brown, Mother of NDP Leader 
Audrey McLaughlin 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to pay 
tribute today to an ardent supporter of universal health care 
from Saskatchewan whose life has been taken away by cancer. 
 
Margaret Brown, mother of federal NDP (New Democratic 
Party) leader Audrey McLaughlin, died on Monday. 
 
Margaret Brown was raised in the Indian Head region of 
Saskatchewan. She was diagnosed with cancer in the 1930s, but 
through her courage and strong will she beat this deadly 
disease. 
 
It was through this fight and the time which was needed to pay 
off her medical bills that she became a strong supporter of 
universal health care — something which cannot be taken for 
granted, as we found out this week at a meeting of provincial 
Health ministers in Vancouver. 
 
Margaret Brown, like her daughter, also served in public life. 
She was the first woman councillor in Essex, Ontario and 
served in this position from 1958 to 1969. 
 
A memorial for Margaret Brown will be held at 3:30 tomorrow 
afternoon at the Regina Funeral Home. She displayed courage 
and determination throughout her life and will be missed by her 
family and the many friends who knew her. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 



April 12, 1995 

 
1543 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Prayer Breakfast 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I had the pleasure of joining some of my colleagues in 
the Assembly at a prayer breakfast sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan prayer breakfast committee. We had the distinct 
honour of welcoming a true Canadian sports hero to the 
breakfast table — Mr. Paul Henderson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition caucus also had the unique 
pleasure of Mr. Henderson's attendance at our daily caucus 
meeting, which was certainly a welcome break from political 
discussions. 
 
Paul's passion for the game of hockey was evident in his many 
fascinating stories and anecdotes, from the insufferable Harold 
Ballard to the dramatic and now historic game 8 of the 1972 
Canada-Russia hockey series. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one lesson he said he learned from the series 
should well be heeded by the government — never 
underestimate your opposition. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to thank Paul 
Henderson for attending the breakfast, our caucus, and for 
imparting his kind words and uplifting message, and most of 
all, for scoring the winning goal in 1972. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Law Day 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to report that today is Law 
Day, which is established by the Canadian Bar Association and 
the legal community to educate the public about our legal 
system. 
 
The theme this year is, "Access To Justice." The goal is to 
inform the public of legal avenues available rather than going to 
court — avenues like mediation, Public Legal Education 
Association, the Ombudsman, victim services, and the Human 
Rights Commission, the Better Business Bureau, and the small 
claims court. 
 
Several Law Day events are happening. A forum on euthanasia 
was held last week at the University of Regina. A poster and 
essay contest will be sponsored in schools, while lawyers and 
mediators will visit classrooms across the province. Today as 
well the Justice department has invited a number of people 
involved in small-claims disputes to attend a free mediation 
seminar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the law in society is to establish 
rules and guidelines by which we all live. Our laws enable us to 
cooperate with each other and live in harmony. Law Day gives 
us an opportunity to appreciate and remember the legal system 
that we're fortunate to enjoy. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Defensive Driving Course 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, lately 
this House has focused on the issue of safe driving. I noticed an 
article in the Wascana Energy newsletter about a constituent of 
mine who benefited from a defensive driving course. Ellen 
Mitchell, an accountant in Lloydminster, took the course as part 
of her training with Wascana Energy. Previously her method of 
defensive driving had been to avoid bad weather, and moving 
out to the Lloydminster area raised her fears of driving into a 
ditch. But thanks to a defensive driving course, she overcame 
her fears and prevented an accident. 
 
In her course, Ellen practised driving into the ditch. Though, as 
she put it, her nerves were shot, with the help of another 
employee on the course she drove into a ditch several times. 
 
It was just a few weeks later that Ellen was glad she had 
practised. While driving into Lloydminster she came over a 
gravel incline and found a vehicle heading right in her lane. She 
noticed that the other driver was going too fast to pull over 
safely and that the ditch on the other side was too dangerous to 
drive into. She reacted perfectly and drove into the ditch on her 
side. Both cars stopped and no one was hurt. 
 
I wish to commend Ellen for her quick action and also for 
encouraging others to take a defensive driving course, and to 
Wascana Energy for their support. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I sure hope the three Liberal members 
were paying attention just now. With the steering problems they 
had yesterday, they could also benefit from a defensive driving 
course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Museum Fund-raiser 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make a 
short comment about an important event that will be taking 
place this summer in my old constituency of Shaunavon, or as 
Mr. Eisler from the Leader-Post refers to it, my personal 
fiefdom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I still have more than a passing interest in what 
has become one of the most exciting and vibrant areas of the 
province. Mr. Speaker, the discovery of the T-Rex has 
something to do with that. And the people of south-west 
Saskatchewan know a good thing when they see it. 
 
In order to provide a permanent home for Scotty, the T-Rex, 
and to build an appropriate facility for tourists to view this 
significant discovery, the Eastend Community Tourism 
Authority and friends of the museum have launched an 
interesting fund-raising event scheduled for this summer, July 
21, in Eastend, in 1995. 
 



April 12, 1995 

 
1544 

Mr. Speaker, a fund-raiser that has attracted some very 
significant contributors. About 1,500 letters have been mailed 
out requesting personal items for an auction, and members will 
be interested and want to keep their calendar clear for that 
event. 
 
For instance, members will be interested to know that Ringo 
Starr, the ex-Beatle, has donated an autographed tie for the 
event. And I might add, the former premier may want to give 
one of his string ties to see if he can't get on the same billing as 
Ringo Starr. 
 
The fund-raising committee has also received autographed 
pictures from Vanna White and other Hollywood types; 
merchandise from a number of country stars — Rita MacNeil 
has given a CD (compact disc). 
 
And I want to say, on behalf of all the members of the 
Assembly, to Elaine Stork, the chairperson of the friends of the 
museum, and her organization, a special congratulations. And I 
know all members will want to personally endorse and support 
this important community event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Repeat Young Offenders 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, some time 
ago the Liberal leader promised to come up with an economic 
development project a week. Instead she's coming up with a 
newspaper retraction a week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a question on something the Regina police 
actually did say. On Tuesday there were two more dangerous, 
high-speed chases involving teenagers in stolen vehicles. The 
Regina police say many of these car thefts involve repeat 
offenders. Obviously the current corrections system isn't 
working. 
 
To the Minister of Justice: Mr. Minister, you are responsible for 
the young offenders correctional system in this province. What 
reforms are you planning to make it more effective in 
discouraging repeat offenders like the car thieves we're seeing 
in Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member will know, the Young Offenders Act is a piece of 
federal legislation. It's a piece of legislation, however, in which 
we have a great interest for obvious reasons. 
 
We've been working closely with the federal government, over 
the last couple of years anyway, with specific reference to this 
legislation. We are supporting the amendments to the Act that 
the federal minister has before parliament now and we are 
encouraging them in their review of the Young Offenders Act 
which is scheduled to take place this fall before the standing 
committee on legal affairs or justice affairs. 

That will be ongoing and we have participated in the 
preparation for that work and will continue to support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
current system of open custody simply isn't working. In fact two 
of the teenagers arrested yesterday were unlawfully at large 
after walking away from an open custody facility. The Regina 
police say open custody is not working for these offenders and 
punishment needs to be stiffer. 
 
Mr. Minister, the opposition has proposed an alternative, an 
alternative which we understand is working well in Manitoba. 
We believe the province should develop a pilot project work 
camp for those sentenced to open custody. Will you support 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This subject was debated in this 
Assembly, I think, yesterday afternoon. And it was pointed out 
to the House by one of the government members that the 
program in some of our facilities is really quite rigorous. And 
Echo Valley is the example — really quite a rigorous program 
that incorporates many of the ideas that were being put forward 
by one of your members. 
 
We know that there are problems with the Young Offenders 
Act. The treatment or the handling of situations where very 
young people commit crimes has been a problem in society for 
decades, maybe even centuries. It's not new. 
 
The Young Offenders Act was thought to be a better approach 
to it, and I think may well be, but clearly it has some 
shortcomings. And so the review that's scheduled to take place 
this fall . . . very important and we intend to be involved in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Manitoba 
is dealing with the situation. Young offenders in Manitoba 
correction system are not immediately granted privileges; they 
must earn privileges. They have limited free time. Instead they 
spend their time taking classes, clearing bush, gardening, 
assembling mailings for non-profit groups. They participate in 
community service for organizations like UNICEF (United 
Nations Children's Fund) or the Multiple Sclerosis Society. 
They shovel snow for seniors. 
 
Mr. Minister, these young offenders are learning to fill their 
time with constructive activities. They simply can't walk away 
during the day and go out and steal another car like the two 
teenagers arrested yesterday here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you so opposed to this idea? And since 
the current system, since the current system clearly isn't 
working, what is your alternative? 
 



April 12, 1995 

 
1545 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I don't know why the member 
would get the idea that we were opposed to any particular 
aspect of the closed-custody arrangements for young offenders. 
There's nothing in a name. You call a camp a boot camp, 
doesn't make it any different than a camp that provides a similar 
sort of program with a similar sort of rigorous routine and 
requirements, and we have had that. We have had that for some 
time. 
 
I would, Mr. Speaker, invite the Leader of the Opposition, 
together with as many of his caucus members as are interested, 
to come and tour some of these facilities and see the kind of 
program that is being delivered and the requirements that are 
being placed upon the people who are inmates in those 
facilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Doctor Shortage 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is becoming more and more evident that the NDP 
government's health reforms are simply not working. Our office 
is inundated with calls and letters from concerned and 
frightened people regarding the future of health care in 
Saskatchewan. And this morning, Mr. Speaker, another doctor 
in rural Saskatchewan has called it quits. Dr. Rick Twanow 
recently decided to give up his Melfort practice and has 
accepted a job in the United States. That's the third specialist to 
leave Melfort in the past year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Minister, recent reports are saying that many doctors in rural 
Saskatchewan say they're overworked and getting close to 
burn-out because of the shortage of specialists; in fact in this 
province 88 specialists short to be exact. And in some cases, 
such as Dr. Twanow, what they've done is they're leaving this 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, very simply, what is your government doing to 
address this concern and to ensure that Saskatchewan people 
have adequate health care in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify for the 
member unless he . . . in case he's not aware, that the doctor he 
mentions in his comment today made that announcement some 
many months ago. It's not a new announcement today. 
 
I want to assure the member that this minister and this 
government is conscious of the need to recruit and maintain 
specialists in our province. This, as he will know, is not a new 
problem. I know his government wrestled with it when they 
were in government. 
 
And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, I believe we're having some 
more effect and some more success than has been had over the 
past number of years, and so I want to report to the House today  

that the total number of doctors practising in Saskatchewan 
today as opposed to a year ago is considerably up. 
 
In December, 1993 there were l,177 practising; December of 
'94, 1,207. And that includes an increase, Mr. Speaker, in the 
number of specialists. In using those same two dates: December 
'93 there were 437 specialists at practice in Saskatchewan; by 
December of '94 there were 455. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we do not consider this to be a problem 
solved. And we continue to work with the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, with the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association), with our district boards, to ensure that we 
have an adequate supply of physician services in Saskatchewan. 
 
But if I may also say, Mr. Speaker, it's not only physicians who 
are working very hard these days. Nurses are working very 
hard; aides are working very hard; everyone in the system is 
working very hard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, the 
fact that you continue to go back to statistics doesn't do 
anything to alleviate the fears and concerns of people in rural 
Saskatchewan. In fact you can deflect and excuse and blame all 
you want. The truth is, while we're spending more, 
Saskatchewan people are receiving less — and that's the sad 
truth. 
 
Mr. Minister, who closed the 52 hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan? And while you were closing this, did you save 
any money? What we have is actually the worst of both worlds. 
We're short 88 specialists, and doctors are telling us they are 
burning out; they're leaving this province. Nurses are stressed 
out and overworked, and patients are the ones to suffer. And it's 
these individuals who are bringing these concerns to my 
colleagues' attention and my attention. 
 
North Battleford recently lost orthopedic surgeon Dr. Tom 
Evans due to burn-out. And all the statistics you can give us, 
Mr. Minister, do not address the concerns. 
 
Mr. Minister, what do you tell the people in North Battleford or 
Melfort or any other community in Saskatchewan when they 
voice their concerns? Do you just brush them off by quoting 
statistics and more of your rhetoric? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what I try to do at all times 
is not to concern the public with misleading kind of rhetoric 
that we sometimes get in the House from members opposite. 
 
I repeat again, Mr. Speaker, that the issue of securing physician 
services, and particularly specialist services, in our province is 
not a new issue. Having just returned from a meeting with all 
provincial ministers, I can report to this House that this is a 
matter of concern for every province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
We're not alone in this. But I repeat again — and these are not 
just simply numbers; each of these numbers represents a real  



April 12, 1995 

 
1546 

physician at practice in Saskatchewan — that in fact the number 
of physicians practising in our province is growing, is growing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact we had fewer people, fewer physicians, leave our 
province in the last year than we have for the past seven years. 
Saskatchewan is a good place to practise medicine, Mr. 
Speaker. It's a good place to practise medicine. 
 
Now again, I'd ask the member then if he believes that we 
should be adding resources to this field? How is it that he 
squares that with his leader's comment, Mr. Speaker, when he 
talks about cutting government spending across the board? 
Where would the member and where would his leader take that 
money, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I find that 
interesting, your comments interesting. Well you tell us we've 
got a better system here in this province today. It wasn't all that 
long ago that you sat on this side of the House and you brought 
up statistics on a daily basis only to find out two days later that 
the information was incorrect. 
 
What we have here . . . even doctors in this province are 
speaking out. And in the Star-Phoenix , April 12: 
 
 "Morale must be low and stress high if it allows (the) 

situation that occurred to my diabetic roommate," says 
Dr. John Bury. 

 
He says about the nurses who looked after him, they: 
 
 . . . were always in a hurry. 
 
 They seemed stressed and rushed. As a patient in the 

mid-70s, in 1990 and last December, Bury believes 
"there has been a steady decline in compassion over the 
years." 

 
That's in today's paper. 
 
Mr. Minister, it appears to me that our so-called wellness is not 
working, that people in Saskatchewan have a right to be 
concerned. Will you admit today that your health care reforms 
have not been properly planned, have been improperly targeted, 
have not saved the taxpayers a dime, and have served to only 
raise the level of stress and anxiety at all levels in the health 
care industry? Will you admit that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know — I 
mean I know why we go through this in question period — but 
the member will know, we've had long discussions during the 
process of estimates and Bills, not just in this session but in 
previous sessions, where we very carefully have shared with the 
members of the House the long-term plan for the restructuring  

of health delivery in Saskatchewan. 
 
Everyone in our province knows that change was required, 
change was necessary. We early on in the course of this 
government laid out a long-term plan which, I may say, Mr. 
Speaker, is being noted across the nation — indeed across the 
continent and the world. Now we're working on that plan. This 
transition time is difficult — there's no arguing that. 
 
But I ask the member: does he support the plan therefore — if 
he doesn't like our plan — does he support the plan of his Tory 
colleagues in Alberta? Does he support the plan of Mr. Preston 
Manning and the Reform Party, which is a two-tiered plan à la 
medical care, à la American medical care, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Is that the kind of plans that the members of the parties opposite 
would bring for the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Canada? 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we reject that plan. We've laid 
out a plan which we know can sustain publicly funded and 
publicly administered medicare into the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Effects of Health Reform 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been 
noting with interest the comments made by the Minister of 
Health. And I would like to table a report from the November 
Medical Post, and the subheading is: Saskatchewan's 
physician-to-patient ratio is worse than the national average in 
almost every speciality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now some specialists are attributing their decisions to leave to 
the effects of overload and burn-out on their ability to perform. 
Very recently, I gave a stress workshop in Indian Head which 
was sponsored by the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 
Association. It's absolutely no secret to anyone, except perhaps 
the Minister of Health, that there are growing numbers of health 
care professionals who are ending up on stress leave and on 
workers' compensation. 
 
My question to the minister today: how do you, sir, expect 
health care professionals to manage the stress of health reform 
when you and your government have consistently ignored their 
genuine concerns and their legitimate criticisms about the effect 
that health reform is having on hospitals, on patients, and on 
their ability to perform? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, from the outset of the 
structural changes in health care in our province and the 
movement towards a wellness model, we have worked very 
closely with health care providers, worked closely in terms of 
their leadership, worked closely in terms of their membership in 
the field. 
 
Now the member from Regina shakes her head and says it's not 
so, Mr. Speaker. It is so because I have been there myself. Mr.  



April 12, 1995 

 
1547 

Speaker, does that mean it's been easy for health care providers? 
No, it has not. This has been a difficult time of transition. We 
have fewer resources to work with, and I think even the member 
opposite would admit that. 
 
Now what, Mr. Speaker, does not help is when the Leader of 
the Liberal Party gets up in this House, on a variety of subjects, 
and brings all sorts of erroneous information into this House 
and then has to walk out two hours later and apologize: no, that 
wasn't correct. I think she does owe an apology to this House 
and to the people of Saskatchewan for the time and time again 
she brings into this legislature erroneous information. Would 
she do that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will 
ensure that this copy of Hansard goes in particular to Dr. 
Sharma, chief of medicine at City Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At a recent provincial health ministers' conference, this minister 
stated . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Send the last one to the Regina police, 
too. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Yes, and I did speak with him last night as 
well . . . Stated that health reform must not simply be about 
saving money, but about quality care. 
 
Specialists and professionals from all Saskatoon hospitals 
contributed to an emergency working group, and they have 
reached a consensus, Mr. Minister. They reached a consensus 
that the district health board decision to close City Hospital 
emergency department would save no money and will 
undermine acute care capacity. 
 
Instead of following the advice that they asked for, the district 
health board struck a new committee, Mr. Minister, to 
recommend that the emergency ward be closed. Now it's no 
wonder that specialists and doctors and nurses are exasperated 
with this kind of health reform process. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: if saving money is secondary to 
the delivery of quality care, why don't you do both and follow 
the recommendations made by this initial group of people, the 
professionals whose advice was actually requested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before I, or any member of 
this government, responds to new allegations by that member 
then I challenge her to stand in this House today and apologize 
for the allegations she made in here yesterday and then only 
half an hour or two hours later had to go out and retract. Will 
she do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now she makes new allegations today. I stand by my words of 
yesterday or the day before, Mr. Speaker. Health care reform 
significantly is to move us in the direction of preventative 
health. If she opposes that, please stand on her feet and say that. 

And if she's on the question of the resources available, then will 
she please talk to her cousins and friends in Ottawa who are 
pulling not millions but billions out of health care across 
Canada, threatening the entire fabric of health care in our 
nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed this government who needs to make apologies to the 
people of this province, not only for their health care reform but 
the kind of health problems they created by their gambling 
policies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Health care professionals invest years, they invest years in 
training to qualify them to care for the sick of this province. 
And specialists tie their entire careers to building a reputation, 
and a decision to leave their profession or reallocate is not one 
which is not arrived at without painstaking deliberation. 
 
My question to the minister: money has not been what attracts 
or keeps specialists in the province of Saskatchewan. How do 
you explain why those who have practised here until now are 
deciding to leave this province? And you tell me, sir, what 
signal does that send to the specialists that you're trying to 
recruit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will explain to the 
member. But first I would ask her to explain what I read, when I 
return home from the Health ministers' conference, in the daily 
press in Saskatchewan. I read comments from local city police 
officers, saying, "I don't know where . . . (the Liberals) got that 
from." I read, "(They) have no correlation with break-ins to 
suggest they're related to VLTs." 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if that's the kind of level of debate that the 
Leader of the Liberal Party wants to bring into this House, then 
I guess that's her choice. But I think for her credibility, the 
credibility of her caucus, and the credibility of this legislature, 
she should stand and apologize for that kind of statement. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I remind the member again of the facts. And 
I know she has difficulty relating to facts, she doesn't want to be 
confused by the facts, Mr. Speaker, but these are the facts. The 
numbers of specialists in our province have been growing; the 
numbers of active, practising physicians in our province have 
been growing. 
 
Now I say again to the member, as I say to all members of the 
House, we don't count this success; we are yet concerned, as I'm 
sure she is. This is not a new problem. We will continue to 
work with the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, the district health board, 
and members of this House, in finding new solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 12, 1995 

 
1548 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
weeks ago Merit Contractors filed an unfair labour practice 
application against the government over its union-preference 
tendering policy. 
 
Now they cited eight specific instances where the government 
has breached its own Trade Union Act. Many contractors and 
workers are anxiously awaiting the Labour Board's decision on 
this matter. But no decision has been made yet; in fact the 
Labour Relations Board hasn't even set a date for this hearing. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the hold-up? Why is the Labour Relations 
Board dragging its feet on this very important case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'd like to thank the hon. member for his 
question. As the member would know, or at least should know, 
the Labour Relations Board is a quasi-judicial body. It's 
inappropriate for any politician or other individual to interfere 
with the workings of the Labour Relations Board. We view the 
Labour Relations Board as a professional organization. 
 
And I would ask the hon. member, instead of trying to inflame 
the situation, which they have up until now, to just be a little bit 
calm about this and let the Labour Relations Board perform in 
the way that they're set up to function. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 
the member knows full well that this board is appointed by the 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Construction Association tells 
us the excuse that the Labour Relations Board is giving is that 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) hasn't 
picked a lawyer to represent them yet — not the Labour 
Relations Board; CIC. Sounds like a stalling tactic to me, Mr. 
Minister. Your government usually doesn't have any difficulty 
in finding lawyers. And if you're really stuck, I hear that Louise 
Simard is available. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you get on with the job today. Will you 
appoint a lawyer and get a date set for this hearing? Or are you 
just going to sit around and wait until the next election is over 
before you take some action on this very important matter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I think it's a very revealing 
admission today in this House, Mr. Speaker, that a member 
would stand and say he would interfere politically in the Labour 
Relations Board. I think that speaks of why that particular party 
sits in opposition with a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the member from Maple  

Creek can't stand up and ask his question, then when the 
minister is trying to answer it, he's interfering. At least you 
should give him the respect and listen to his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — That's I think, because of admissions 
like the member has made here today, Mr. Speaker, that they sit 
in official opposition status and continue to climb in the public 
opinion polls of Saskatchewan. 
 
No politician should be interfering in the quasi-judicial process 
of the Labour Relations Board. And if we get to a situation like 
that, the public should fear for democracy within the province. 
And if that's what the member's advocating —political 
interference — I think you'll find that you'll continue to slip in 
the opinion polls because people would be afraid of what type 
of government you'd run. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Plebiscite 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
rather short question which I would like to direct to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, today in the books, in the statutes of this province, 
legislation exists which allows for plebiscites or referendum 
questions to be put on a general election ballot. 
 
Now yesterday you said in one of your . . . the only answer that 
you did give, let the court of public opinion apply. So very 
simply, Mr. Premier, do you have any intentions of asking 
questions on the upcoming ballot, and if so, what are they? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the government 
currently has no plans to ask any questions on a plebiscite under 
the legislation which the former administration introduced. But 
of course the election date is unknown and we have some time, 
some considerable time yet, in which to contemplate such 
things, and we haven't made that decision yet. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Premier, I would suggest to you to 
hurry up. June 12 is approaching quite rapidly, so you're going 
to have to make your mind up fairly quickly here. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, I'm sure that even you recognize the benefits 
of direct democracy on the important issues that affect 
Saskatchewan people. For instance, the vast majority of people 
in this province would like to have a say on your gambling 
policy. 
 
Even your own polling tells you that, Mr. Premier. In fact the 
growing numbers of organizations and concerned citizens 
against your ill-advised gambling policy are now getting up, to 
achieve by the only avenue possible for them now to get a 
question on, and that is through the petition route. 
 
Why not save them that trouble, Mr. Premier? You can put the 
question on the ballot with one simple stroke of the pen, and  



April 12, 1995 

 
1549 

then the people will be able to tell you — as they did in 
Saskatoon — what they think of your ill-advised gambling 
policy. 
 
Mr. Premier, why don't you have the courage to go the direct 
democracy route and let the people of Saskatchewan tell you 
what they are telling us  what they think of your gambling 
policy? Why don't you do that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the member makes an 
argument, as I hear it in any event, for what I would describe as 
plebiscitarian democracy, which in effect says that on major 
issues the government of the day, or the legislators, members of 
this Assembly, in effect abdicate their responsibilities; that they 
no longer have the role of adjudicating competing values, 
competing pressures, competing considerations. 
 
Representative democracy, which is what we're all about in the 
election — election of MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), election of MPs (Member of Parliament) — 
imposes upon us, amongst other things, the responsibility to 
make those kinds of difficult choices. 
 
At the end of the day the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan will have the right, the duty — and they'll 
exercise it responsibly I'm sure — to judge the overall record of 
this government and determine whether or not it should receive 
another four years. 
 
I think that they will say yes, that this has been a very good 
four-year term, it isn't yet complete. We have made mistakes to 
be sure, but that on balance, on the major issues that the people 
elected us, we have addressed them, and there's a partnership 
for progress and there is a new day dawning. That's what I think 
they're going to decide in democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 26 — An Act 
respecting Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers and to 
enact certain Consequential Amendments to The 
Assessment Management Agency Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a piece of legislation that deals with the setting up of a  

professional association to government assessment appraisers 
and this is a very worthwhile idea, Mr. Speaker. Many 
professional groups throughout the province have their body set 
up under provincial legislation. 
 
The minister has stated that this Bill was initiated at the request 
of the Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers’ Association and 
that they have been involved in the drafting of the legislation. 
This Bill gives SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) the authority to establish and maintain educational 
standards and professional competence for municipal assessors 
but not assessment appraisers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are in the process of consulting with a broad 
range of associations and industries that may be affected by this 
legislation. There are many groups and individuals out there, 
Mr. Speaker, that have to deal with assessment appraisers, and 
they all have opinions as to how this piece of legislation may or 
may not affect them. And we look forward to the participation 
that they will present to us in dealing with this particular piece 
of legislation. 
 
We will have some questions, Mr. Speaker, on this legislation 
that we will bring forward in committee. Therefore at this time, 
since we're still awaiting some of the responses that . . . we have 
got back some. But we're still awaiting others dealing with the 
people who deal with this in legislation. I would move at this 
time that we adjourn debate of this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 30 — An Act to 
amend The Assessment Management Agency Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the two members 
that are offending the rules of the House right now know full 
well what the rules are, and they should not be yelling across 
the theatre here, or whatever you want to call it. It's a . . . you 
know, the people are just abusing the House rules here, and I 
wish they would abide by the rules. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past 
year, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board has struggled to 
address assessment appeals with fairness and equity. SAMA 
has also struggled to do the same since there have been a 
number of appeals regarding assessments. Recently we saw the 
courts reverse a significant appeal decision, and confusion 
resulting from this decision. 
 
In the debate about assessment over the past several months, it 
has become quite clear, apparent, that it's time to get on with the 
reassessment process. The minister stated in her second reading 
speech that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SAMA, city mayors as well as the  



April 12, 1995 

 
1550 

chambers of commerce, want reassessment in 1997 and that this 
is the purpose for this particular piece of legislation, Bill No. 
30. It would require a comprehensive assessment to be done 
and to take effect at the beginning of 1997. 
 
Bill 30 affects each and every one of us directly as landowners 
whether you own a home, whether you own a business, whether 
you own a farm or whether, as is the case in my constituency 
and a number across the province, pipelines. Pipelines will be 
very, very significantly affected by this reassessment. 
 
The minister in her speech mentioned the fact that this 
legislation is going to basically eliminate the 10-year 
assessment process and cut it into a margin of three years. I 
think this is good and appropriate, yet why would a program be 
designed that would set out a standard for assessment process 
that would be an ongoing process, rather than always working 
through and having a board redesign an assessment process or 
assessment rules on an annual or biannual basis? 
 
A long-term solution to this problem must be sought in order to 
avoid the long appeals, changing of reassessment dates, the way 
SAMA is funded, and the general confusion surrounding this 
issue. After all, people should have an idea of what they will be 
paying for their homes and business and property tax for many 
years in advance. 
 
For instance, in Regina, if new home buyers are checking out 
the market in different neighbourhoods, it's important to know 
that their property tax could double within two years given the 
fact that they are buying in a new development in Regina. 
 
As well, individuals starting a business need to know exactly 
what they can expect in costs and factor that into their business 
plans. Municipal governments have to know what to expect and 
how to plan for assessment costs. And the confusion over 
assessments recently has made these kind of decisions very, 
very difficult, if not impossible. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hope a long-term solution can be found to 
this problem. Many people have not been pleased with the way 
the assessment process has worked to date. They have not been 
pleased with the way SAMA has operated. And I believe 
SARM and SUMA are correct in suggesting that it's time we 
got on with the process and implemented a full assessment 
form. 
 
There has been confusion over how SAMA will be funded for 
the most part — by the provincial government or by 
municipalities. Rural municipalities have expressed a great deal 
of concern over bearing the costs of assessments and 
understandably so, since they have had their provincial funding 
slashed to the bone already. 
 
The process that is being suggested, Mr. Speaker, is moving 
their assessment costs from 1 to $2,000 a year to over $10,000. 
And it's not a circumstance where they have the opportunity to 
say, I want to hire this assessor or I want to hire that assessor 
and we'll sit down and negotiate what it's going to cost to come  

up with the assessment. The fees are all set and the government 
says this is who you're going to hire. You're going to take 
SAMA people and that's the end of it. 
 
This issue, Mr. Speaker, must be dealt with to the satisfaction 
of all involved as well. The minister also mentioned that this 
legislation brings an appeal process that will be more expedient 
than the present system. I'm sure everyone will be in favour of a 
faster process for appeals, but in the long run, any formulas or 
standards set must be based upon fairness to all involved. It 
should also be accountable to taxpayers across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again in this particular case, we're doing a 
consultation with the various groups involved with SAMA, 
with SUMA, with SARM, with individual municipalities. We 
have responses coming back in; we anticipate more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Therefore I would move that we adjourn debate at the present 
time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 36 — An Act to 
amend The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
few comments within relation to this Bill that I want to provide 
for the Assembly here today. 
 
This Bill begins by changing the name of the legislation from 
superannuation to pension. Mr. Speaker, that is a significant 
change, as it relates to the public's perception of the function of 
the Bill. And I think the government should be congratulated 
for this move because it clears up the language. 
 
But we have question on that, Mr. Speaker, what the cost of this 
is going to be to the superannuation . . . or the people who look 
after the superannuation. Is it enough to justify changing 
everything from signs on the door to the letterhead to the 
thousands of forms and paperwork that bear the previous name 
of the plan. 
 
That's one of the concerns that we have, and we're going to be 
asking the minister to give us some of that information and 
seeing whether it is going to be cost effective. 
 
In addition, we will be guaranteeing ourselves busy work for 
the next session or so, going around and amending every other 
piece of legislation that refers to the municipal employees' 
superannuation plan. At some point we have to question 
whether this sort of legislative navel-gazing is really worth this 
Assembly's time. However, it's not enough of a pressing issue to 
hold up the Bill. 
 



April 12, 1995 

 
1551 

This Bill allows municipal employees of a lapse of up to two 
years without interruption of pension benefits. This would be 
used, for example, in the case of parental or educational leave. 
 
We feel that this is a very positive change that encourages two 
very important values in our society, namely, Mr. Speaker, the 
family, and the other point being that education is considered as 
a good option for a leave of absence. 
 
Not unlike MLAs, municipal employees have a new and an old 
pension plan formula. This Bill allows pension members under 
the old plan to switch to the new plan if they apply by 
December 31 of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is ironic to see this issue of new and old pension 
plans arising in this context. Of course we would like it if the 
Premier and several of his cabinet ministers took the lead of 
municipal employees and opted into the new pension plan. 
 
We're not sure why the time limit was put on this provision of 
being December 31 of this year, but we will be satisfied to 
examine that in the committee. In the meantime, if the Premier 
would like to opt into the new MLAs' pension plan by 
December 31, that will also be fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth point that we have dealing with this 
pension, or the change in this Act, allows pensioners under this 
plan who have a medical condition that is shortening their life 
to receive higher benefits than they ordinarily would. Mr. 
Speaker, we believe that this is a fair and compassionate 
change. 
 
However, we should add that since pension members have to 
prove their condition to the commission, we hope that the 
bureaucratic regulations and run-around associated with this 
provision do not end up destroying the intent of it. Obviously, a 
terminally ill pensioner often cannot afford to wait two years 
for bureaucracy to grind out a decision. 
 
We're going to be asking the minister to outline for us the 
details of those provisions and the regulations that are going to 
be ensued in the Act. This is something that we would like the 
minister to keep in mind when she not only sets the regulations 
up, but how she wants to administer them. 
 
Number five allows pensioners without a spouse to be paid 
more than those who do have a spouse. We are not 100 per cent 
clear on the reasoning behind this provision, Mr. Speaker, nor 
did we find out from the minister's explanations why this is 
being considered. So we want to examine in close detail in the 
committee some of the impacts that this will have on the 
pension provisions. 
 
The Bill enacts a number of changes that allow for quicker 
winding down of estates in relation to this pension. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we're going to take and ask questions relating to that. 
 
In the principle, we have no objection to these obviously. These 
are questions of detail that are best left for committee. On the  

whole, we regard this as a positive Bill. 
 
As I have noted earlier, we have some questions of detail that 
we would like to straighten out later. We would also like to 
know a few things about the consultation process and about the 
changes that funding . . . that are inherent in this Bill. So it 
would be appropriate for this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to move to 
committee so that we can attend to these matters. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 
 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with 
me today Marcel de la Gorgendiere who is the chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission. Behind Marcel is 
Barbara Shourounis, who is the director; and Dean Murrison, 
behind me, who is the deputy director of the commission. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First of 
all, I want to thank the minister and his office for giving us the 
freedom to have the members who are joining you . . . or the 
individuals joining you here today in our offices and discussing 
the Bill and the implications and the ramifications. I want to 
thank you for that. 
 
In order that the public have a little bit of a view of what this 
Bill does, I'd like to ask you this question. One of the main 
actions of this Bill is to enact a registration system for 
commodity traders. Could you describe how this system will 
work and compare it to the way the system works today; draw a 
comparison between what we're going to have and what we 
have today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, the amendments will 
provide, to all intents and purposes, the same regime for 
commodity traders and commodity trading as you now find in 
the Act applying to the traders that are covered by the Act and 
the trading in the matters that are included in the Act. So in 
effect, they are brought into the same regime. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Would you tell me how they're going to be 
doing that? Would you tell me how traders today are going to 
be involved and the things that they have to do under the new 
regulations and this new Bill . . . what they're going to have to 
do in order to comply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, the firms that are 
registered as commodity traders will be required to meet the 
requirements of the Act, including the requirements for bonding 
and for insurance and for capital. They will be required to file 
returns and keep records. They will fall under the provisions of  



April 12, 1995 

 
1552 

the Act, having to do with the way in which they do business, 
the way in which they deal with their clients. 
 
As well as the firms, the individual sales people will be 
registered, and they will be subject to background checks and 
the normal things that the commission does in licensing sales 
people: checking for criminal records and that sort of thing. 
 
Mr. Martens: — With the establishment of the framework of a 
business that wants to become involved in trading . . . and I'll 
use ABC elevator company, or for that matter you could use 
Pool, Pioneer, whatever. When they set up an office that is 
going to be trading in the commodities in Regina, for example, 
will they have an overall bond for the traders in that group? 
And will it be based on a volume per trader or just one major 
bond for all of them? And will . . . then the question . . . well 
answer that one, and then I have another one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The bonding and insurance 
requirements apply to the whole firm. They're not done on an 
individual employee basis but cover all employees. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So for a person who would want to set up a 
business in the commodity exchange, in dealing with the 
commodity exchange he would have to have the . . . or he 
would be levied with the same volume of bond requirements 
that Pioneer Grain who deal all the way across western Canada, 
or Sask Wheat Pool who only deal in Saskatchewan, or the 
Alberta Wheat Pool who only deal in Alberta . . . they all would 
be considered having the same bonding requirements and the 
same volumes of dollars that cover the trading implications that 
they have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There is one rate that applies regardless 
of the size of the firm, so far as the amount of the bond is 
concerned. The same bonding arrangements are required as a 
minimum. The commission has the power, in the case of a 
high-risk situation, to increase the bonding requirement. 
 
The bonds are obtained . . . these bonding requirements are 
satisfied by contracting a bond with a bonding company. And 
the rates that those companies have to pay is in part dependent 
on the number of employees they have. And the risk, I guess, 
varies with the size of the operation. But so far as the 
commission is concerned, they have to be minimum 
requirements. 
 
Mr. Martens: — On the issue of licensing, will each 
commodity trader have to have a separate licence, or will it be 
an overall coverage for Pioneer Grain or Cargill, or will they 
have one licence to operate, or will each of the traders have to 
have a licence to operate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Both the firm and the individuals are 
required to register under the Act. I think that's the answer to 
your question. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Okay, the business has a licence. The 
individual has a licence. Will the licences be equal in their cost  

for the companies and equal in cost for the individuals trading? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The fee for firms now to become 
registered under the Act is $500 and for individuals is $250. 
Those compare favourably with other jurisdictions, I'm told. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In describing the firm — I don't think it's 
difficult but I'd like to ask a couple of questions — what will 
qualify an individual firm to meet the requirements under the 
provisions to be licensed? Will you have a set of criteria that the 
firm has to deal under and . . . answer that, and I've got another 
one. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, there are requirements with 
respect to insurance, bonding, capital, and the people who are 
running the firm. Their qualifications to do that and their 
competence to do it is checked out by the commission. Those 
requirements have to be satisfied along with the payment of the 
fee, in order for the firm to be registered. Then as the firm 
carries on its business, it is subject to ongoing operational 
requirements and the keeping of records and that sort of thing 
that are . . . The commission has to be satisfied that those are 
being required as the firm continues in operation. 
 
Mr. Martens: — If a firm is licensed in Manitoba and in 
Saskatchewan, do they have to have a licence to do business in 
both jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Martens: — How many of these firms are you anticipating 
going to be in this or do we have on hand at this point in time? 
How many of these firms are we talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There are five or six that have given us 
notice that they are going to enter this field. We expect that that 
number may rise to 10. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Do you have any anticipation of the volume 
of traders that you're going to have in these five to ten agencies 
or in the five? Can you give me an idea what you’re anticipating 
having this evolve into, the dynamic that it has? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, in answer to the member's 
question, we would estimate that the number of individuals that 
will be registered would be between 30 and 50 initially. That 
has the capacity to grow depending upon events, depending 
upon the extent to which . . . well, depending on the future, you 
know. 
 
Who can see what the future will bring? We could see it 
growing to as many as a hundred perhaps. Depending on how 
the firms handle it, how much they decentralize, it is possible 
that elevator companies may seek to register people in some of 
their outlying elevators, you know, and you could really find 
yourself up to a hundred without too much trouble. We can't see 
that very clearly. 



April 12, 1995 

 
1553 

Mr. Martens: — Just adjacent to my constituency office, 
Pioneer Grain has set up an office like this, and so my curiosity 
has been raised somewhat by this very fact. Will the individual 
traders have to have some form of training in order to qualify in 
order to market these commodities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, there will be requirements as to 
courses that they have taken, and those requirements will be 
similar to the kinds that are now taken by other traders under 
the Act, perhaps somewhat different having regard to the 
somewhat different market that they're operating in. And we 
think it quite likely that the people who will be registered have 
already taken that kind of training in the past, perhaps in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
But they're probably ready to go now, but the commission will 
have to examine each situation and determine whether or not 
the individual has met the minimum requirements that we'll be 
setting down here. 
 
Mr. Martens: — If I have this assessed correctly, I would say 
that in an office situation, it'll work similar to a broker in real 
estate, and then he'll have salesmen underneath that deal with 
the commodities and typical of that. 
 
I asked the question earlier about the company doing business. 
Will they have to have an individual in that company doing 
business that will have qualified . . . to do business as a trader 
in order to have that business? A business can come and go, 
and it can hire and excuse people from responsibility. But some 
place there has to be a basis for that company to be required to 
hold the person responsible for a licence as well as a trader. 
And so that's why I wonder if the licence to qualify for the 
business will be contingent upon licences qualifying in the area 
of traders within that company that's doing business. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well the member is quite right. There 
has to be an individual within that firm that is trained to a 
standard that . . . or has experience, a combination of training 
and experience to a standard to run the affairs of that firm in the 
province. 
 
And that is a higher standard than the people who are the 
traders, the individual traders. And the level of training is 
different, and the kind of training is different. But the member 
is perfectly right; there has to be that person present. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is the licence contingent upon that individual 
being there to give the information accurately for the traders in 
that business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In order to get registered, the firm has to 
have a person in charge, supervising the operations, that meets 
the standards we were discussing just a moment ago. And that 
person has to continue to be there, continue in that position, in 
order for the company to continue to operate. 
 
If that person were to vanish, no longer be employed by the 
company, then that would threaten the registration of the firm.  

And if that problem persisted and wasn't remedied in short 
order, in due course, then the commission would consider 
cancelling the registration. 
 
I'm told the person doesn't necessarily have to be resident in 
Saskatchewan but they have to be here enough to be able to 
show the commission that they are in fact performing the 
supervisory responsibilities that are a requirement of the 
commission. 
 
They could, for example in the case of smaller firms, be 
somewhere else. We would expect that a firm of any size, 
though, would have someone in Saskatchewan who was 
performing this function. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Okay. So I get an idea of what we're talking 
about; let's take James Richardson's securities for example. 
Well they deal in commodities. Would they have a commodity 
representative, in your mind, in Winnipeg and then deal with 
salesmen in Saskatchewan? And you could use the example of 
Pioneer Grain as well doing that sort of thing. 
 
Will they be required to have an in-house person doing that? I 
just want to use as an example — and I raise it as a concern that 
I have — my family was involved in a business that sold animal 
health products to customers through the south-west part of the 
province. 
 
We had competition from major companies across western 
Canada. And the requirement under the Saskatchewan 
Veterinary Medicine Association is that you have to have a 
veterinarian on staff in order to do it. And what they said is, 
well these companies — we had a local vet who was involved 
in the business — but these other companies, they had a 
veterinarian in Alberta or in Vancouver or in Toronto, giving 
them the opportunity to market in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I don't think that that's entirely good because what you 
have is a . . . Well there's lots of distance and I know what 
communication can be today; that still is a long distance for 
something that is marketable on a regular basis as commodities. 
 
And because commodities are — if I compare this to this 
animal health business — commodities are a far higher risk in 
the business that I was involved in, because I knew a little bit 
about it, but the majority of people or a lot of people in the 
commodity business rely on these traders in order to give them 
accurate information. 
 
And that would raise a concern for me if James Richardson had 
a trader, the head firm in Winnipeg giving an arm's-length kind 
of advice through the traders here, and not having someone who 
is directly responsible to your Securities Commission dealing 
with it, who has jurisdiction given to him by another province. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm glad the member asked the question.  



April 12, 1995 

 
1554 

I was probably a bit vague with my previous answer. We would 
expect that with respect to firms in the business of trading 
commodities, for them to have a resident person in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If a small firm came with a case indicating that they couldn't, 
but they would be able to service it from, say, Winnipeg, the 
commission would listen to that argument, would listen to that 
case, would consider it, and has the jurisdiction if it . . . in a 
proper case to allow that to happen. But they do it from the 
point of view that the starting point, the starting point of view 
that the person will be resident here. 
 
The reason is of course that it is the kind of a thing that requires 
close supervision and close assistance of the actual traders. In 
the two examples, Dominion Securities and the Pioneer Grain 
Company, they will certainly have resident people here. There's 
no question about that. There of a size that they would have 
people here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, my colleague has been dealing with 
some questions regarding the commodity exchange and I'm 
wondering . . . I'd like to pick up where he left off. Can you 
describe what, if any, consultations you had with the Winnipeg 
Commodity Exchange and with other securities legislatives 
before drafting these changes in the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . and to the 
member, the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange were actually the 
requesting party, the organization that requested that we 
introduce these requirements into the Saskatchewan Act, as they 
had with other provinces. And what they had in mind was to 
facilitate their own operations. It would assist them if these 
regimes were in effect in the other provinces. 
 
We have, in preparing this legislation, followed the lead of 
British Columbia and Alberta which acted faster than we did in 
Saskatchewan; and Ontario have similar legislation; and we 
expect that Manitoba will shortly have the same kind of 
legislation too because the request from the commodity 
exchange has been made to all of these provinces and it is in all 
of our interest to do this thing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I can take it from 
your comments then that the implementation of the changes 
have come from, initially from the commodity exchange to 
bring the Act. I gather that they're asking for the Act to address 
a number of concerns that they saw within the securities and 
within their own area of expertise and how they would operate 
as a commodity, and then therefore they came forward with the 
changes. 
 
I had another question that was basically dealing with . . . I 
understand Alberta has already passed a Bill similar to this one. 
I think you indicated as well that this Bill basically follows that 
example, and that in fact the changes that are being 
implemented by The Securities Act, Bill No. 21 in front of us, 
deal with a number of the concerns, a number of the issues 
having been raised by the commodities exchange, and that a  

number of provinces have actually completed that and have 
introduced and brought forward Bills, passed Bills; some others 
are doing the same thing. 
 
Do I understand as well, Mr. Minister, that all provinces would 
basically be, at the end of the day, be looking at following suit 
in bringing forward legislation that would make their securities 
commission follow the same guidelines; is that what you're 
telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — As both the member and I have said, 
Mr. Chairman, B.C. (British Columbia) and Alberta already 
have this legislation, as does Ontario. And Manitoba will, we 
understand, be doing it in the near future. Quebec has similar 
provisions in a separate Act from this legislation, but none the 
less in their legislation. We are not certain what the situation is 
in the maritime provinces. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I may have missed it, but what 
specifically does this Act address that the commodities 
exchange would have been bringing forward to this legislature 
and asking for the introduction of this Bill to the legislature; 
and the reasons for the changes that we're implementing today 
or that are being brought forward in this piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The legislation provides for the 
registration of the firms and of the individual salespersons, and 
that is common to all legislation. The regulations respecting the 
way in which the business is carried on will be developed 
pursuant to the statutory framework, and there will be a great 
deal of consultation among the provinces to ensure that those 
requirements are uniform. 
 
That is what is so facilitative about this so far as the commodity 
exchange is concerned, and is a sensible way of dealing with a 
situation that really doesn't pay much attention to provincial 
boundaries. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Based on that comment then, just a thought in the 
back of my mind. Does this Act have any implications or have 
anything to do with the organizations throughout the province 
that come to the Securities Commission to get the ability to 
gather funds under the community bond program? Does this 
address that, or does this address any of those concerns or have 
anything to do with that aspect of the community bonds 
program, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — None of the amendments affect the 
community bond program at all. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I understand, Mr. Minister, that the Bill also 
expands investigative reciprocity for investigating potential 
securities fraud. And I'm wondering if you could give us some 
examples of how this will allow you, through this Act, to better 
protect the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The problem arises in a number of 
ways, and I can give you an example. Let's say that a particular 
salesman had committed frauds in Saskatchewan, securities  



April 12, 1995 

 
1555 

frauds, and the commission was on to it and investigating it, 
and the person in question moved to British Columbia. Under 
the present law, the commission has no capacity, no way, in 
which to force that person to come back to Saskatchewan, or to 
go to B.C. in order to take the evidence from that person, to 
require that person to appear and give evidence. 
 
This would permit the commission to go to court and to obtain 
a document that would enable the commission to go to British 
Columbia, have a representative there question the person who 
was alleged to have committed the fraud. Similarly, if someone 
who had committed a fraud comes to Saskatchewan, it will 
enable us to be reciprocal in the way in which we deal with 
those cases. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So if I understand you correctly then, Mr. 
Minister, at the present time we really don't have anything that 
allows . . . now are we talking specifically the Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission? If a case of fraud should happen to 
appear, they really have no opportunity to proceed beyond the 
boundaries of this province. If someone happens to, as you 
indicated, leave the province, they're at the mercy of another 
jurisdiction basically giving them a hand. 
 
And I guess you use the word reciprocal. That was the question 
I was coming to. Does this basically work out, if you will, 
reciprocal agreements between other provinces now that allows 
that interaction between provinces to treat these cases and 
indeed make sure that individuals or groups do not shirk their 
responsibility or get away with incidents of fraud that may have 
been committed in a specific province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, the member is perfectly 
right. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I believe the Bill as well, if I 
understand correctly, gives the government the power to remove 
from the boards of companies any directors who have any sort 
of previous record of fraud. The individuals then have to prove 
that they are not involved in fraud. And I guess, is that true? 
 
And if it is, if — say — an individual comes from another part 
of the country and sets up a business dealing with securities 
and/or a group sets up a board of directors and an individual 
may have committed a criminal offence in another's 
jurisdiction, does the province have any ability in the 
establishment of that board? Does the province then have also 
the ability to determine whether or not that individual should be 
allowed on that board or removed from the board? Is that 
covered under this Bill, or do I understand it correctly? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, there is no reverse onus here. 
There's no presumption that operates in favour of the 
commission. The commission staff must produce evidence to 
indicate to the commission that indeed the person is . . . I'll use 
the term, unfit; that's not the technical term. But to satisfy the  

commission that it is not in the public interest for that person to 
be a director; then the commission has the jurisdiction to make 
that finding. 
 
It has . . . The member is correct in your example; it's most 
usually someone coming in from the outside with a history of 
fraud and starts to operate in Saskatchewan. And then the 
experience around the country is that the mere service of the 
notice that the commission is going to have a hearing on this is 
enough to drive them out of this jurisdiction, or out of that 
jurisdiction, I should say, to go somewhere else. That's been the 
experience around the country. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So basically what 
you're saying, the legislation is fairly consistent with the other 
jurisdictions in Canada, in their legislation, so that we have an 
equal understanding between provinces of how the Securities 
Commission operates. And I take it from the nodding of your 
officials that that is the case. 
 
I understand the Bill also provides for fines for persons 
involved in securities fraud. And first of all, the fines are 
limited to, I believe . . . is it $1 million? And second, they are 
paid into the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Would this level of $1 million be considered low? Or is it 
considered consistent within the industry? It would seem to me 
that with the amount of dollars that an individual or a group 
may be dealing with when you're looking at commodities, $1 
million may be low. 
 
And I'm just wondering . . . I suppose what we're looking at is 
consistency in the legislation. But I'm wondering if any other 
jurisdictions have questioned the limit and whether this low 
limit would indeed rob innocent people of millions of dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I want to say two things in response, 
Mr. Chair. The first is that these provisions are consistent with 
the provisions in other jurisdictions. 
 
The other thing I want to mention is that the fine, as the 
member observed, can be $1 million, or it can be an amount 
equal to triple the profit made or loss avoided by the person by 
reason of the contravention. 
 
So there are those two options that present themselves when the 
penalty or fine is being assessed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Now I believe it mentions about . . . that fines are 
paid into a general revenue fund. Is that a fund within the 
Securities Commission? Or what fund are we specifically 
related to . . . talking of here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The provisions are the same as all fines 
under the provincial statute. They're paid into the general 
revenue of the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So it actually comes into the Department of 
Finance then, the general revenue. 



April 12, 1995 

 
1556 

And what is the purpose for the fine? Is the purpose . . . Does 
that . . . When I say that, if it comes into the general revenue, is 
that just basically seen as an income? Or if a person has been 
defrauded of a certain amount of money at the end of the day 
and it is proven that fraud has been committed — a person has 
lost a substantial amount of money — is this then used to help 
repay or reimburse? Or what happens if a person loses or a 
group loses money through fraud in a circumstance such as 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The answer is no to the last part of the 
question. Where someone has lost money, they have to go to the 
ordinary common law, to the civil law of the province, to 
recover their loss in the normal way. They have to try and 
recover it through the civil courts. 
 
The fine is intended to be a sanction for the performance of the 
obligations set out in the statute. And if they convene . . . if they 
contravene those provisions, then they are liable to the penalty. 
And the penalty can be quite stiff and it's meant to act as a 
deterrent to contravention. 
 
It's like a speeding fine which is set at a high enough level to 
deter people from speeding down the highway, and in that sense 
is analogous to the way in which I think all of our provincial 
statutes are set up. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I'm not sure, Mr. Minister, if we can call 
speeding fines as deterrent or not another source of revenue for 
the province of Saskatchewan, but that's neither here nor there. 
 
The concern I have, Mr. Minister, though is you mention about 
an individual who has lost funds through fraud could go 
through the common law process. And I guess the concern I 
have is, okay, you've lost, you've dealt with a broker, if you 
will, you trusted that individual, and then all of a sudden find 
yourself short a substantial sum of money. 
 
And who knows what that sum can vary. I'm sure it can vary 
quite significantly to a lot of individuals. Some cases, it may not 
be all that significant. But by the time you go through the 
common law process, it seems to me, as I've observed legal 
cases in this . . . and not just in this province, but in general, 
when you go to court to try to recover a loss, and I bring the 
example of the discussion we had regarding young offenders 
and stolen gas. The police actually finally said to the individual: 
by the time we go through the court system, the reality is we 
may or may not get a conviction; we may or may not get a 
penalty — but you are not going to recover your loss. 
 
And it would seem to me that probably what most people will 
find, okay, if they're going to look at the court of law to try and 
recover their loss, by the time they go through the process, their 
cost to try and recover that loss may end up being higher than 
their loss. 
 
Wouldn't it be better to have had something within the Act that 
would basically set up a fund, if you will, that would help for 
recover and repay for loss versus saying to an individual, well  

you trusted the person, they unfortunately abused their privilege 
of trust. You lost, so you take the court system or else having 
. . . we've got fines, substantial fines, that instead of just going 
into general revenue putting it into a trust account that would be 
used to reimburse individuals for the loss they incurred. 
Wouldn't that be appropriate, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This is an interesting subject. The 
whole purpose of The Securities Act and the Securities 
Commission is to try, to the extent that it's possible to do so, to 
ensure that everything is on the up and up in the trading of 
securities. 
 
And the problem cases don't involve the registered brokers 
because they're not fraudulent. I mean they're doing business in 
a very competitive market, and they're providing high-quality 
service to their clients for which they're paid well. And if any 
problems did occur, they are bonded and insured, and they're 
good for the loss. And in the event that such a firm were to go 
bankrupt, there is a kind of funding arrangement in the industry 
that the people who have losses could have access to. 
 
The problem arises with the shady operator, the fly-by-night 
manipulator that comes slipping into Saskatchewan and 
organizes some kind of project, doesn't get registered under the 
Act, tries to fleece a little money out of the economy, and then 
get out of town before the sheriff rides in. 
 
Those are tough situations. You know it's supposed to be 
regulated by the law. Chances are they have broken the law, but 
by the time you reach into the situation, some people have been 
fleeced. Some people have turned over their money to these 
predators, and it's gone, and they're gone so that . . . 
 
I was just asking my officials about the situation, and they told 
me that they can't remember a fine that's been paid in their days 
with the commission. There have been fines levied but not 
necessarily paid. 
 
The real deterrent is jail, and that is the penalty that I believe is 
sought in most of these prosecutions, rather than the payment of 
a fine. Chances are these birds I'm talking about don't have deep 
pockets and are not able to pay fines, and they wind up, if 
they're convicted, serving jail time rather than paying the money 
over. But my staff can't remember a fine having been paid. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I'm not sure if the reason it hasn't been paid is 
because of the laxity in the bankruptcy laws or not; I don't 
know. 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Minister, you made the comment 
about the fact that indeed most individuals who are licensed, 
very seldom, if any, have these individuals really run into a 
problem with the way they have held their licence and the way 
they've conducted the work. It's the individuals who would 
come in who . . . 
 
And if I gather correctly, I'm gathering from your comments  



April 12, 1995 

 
1557 

that there indeed have been cases where individuals have come 
in and set up a practice without actually getting a licence. Is that 
what I'm understanding you to indicate, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, these operators will not 
normally set up a business or set up a firm, but what they will 
do is come in and push a project. 
 
My officials were telling me about a recent situation in Bethune 
— the member knows where Bethune is, a very small town on 
the way to Saskatoon. And the scam was that they had a process 
for extracting gold from the groundwater, and they sold an 
interest in this process and cleaned a lot of money out of the 
community of Bethune. And they're in and out and gone before 
you can get a grip on them, you know, and away they go. 
 
So just to repeat myself, it's that kind of operator that excites 
the interest of the Securities Commission with respect to those 
fraud requirements. It is not the mainstream companies. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the suggestion would be, Mr. Minister, 
then that, and if there's a message that we could certainly send 
from this Assembly, is that people in Saskatchewan before they 
start getting involved with any group or any organization, 
whether it's in investing funds, is that they ask for and require 
of them a bit of information as to who they operate with, how 
they operate. 
 
I believe on the news the other evening there was just a news 
blurb telling the people of Saskatchewan about a group that had 
come in and I believe they were offering you — I think maybe 
that was the one with the gold; I'm not sure — offering you, if 
you send so many thousand dollars to this certain . . . Oh, it was 
another function then. Send so many thousand dollars to this 
certain address, you would be sent a form as to receive, and I 
just don't remember all the details, but some kind of contraption 
that would help you in making money for yourself. 
 
The unfortunate part is once the money left your hands, left the 
province, that was the last you heard of organizations like that. I 
know it's not dealing specifically with this piece of legislation, 
but it sounds to me like we have it whether we're dealing with 
securities, whether we're talking about people trading in 
commodities, or just individuals selling a product  it would 
be buyer beware. And the general public should really take note 
as to who they're dealing with because a lot of these operators 
are very smooth operators in being able to sell their product. 
 
I also noticed, Mr. Minister, that the administrative penalty is 
set out at $100,000. Is this penalty set in line with the $1 
million? Or here again, is this penalty considered high enough, 
or would you consider that penalty as being somewhat low for 
this type of an offence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There is no question that people who 
receive one of these offers that seem too good to be true . . . In 
other words, an offer you can't refuse should require the  

production of a licence from the Securities Commission. But it's 
just amazing how many people there are around who don't think 
of that; they just see an opportunity to get rich quick and they 
grab for it. 
 
We were talking about the fines a moment ago, and the member 
will know that those fines are in the hands of the courts and the 
court levies that fine. The commission however does have the 
power under this legislation to levy an administrative penalty in 
some circumstances and to specify that that money will be used 
to produce material to promote knowledge of the participants in 
the capital markets of investment and regulatory matters. 
 
So I mention that to the member to underline the fact that it is a 
function of the commission to educate the public or see that the 
public is educated to the extent possible with respect to these 
matters. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I notice that we have a section that 
deals . . . detailing extensively with misrepresentation, defining 
misrepresentation of securities. And I'm wondering, Mr. 
Minister, is this a new section? Are we bringing some new 
ideas into this Act and from what the previous Act would have 
had? And I wonder if you could explain how it differs and what 
the real intent and purpose of this section of the Act is — I 
believe it's sections 138 to 138.2. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'll deal with the sections one at a time. 
Section 138 in the Bill expands the rights of action for 
misrepresentation in offering memoranda — the member will 
know what I mean by that — which parallels the rights for 
misrepresentation in a prospectus. 
 
And just for the record, of course, the offering memoranda is an 
alternative to a prospectus. 
 
Section 138.1 contains provisions regarding misrepresentation 
in advertising, but those provisions were already in the 
preceding section, so that they're not new. And again it expands 
the rights of action for misrepresentation in advertising to 
parallel the rights for misrepresentation in a prospectus. 
 
And with respect to section 138.2, there is a new provision 
which gives a right of action for verbal misrepresentation made 
in connection with the sale of a security. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, if a person comes to the 
commission and feels that they haven't really been given the 
true bill of goods, and have actually had misrepresentation of 
the sales pitch that was given to them and what they 
understood, what guidelines would the commission then follow 
in dealing with a broker or a firm that an individual may feel 
may not have been up front and open with them regarding the 
sale of the commodity that they were handling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In the circumstance that the member has 
put to the Assembly, the commission would . . . a member of 
the staff of the commission would meet with the person who 
came in with the complaint; he would take particulars of the  



April 12, 1995 

 
1558 

complaint; they would then try to document it in whatever way 
they could; and then it could take different routes depending 
upon the nature of the complaint. 
 
The first possibility is that the commission would . . . the staff 
of the commission would investigate the complaint. And that 
may lead to either some proceeding before the commission or 
one of the other two options that I'm about to mention. 
 
The second option is that the complaint would be turned over to 
the self-regulator, the industry's regulation process, if it's an 
appropriate case. It may, for example, be turned over to the 
investment dealers association for investigation and perhaps 
disciplinary action. It may be turned over to the Toronto Stock 
Exchange for the same kind of investigation and disciplinary 
action. 
 
Or the third option may be a prosecution under section 131, 
where the complaint discloses the commission of an offence. 
And either the second or third option could flow from the 
commission's investigation or it could be an apparent case that 
would be immediately turned over without any great amount of 
investigation by the commission staff. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I noticed also we have a section 
dealing with regulations, and talking about the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council may make regulations, and it's a fairly 
extensive section. I'm wondering exactly what is the purpose of 
this specific section? What are you addressing with it through 
this section, Mr. Minister? And is this also in line with the other 
pieces of legislation in other jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There always has been a power to make 
regulations under the Act, and considering the nature of the 
industry, it's advisable to do that because the industry has been 
constantly changing for a long time. There are new . . . 
changing in the sense that there are new instruments being 
thought up and being marketed and that requires some, you 
know, an ability to respond. And so the response by regulation 
has long been the technique that this Assembly has authorized. 
 
These provisions closely parallel the Ontario Act, which has for 
decades been the leading Act in the country and the Act to 
which the other provinces look to for leadership. A number of 
new areas are covered in the Act that weren't covered before. I 
cite, for example, the situation respecting mutual funds. It's an 
attempt to try and keep up with recent developments in the 
industry. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Toth: — I also note, Mr. Minister, that we have section 
that deals with the commission and allows the commission to 
be exempt from certain fees; and fees regarding registrants for 
the Land Titles Office, registrar of personal property, any 
department of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it seems to me when any other group would have to go to 
the Land Titles Office to get documentation, they would have to  

pay a fee in order to get that information. And yet under section 
71, it seems that we've exempted the commission from that. 
And I'm wondering why we would be exempting the 
commission from having to pay for some of the evidence that 
they may be looking for when . . . and an average person on the 
street may have to pay for it. Is there any specific reason for 
these exemptions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, this 
exemption has been around for a long, long time so far as land 
titles and the court system is concerned. And I suspect the 
reason why was that it would just come out of one account into 
another account of the government system. It is being expanded 
here to include the personal property registry and any 
department of the government, but these things have been going 
on for years. 
 
The commission doesn't charge any of these departments for 
any documents and photocopying and the like that is requested 
of them, and they don't pay any fees in return, so not intended 
to get any special advantage but simply to reduce unnecessary 
bookkeeping within the government system. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I understand as well, that through 
this Bill we have exempted this Bill from The Saskatchewan 
Evidence Act. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, it took me a while to get 
briefed on this because it's very technical. I think I have it 
straight now. 
 
Under the Act as it now exists, the officers of a bank had to 
give evidence to the Securities Commission in respect of an 
investigation. And they could not claim to be exempt by virtue 
of anything in The Saskatchewan Evidence Act from giving 
evidence on investigations. 
 
This provision broadens the provision so that now the banks 
and the credit unions cannot claim that The Saskatchewan 
Evidence Act exempts them from the whole of this Act. They 
have to do what everybody else has to do so far as the Securities 
Commission is concerned. Of course the commission still has to 
operate within its jurisdiction. But that being the case, they can't 
rely on any provision of The Saskatchewan Evidence Act to 
exempt them from the operation of this Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Can I ask you to explain that again, Mr. Minister? 
Mr. Minister, does this in any way infringe upon individual 
rights by having this exemption in here? Mr. Minister, does that 
come into play? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, it does not. It means that banks and 
credit unions are treated like everybody else. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your officials. I just have a few questions and just 
to confirm that I understand the intent of the Bill. 
 
As I understand it, the proposed legislation in Bill 21 contains  



April 12, 1995 

 
1559 

many amendments that have one or more of the following 
purposes: (1) to allow the Act to exchange contracts and 
broaden the concept of an exchange; (2) to provide equal 
treatment for credit unions and Credit Union Central to that of 
banks and trust companies; (3) to be consistent with Ontario 
securities legislation; (4) to allow certain provisions to apply to 
unincorporated entities as well as business corporations; and (5) 
to clean up drafting errors and ensure that parallel provisions 
are consistent and to keep topical areas within the same part or 
section of the Act. 
 
I'm assuming that this . . . and you can correct if my 
understanding is wrong. So I'll just have a couple of questions 
to ask. In providing equal treatment for credit unions and Credit 
Union Central to banks and trust companies, can you make a 
relatively brief comparison of the situation, the inequality that 
now exists, and how it will be different with the application of 
this amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The thrust of these amendments are to 
give the credit unions the same kinds of powers and abilities as 
the chartered banks have. For some time the banks have been 
able to do things without becoming registered as brokers under 
the Act. And they were . . . Unsolicited sales or purchases of 
shares for their members, for example, is a convenience in rural 
areas where you can go in and buy a hundred shares of Bell, of 
the Bell Telephone Company, and the bank can make that 
happen for you without being registered as a broker under the 
Act. 
 
I'm told that that is the position of the chartered banks. This will 
allow the credit unions to do the same thing, and that only 
makes sense. The bank exemption was based on the fact that 
they've got pretty deep pockets, you know, and they're good for 
that sort of transaction. Well the credit unions have deep 
pockets, you know, and they're good for that sort of transaction. 
Well the credit unions have deep pockets too, and they should 
be entitled to the same exemptions and the same consideration 
as the chartered banks. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Minister, could you please give me 
perhaps some other examples? And did the credit unions lobby 
for these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I've got a couple more examples to give 
to the member. The credit unions, under this amendment, will 
be exempt from the requirement to register an adviser. The 
banks can now advise with respect to these matters without 
being registered; the credit unions will then have a similar 
power to the bank. 
 
Another example is with respect to their trading in their own 
account; they will be exempt. Let me put it this way, the 
legislation will exempt to trade from the registration and 
prospectus requirements where the purchaser is a credit union 
or Credit Union Central. That is already available for banks; it 
will now be available for credit unions. 
 
And the member is correct with respect to the last part of your  

question. The credit unions requested that the legislation be 
amended to put them in the same position as the chartered 
banks. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. When credit unions 
were founded, why was there such a big difference between the 
banks? As you say, deep pockets, but was that the only reason 
that there was a big difference for the necessity of an adviser 
and these other changes? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The banks of course are set up pursuant 
to federal laws, the Bank Act, and they have a review every 10 
years of that Act and usually is followed by major amendments 
to the Bank Act. And the credit unions are set up pursuant to 
legislation of this Assembly, and I think were born in the 1930s. 
 
I believe that the credit unions were . . . is not active in this 
field . . . were not interested. They weren't getting that sort of 
demand from their customers. But in recent years of course the 
credit unions have become very sophisticated financial 
institutions and are clearly in competition with the banks in a 
number of areas and are trying to level the playing-field 
between themselves and the banks in a number of areas. And so 
I believe that that's the genesis of this request. 
 
For the history I must admit I'm just supposing. I'm not 
personally familiar with what the thinking was, but I believe 
that I've captured it. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. If you're doing this for 
the credit unions, is there some sort of customer protection for 
the customers of the credit unions that parallels that of the 
federally mandated banks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, the unsolicited trading is a 
situation where the customer comes in and says, I'd like to buy 
25 shares of Imperial Oil, and the financial institution facilitates 
that transaction. So they're small, and they're unsolicited. The 
institution is not in the business of doing that. It doesn't 
advertise itself as in that business. 
 
With respect to the advisory provisions that I just told you 
about, that is a technical kind of protection so that the 
institution doesn't inadvertently get itself into difficulty with 
The Securities Act because the customer is told something that 
could technically be considered to be advising with respect to 
the purchase of securities. 
 
And it simply allows the bank manager or bank officer to do 
what bank officers do, you know. You're in a position to 
consider that kind of investment, or, yes, I hear it's a good 
company or whatever. 
 
Just in connection with the fulfilling the role of a banker, such 
statements are I think often made and such advice just casually 
given, and we don't want that construed as being activity that is  



April 12, 1995 

 
1560 

caught by The Securities Act because they're not in that 
business of advising. Now the exemption for the credit union 
has just put them on the same basis as for the banks. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I guess I'm just a little bit confused about 
the adviser and the advice of what they're . . . in removing the 
adviser, they're still able to give advice. Are the banks in the 
business of selling securities and so forth? And do they 
advertise at this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This advisory function is limited in The 
Securities Act. I refer the member to section 38(1)(a), and I'll 
quote it because the words are important: 
 
 Registration as an adviser is not required to be obtained 

by: 
 
  (a) the following persons or companies where the 

performance of the service as an adviser is solely 
incidental to the person's or company's principal 
business or occupation: 

   (i) a bank to which the Bank Act (Canada) applies 
. . . 

 
And so on. We are amending that by giving the same . . . 
making the provision applicable in the same way to credit 
unions.  
 
So the adviser capacity is solely incidental to the company's 
principal business of banking. And if they're in the business, 
though, of advising with respect to the purchase of securities, 
then they are caught by the Act. It's not incidental to their main 
business, and incidental means incidental. It's not a licence to 
enter the field without being subject to the requirements of the 
Act. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, would you please table the document that you just 
read from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I just read from a copy of The Securities 
Act. It's available right there. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Minister, section 52(b) talks about . . . 
you've spoken about the consistency with the Ontario securities 
legislation. Is this common across the country that security 
commissions are putting their regulations in line with Ontario 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There is a great deal of consultation 
between jurisdictions with respect to a vast array of issues in 
this field. I don't think there's another part of the government 
operation that I can think of where there is more consultation 
and more joint effort to deal with some of the common 
problems because what is a problem in Ontario is a problem in 
Saskatchewan.  
 
There will be somebody with the same kind of a scheme or the 
same sort of instrument that they're trying to sell, and the  

problems are similar. They tend to happen in Ontario earlier and 
on a grander scale than in Winnipeg or in Regina or even in 
Vancouver. So for decades the Toronto Stock Exchange and the 
Ontario Securities Commission has led the country with respect 
to this kind of legislation and the regulation of this industry. So 
that because the problems tend to happen earlier and on a 
grander scale in Ontario, they tend to attack the problems before 
the other jurisdictions are in a position to tackle them or feel 
any particular need to tackle them. 
 
We tend to look at Ontario because of that and because of the 
fact that they in that province for decades have really focused 
hard on trading in securities and the activities of their Securities 
Commission and of course the dominant position of the 
Toronto Stock Exchange in the markets in Canada. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. To go back to the 
credit unions, can you tell me how this legislation will affect the 
small insurance brokers who also deal in some of these things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Not at all, not at all. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — In talking about equal treatment for credit 
unions and banks, trust companies are also included. Is there 
any specific thing applying to trust companies that is different 
from banks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I just called again for a copy of The 
Securities Act as it presently is, and one of the exemptions from 
the advisory provisions is a trust corporation licence pursuant to 
The Trust and Loan Corporations Act. So in that respect, the 
provisions are parallel. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I have a question about section 152.1 of the 
old Act, section 66 of the amendment. I have some information 
that that may run into some future constitutional or charter 
problems. The confidentiality of information provided by this 
section might be subject to more complete or full disclosure 
than the Act contemplates. 
 
Currently there is more complete disclosure in both civil actions 
and criminal matters, and it is expected that the consequences 
of a hearing or review decision by the commission could be as 
severe as either the civil or criminal matter. Do you have any 
comments on the charter implications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, that's a 
new thought for us. We've consulted quite broadly with respect 
to this confidentiality provision. And the main part of it is a 
carry-over from the old Act, and it's almost identical to 
confidentiality provisions in other Acts. 
 
We're not aware of any charter challenges having occurred 
anywhere with respect to these provisions. But the charter is a 
fairly elastic instrument and is being tested in all kinds of ways. 
And I suppose that this may be one of the areas where it's 
tested. 
 



April 12, 1995 

 
1561 

But the investment community doesn't seem to be concerned 
about it up to this point because it had not been raised with us, 
and we don't know what to make of it. And so I can't respond in 
any very informed ways to the issues that are contained in your 
question. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Minister, who is being protected by this 
confidentiality provision: the consumer, the bank, the credit 
union, the Securities Commission? Who is being protected by 
it? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The people being protected, Mr. Chair, 
are the people who provide information or who give up 
information to the commission. You'll notice that the 
information that is held in confidence includes internal reports 
and records of the commission and specifically includes 
information and evidence and witness names obtained in most 
circumstances, so long as the commission considers that it is in 
the public interest to protect that information. 
 
The concern of course is that if people think that the 
information that they're providing to the commission can be 
made public, they may not provide it as willingly or as fully as 
they may otherwise do. And there can be some pretty hairy 
circumstances arise in this area of the government's operations. 
You investigate some pretty hairy situations. 
 
As I was talking earlier, there can be some shady operators who 
move into a community and set about gathering up the loose 
money, sopping up the loose money in the community in 
pursuance of some fly-by-night get-rich-quick scheme. And 
those people are badly hurt by it. And we want the flow of 
information by them to the commission to be as free and 
unfettered and protected as possible so that the operators can't 
. . . these fly-by-night operators can't go in to the commission 
and demand to see the statements for example and the 
information that was given to them and who gave the 
information and who turned us in, who squealed on us, that sort 
of thing. So that's who's being protected. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. This is a rather 
esoteric subject for someone who has fairly safe investments 
but not a whole lot of them. Could you explain more about the 
kind of commodities and securities that might be traded in 
Saskatchewan that this would apply to, especially with the 
banks and the credit unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think I was clear from the member's 
question that you want to know all the . . . a number of the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well a general picture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Okay. A representative sample of the 
sorts of things that are covered by the Act . . . I'm looking again 
at a copy of the existing Act and the definition of security 
covers any document, instrument, or writing commonly known 
as a security. It will be a stock or a share in a company; any  

document constituting evidence of title to or interest in the 
capital, assets, property, profits, earning, or royalties of any 
person or company; any document constituting evidence of an 
option, subscription, or other interest in or to a security; any 
bond, debenture, note, share, stock, unit, unit certificate, 
participation certificate, and so on. So that's the definition of a 
security. 
 
So far as commodities are concerned, which is part of your 
question, the principal commodities that will be traded in 
Saskatchewan will be agricultural futures, and that will 
constitute the lion's share of the commodity market in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me how this 
affects the on-farm produce of incorporated farms? Would that 
be a security in these definitions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm going to answer in two ways 
because I'm not quite sure what the full breadth of the member's 
question was. But first of all, the produce of farms are not 
covered in any way. They don't become a commodity until 
they're delivered and in the hands of the grain company. So 
that's one way to answer the question. 
 
The second way is with respect to farm corporations. Family 
farm corporations are not covered by this Act. You could 
become covered if you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's all we want to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — You could become covered if you . . . 
yes, well then, the member's indicated I've answered the 
question. I'm going to sit down. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you to 
your officials. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, I am 
glad that I'm able to get a chance to ask you a question because 
you were alluding to something near and dear to my heart 
which of course is the agricultural commodities market. And as 
everyone in agriculture knows, we are heading into these 
diversification programs where we have to get into products 
that are not necessarily controlled by the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
As a result of that, we have considerable education to do 
ourselves to find out how to market these new products and 
how to not get taken  I guess is the only word I can think of 
— not to undersell our product or that sort of thing or have 
somebody take advantage of us as farmers. 
 
In the commodities market, when I sell a carload of canola, I 
phone up last April, several of the grain companies, and I say I 
have a carload of canola for sale. And they told me, well you 
can't sell it on the June contract because I've heard on the radio 
and the TV that the June contract was going up really quite 
significantly. And they said, oh no, the price is there, but you  



April 12, 1995 

 
1562 

can't sell yours for that price. And I said, well why not? And 
they said, well we don't really know. It's just that there doesn't 
seem to be any buyers at that price. So I said is this fair? You 
know, is there something wrong with that? And eventually I 
was able to sell on a July contract at a considerable less value to 
me. So I lost a significant amount of money on that carload of 
canola. 
 
Having done that, as time went by last year, we discovered that 
there was some kind of an investigation going on to see if 
everything was above board or not, or what was wrong. 
 
Now does this Act protect farmers from that sort of thing? And 
if it does, how would it protect us? And if it doesn't, how would 
farmers get protection from that sort of situation happening? 
Because it was an advertised price that we could not, as 
farmers, access. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — That July canola price was the subject 
of an extensive investigation by the Winnipeg Commodity 
Exchange. And we don't have a copy of that report or a 
summary of it here, but the member is quite right. It was looked 
into by the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange. 
 
This Act provides some significant protection for farmers 
because the contracts, the futures contracts — the commodity 
trading, in other words — will be subject to regulation by the 
commission. And the contracts will be looked at and will be 
approved by this commission. 
 
And the exchange contracts are dealt with in part VIII of the 
Bill, sections 40 and the subsequent section. And there are 
some significant powers that the commission has in order to be 
certain that the contracts that are being offered, are being sold 
to farmers, are on the level, meet the requirements of the Act. 
And we won't take the risk out of it, the gamble out of it  
that's still a business of buying and selling contracts and trying 
to predict what the future will be  but the regulation will 
provide a good deal of protection for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well yes, Minister, there is a lot of risk 
involved in dealing in the commodities markets. But your risk is 
eliminated as a farmer when you produce a product and you 
physically have it and you go to the market and you sell it, and 
somebody gives you a contract saying they are willing to pay a 
certain price and buy it. 
 
And if contracts are worth a nickel in this province or in this 
country, then we should have some legal protection that we 
actually will get that price. At the same time, we also should be 
protected that when a price is offered, that there is a willing 
buyer at that price in order so that we can prevent things like 
steaming up the market in order to encourage people to plant 
too many acres of a certain crop in anticipation of a market that 
is never really there. 
 
And that of course is what may have happened here, is that 
people who wanted lots of acres of a crop seeded, developed a 
market that really wasn't available. It made it appear that we  

could get, say, $10 a bushel for canola when in fact we could 
only get $9.20. And of course because those farmers that didn't 
grow canola before didn't know that this market was not 
available to them, they thought that was the real price of what 
you could get in the springtime if you held your grain over, so 
they went out and planted a whole lot of acres into canola. Not 
knowing of course that you never were going to get that price, 
even though it was advertised on the radio and TV. And that's 
why they had the investigation I suspect and as well they 
should. 
 
So I guess my question as a follow-up is, having been affected 
by this and having lost money personally, I think I would have 
to ask on behalf of all of producers of canola: is there any way 
that we could find out what the results of that investigation 
were; and in fact was anybody ever found guilty of doing 
anything wrong or is it just swept under the rug and forgotten 
about; or was our legislation not tough enough to make the 
system work; or is this an argument to have canola under the 
Canadian Wheat Board, if you want to take it a stretch further? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We have access to the information 
about this investigation and we'll provide as much as we can for 
the member. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. So in this legislation 
you say that we are alluding to this type of contract, so I guess 
my next question naturally should be then: are we now 
protected against this sort of thing happening again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The protection is limited; I should make 
that perfectly clear to the member. What the Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission will be doing will be registering the 
people who are marketing these instruments, these futures — to 
use that term. If the originating entity is in Winnipeg, then they 
will be the instruments themselves. The contracts will be 
governed by the exchange from which the instrument comes. 
 
But we will ensure, in Saskatchewan, that they're sold by 
registered firms, by registered, reputable dealers who don't have 
any fraud background or anything like that. If it should happen 
that there is difficulty with an exchange which is . . . from 
which contracts are originating and people are being hurt by 
them, we have the capacity under the Act to deal with the 
situation under section 40 and section 41. 
 
But I want to correct an impression I may have left earlier that 
we review the provisions of the exchange contracts. We don't 
do that. We accept them from the originating exchange and we 
govern the people who sell them here. We ensure that they are 
being traded by reputable people. That's the extent of the 
coverage. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thanks, Minister, that's clearing things 
up a little. As farmers though, we find ourselves in a bit of a 
catch-22 situation with these markets. We have to sell through a 
dealer in order to access cars in order to get grain to market. 



April 12, 1995 

 
1563 

And at the same time, if you went to your broker and you sold a 
carload through a broker, and he offered it on the exchange and 
somebody supposedly bought it there, then we as farmers could 
access that price but we have no vehicle to get the grain then 
into the system — other than to go through a dealership, or 
these dealers. 
 
And it' almost seems to me like somehow farmers should be 
protected in that they should be able to access both the ability to 
sell a contract and also to be able to deliver against that contract 
without having to have a middleman; because it seems like last 
year it was the middlemen that must have caused the problem; 
they must have been playing the market with farmers' grain or 
something to that effect. 
 
Now do you understand what went wrong there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, we don't know that today. But as I 
said earlier, we'll gather together all the information we can and 
provide it to you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister, we definitely are 
looking forward to that because we want to research that. 
There's an awful lot of farmers that are of course facing these 
problems, as I've said earlier, with the transition in the types of 
crops that we're starting to grow. 
 
How many investigations would you have ongoing in the 
province as a result of this piece of legislation and the kind of 
things that it covers? I heard you alluding to people like trying 
to get gold out of water here a little while ago, and that sort of 
thing. And I guess there was one of those kind of pyramid 
selling sort of things that went on in our community as well 
here a while ago. 
 
And it's kind of scary to think how folks come in with these 
ideas out of the United States in this pyramid selling sort of an 
idea, and they try to sell it to local people who actually think 
they're legitimately buying something. And the only protection 
we really have is the Securities Commission standing between 
them and some perhaps fraudulent idea; but most of them I 
suppose are legitimate, and yet we do need that. 
 
So how many investigations would you be carrying on at one 
time in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There are 42 investigations currently 
under way in the province. This figure is lower than it has been 
normally. Normally the number of investigations would be in 
the 50’s. But whether it's as a result of the good work of the 
commission or whatever, it's now down to 42. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, that tells me that you're going 
to have a pretty significant requirement of staff in order to be 
able to do the job right. 
 
Because it looks to me like this is a really complicated area to 
be able to do, you know, the proper kind of research — to find 
out if a particular system that is being offered to people or a  

particular idea is being sold through some kind of a security. It 
looked to me like it would be massive man-hours or 
woman-hours of work in order to track this all down. 
 
So you now have then the potential for a variance of say, you 
know to go on the low side, you say 40 now, maybe it would 
drop to 30. On another day, though, it might be 70. So how do 
you cover up the need for staff in such a varying range of 
necessity here for people to work on it? Or can you second 
people from the tax department or some other place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member: my 
chairman and his staff like your line of thinking here — as is 
the case everywhere, where you're trying to do more and more 
with less people and trying to make government as efficient as 
possible. 
 
What the commission does when it gets into an overload 
situation is hire a contract person, a retired RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) officer who has background in this 
area and brought onto the commission staff on a temporary 
basis to take care of the overload. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well it would seem though that a lot of times 
you might end up being understaffed and this could cause some 
serious problems for people. Obviously it's good that you draw 
on resources that are available — the retired folks and that sort 
of thing. 
 
But it just sort of crossed my mind as we were thinking about 
this and talking about it that at some times you must be 
hard-pressed to get things done. And I suppose that might 
explain why we had letters from some individuals in our area 
saying that it was taking a long time to get things through the 
Securities Commission done and they were anxious of course 
because they wanted to sell their particular stocks or whatever it 
was they were selling. And so I guess that's a reasonable 
explanation for why it sometimes takes longer. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the credit unions though, 
Minister, as well — you can allude to that a little more if you 
want to — but the credit union system seems to be alluded to in 
the Act here. And it crosses my mind here that maybe . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. I'm having some difficulty 
hearing the member, as are other people that are involved in the 
committee, so I ask for the indulgence and respect of the 
members for this process. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You see there's 
days when it's an advantage to be handicapped. I just shut my 
hearing-aid off and couldn't hear them anyway. 
 
But I did want to ask the minister seriously about the 
involvement of the credit union system in this Bill and how it's 
going to affect the credit union movement in our province. Will 
this Bill allow them to go into the sale of mutual funds or in 
that sort of thing, or what exactly freedom is allowed for the 
credit unions by this Bill? 



April 12, 1995 

 
1564 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, there isn't much in this Act 
of any great interest to the credit unions. They have been active 
in the securities field through subsidiaries for years and there's 
nothing in this Act of any great consequence. 
 
It does provide them with some of the specific exemptions that 
are given to the chartered banks, as I was telling the Assembly a 
bit earlier. For example, if you go in to your bank now you can 
arrange, through your bank manager, to buy a hundred shares of 
Bell Telephone. You'll be able to do that with the credit union 
under this Act. 
 
And you can go in to your bank manager and say, well do you 
think I should buy 20 shares of Imperial Oil? And the bank 
manager can say, yes, it looks like a good buy. And you'd be 
able to do that with your credit union manager now and they'll 
enjoy the same exemption as the bank. But it's not any 
substantial concession so far as the credit unions are concerned; 
anything that they are now able to do, they have been able to do 
generally with respect to the sale of securities. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, what we need to know then, Minister, is 
. . . now you've alluded to the chartered banks and we all know 
that chartered banks of course are regulated by the federal 
government, and historically they have been allowed to do a lot 
more things than the credit union has been allowed to do under 
the legislation of the province that set the credit union system 
up. 
 
Credit unions have been lobbying, as you well know, for a long 
time to be allowed to do the same things that chartered banks 
do in all areas including the brokerages of insurance and that 
sort of thing, if I've used the right term. And now you say that 
they will be able to handle stock options and those kinds of 
things. Does that now also put them on a level playing-field in 
the area of, as being able to sell the insurance that they were 
lobbying for earlier this year and those kinds of things? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This Act doesn't touch the question of 
insurance. That lobbying has of course been done, with respect 
to government members, by both the credit unions and by the 
brokers and it continues. The government's made no decision on 
that. And there's certainly nothing in this Bill that will affect 
that debate or that lobbying effort at all. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:47 p.m. 
 
 
 


