






















































March 31, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 31, 1995 

 

 
1269 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today. I'll read the prayer. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to 
make the necessary changes to the New Careers 
program to allow the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 
recipients who have started the bridging program for 
women to complete their program, to ensure that in the 
event of program changes or cuts, that the vulnerable 
are not trapped; and we urge this Assembly to 
encourage both levels of government to enter into a 
cooperative effort so that the people in these programs 
are allowed to complete them. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all but one of the petitioners are from 
Regina, and one is from Qu'Appelle. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here on behalf of people from around the province. We have 
Pangman, Frontier, Eastend, even one from Calgary; Southey, 
Glen Ewen, Glentworth, Lafleche, and Swift Current, and 
Vauxhall. All of these people have the following prayer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm very happy to table these on behalf of the constituents of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition, 
the prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime  

control are not synonymous. 
 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come entirely from Pense. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding dedicated toward the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce to you today and through you to members of the 
legislature, a group of 12 adults from the Open Door Society 
who are here with their teachers, Roshnie Thaver and Donna 
Spreacker. And we'll be meeting later to have a conversation 
and some refreshment. And I'd like everyone to join me in 
welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: — M. le president, je veux vous presenter 
aujourd'hui, des élèves de l'école de St. Isidore deBellevue. Il 
y'a dix élèves d'onzième et douzième grades. C'est un plaisir de 
les acceuillir aujourd'hui ici a la Chambre. 
 
M. le president, Bellevue, c’est une communauté spéciale pour 
moi parce que mes enfants prendent leur formation educatif a 
Bellevue, et aussi la communauté et tres proche de mon coeur 
parce que on fait beaucoup de la commerce et nos activités dans 
la communauté. 
 
Les élèves sont accompagner par le principal de l'école, M. 
Euclid Dareau, et aussi Mme. Marianne d'Armignon. M. le 
president, la communauté de Bellevue demontrer qu' ils veulent 
preserver pour nous voir le culture et coexistence avec la 
majorité anglophone est spéciale. 
 
(Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
today, students from St. Isidore de Bellevue School. There are 
10 students from grades 11 and 12. It’s a pleasure to welcome 
them to the Chamber today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bellevue is a special community for me, because 
my children received their early education at Bellevue, and also 
the community is very close to my heart because we do much of 
our business and our activities in the community. 



March 31, 1995 

 
1270 

The students are accompanied by the school’s principal, Mr. 
Euclid Dareau, and also Mrs. Marianne d’Armignon. Mr. 
Speaker, the community of Bellevue demonstrates to us their 
wish to preserve their culture and to co-exist with the 
anglophone majority is special.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to introduce to you and to the members 
of the Assembly, 10 grade 11 and 12 students from St. Isidore 
de Bellevue in my home community. Mr. Speaker, Bellevue is 
one of the French schools in the province in the new French 
governance system; and I think they have demonstrated as a 
community that they can co-exist with the anglophone majority 
and still promote and preserve their culture. So I'd like all the 
members to welcome them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, students from the women's bridging 
program in Regina at the south campus of Wascana Institute. 
They are here this morning to meet with the ministries of Social 
Services and Education at 11 o'clock, and they've come to 
observe the proceedings of the House. 
 
I'd ask them to stand as I read their names: Cristy Anderson, 
Kathie Kuntz, Charlene Bruce, Lorraine Hatfield, Sheila 
Gyurak, Clovel Carbon, Olga Pryhitka, Gracy Carvalho, Marny 
Molnar, Sandra Ennis, Sandra Kavas, Theresa Prokopchuk, 
Morag Hurnrabbetz, Rosemarie Frischholz, Gayle Payette, and 
Geinna Ludwig. I'd like the members of the Assembly to join 
me in welcoming these women, who are on the road to new 
careers, to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

State Of The Environment Report 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
comment on the release today of a third bi-annual report on the 
State Of The Environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the State Of The Environment Report has several 
purposes. First, it helps provide people with a status report on 
our environment and resources. Next, it helps us to understand 
how we are managing the environment. Finally, identifies areas 
where improvements or changes are necessary. 
 
Past reports have met with much success and been acted upon. 
For an example, in 1993 the report recommended the 
development of an ecological land classification framework as a 
basis for future state of the environment reporting. I am pleased 
to inform the House, Mr. Speaker, that the 1995 report 
incorporates that recommendation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the environment belongs to all of us but more 
importantly to our children. How we manage and sustain it  

today will determine the environment that we bequeath to our 
children. The State Of The Environment Report is a valuable 
tool that tells us how well we are doing. I hope that all members 
of the House take the opportunity to review the report and share 
it with constituents. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Canadian Speed Skating Championships 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other day I 
made a statement about a local skating club's annual carnival. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to up the intensity level just a 
little bit. 
 
Regina and the Regina Speed Skating Club have been selected 
as the hosts of this year's Canadian Short Track Speed Skating 
Championships. These championships are being held this 
weekend beginning at noon today at the Al Ritchie arena in 
Regina. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I'll be representing the government 
at the opening ceremonies at noon today. 
 
Canada is one of the top-ranked countries in the world in short 
track speed skating. This national competition means then that 
spectators will be treated to some very high calibre 
performances by some of the top athletes in the world. Among 
those athletes — and at the risk of not leaving out too many — 
is Kim Weger from Regina, one of the top women short track 
speed skaters in the country. As well, Jeremy Gougoux from 
Quebec, the top rated men’s' skater, will be competing. 
 
Short track skating is quick, exciting, and involves a great deal 
of split-second strategy. It is a crowd-pleasing sport and there's 
competition for skaters from age 10 right up to the seniors 18 
and over. Mr. Speaker, this is the first time ever for these 
championships to be held in Regina and I want to congratulate 
the Regina Speed Skating Club for bringing them to us. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Borden Citizen of the Year 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other day the 
Deputy Premier announced formal recognition of the many 
Saskatchewan citizens who volunteer their time, money, and 
effort to make our province the finest place to live in Canada. 
Volunteers, as we all know, are the very roots of our individual 
communities. 
 
There are many people in my constituency worthy of 
recognition. One I would like to mention this morning and that's 
Mrs. Jean Newman who was recently named Borden Citizen of 
the Year for 1994. She was presented with the award by the 
1993 winner, Helen Sutherland. His Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor, has pointed out that Saskatchewan has the highest 
number of volunteers in Canada. 
 



March 31, 1995 

 
1271 

Jean Newman is a retired school teacher, having taught in 
Yorkton, Lamoyle, and Radisson. She has worked in the 
Borden Co-op and acted as secretary to the Halcyonia school 
board. She has been a 4-H leader, a founding member of the 
community museum, a member of the Anglican Church 
women's organization, and much more. In her spare time, she 
and her husband raised three daughters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the citizens of her own community have 
recognized the contribution of Jean Newman, and I am happy to 
bring that recognition to members of this Assembly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Avonlea: Female Hockey Capital of Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Did you know that 
Avonlea, at least in my view, is the female hockey capital of 
Saskatchewan? The village sent two teams to the 1990 
provincial championship tournament, and two times they were 
victorious. 
 
On March 5 the Avonlea Eagles won the bantam, 15 years of 
age and under, title. They secured the victory by defeating a 
team from Saskatoon. The tournament was held in Avonlea, 
which is also in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. One week later 
in Eston the Avonlea Eagles — this time the pee wee squad, 13 
years of age and under — were victorious. 
 
This is quite an achievement, Mr. Speaker, considering the 
Avonlea girls only joined the Queen City hockey league two 
years ago. So in two short years, both teams are provincial 
champs. 
 
I would like to congratulate the coach of both the bantam and 
pee wee teams, Tim Forer, and the manager of both teams, 
Brenda Arnold. But most of all, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
congratulate all of the girls involved in the pee wee and bantam 
provincial tournaments. 
 
And I would especially like to congratulate all the members of 
the Avonlea pee wee and bantam Eagles for capturing the very 
first provincial titles for their community, making it the female 
hockey capital of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan's Endangered Species Proclamation 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I hereby give notice that 
tomorrow at this time I will issue in this Assembly a 
proclamation which I urge and expect all members to support. 
 
Immediately after delivering of myself here, Mr. Speaker, I will 
stride outside the legislature where, with absolutely no fear or 
concern for legal or moral retribution, I will proclaim this 
statement once more for the assembled media. If they would  

take note, Mr. Speaker, that's at about 10:20 a.m. on the front 
steps. 
 
In my manifesto I will proclaim the crow as the new and most 
dangerously endangered species of Saskatchewan — indeed of 
all western Canada. 
 
I have timed my speech to the first flight of migrating whooping 
cranes passing over the dome from their winter home in Texas. 
They will dip their wings in precision to signify the passing of 
the guard. The whooper hitherto has held the precarious 
position now occupied by the crow. 
 
After eloquently urging consideration for the crow, Mr. 
Speaker, I will propose that Mr. Goodale dictate that the crow 
be engraved on one side of the new $2 coin; the other side, we 
know, will feature a purple martin, the Montreal bird which has 
feathered its own nest at the expense of the crow. 
 
It is fitting that the bird responsible for the feared extinction of 
our fine western feathered friend share the billing on this new 
coin worth $1.40 American. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
happy April Fool's Day to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Construction Tender 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Minister, on Wednesday the bids were opened on a tender 
that was recently let by SaskTel to do some office renovations 
at the SaskTel office on 2550 Empress Road. This was one of 
the first tenders to be let under your new union preference 
policy. 
 
Could you tell us the results of the tender opening: how many 
bids did you receive; what were the amounts of the bids, and 
who got the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Having spent 
— by my calculation — some eight years here, the member 
should know that such detailed questions about tenders are a 
proper subject for asking in Crown corporations. Ministers 
really cannot be expected to have such detailed information 
here. 
 
Some of the information you ask, as I tried to make note of the 
questions as your reeled them off — you had half a dozen 
questions — some of that information I do not think is revealed 
under any circumstances, but the member's better advised to ask 
such detailed questions in Crown Corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, maybe you don't  



March 31, 1995 

 
1272 

want to reveal it, but the public already knows. We have learned 
that you received three bids on this particular tender, and this is 
remarkably a low number due to your union preference policy, 
but it gets worse, Mr. Minister. Two of the three bidders 
indicated they would be unable to meet the union-hiring quotas, 
so they were disqualified. 
 
In reality you received one bid, one bid only, for your union 
preference policy. Is this the kind of competition you were 
hoping to generate for a quarter of a million dollar project? One 
bid? Mr. Minister, will you now admit that your union 
preference policy is failing? It eliminates competition, and it 
drives up the costs. Will you admit that, Mr. Minister, and get 
rid of the policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — In the short run, Mr. Speaker, 
members opposite may get away with misrepresenting this 
policy. You may get away with it in the short run. In the long 
run, your chicanery on this issue and on all others has caught up 
to you. I ask you to have a look at the latest polls done by 
anyone. That's the result of misrepresenting information, which 
you've done continuously, and you're doing on this issue, as 
well. 
 
This program is intended to provide a level playing-field for 
union and non-union alike. And given half a chance to work, I 
am confident and we are confident it'll accomplish that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
the misrepresentation is being done by your government when 
they claim that there will be no additional costs. The lowest bid 
for this particular tender was $230,000, but you didn't accept it 
because it wasn't a union-hiring quota. And you couldn't accept 
the second one for the very same reasons. 
 
The one you did accept, the only bid that met your union 
preference policy, was the highest bid at $259,900 — 13 per 
cent higher than the lowest tender. That's $30,000, Mr. 
Minister, straight from the taxpayers' pockets to the unions, 
only to satisfy your NDP (New Democratic Party) political 
agenda. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don't you do the right thing — get rid of the 
union preference policy, accept the lowest bid, and save the 
taxpayers $30,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — If . . . One of the first lessons any 
member of this caucus learns in coming here is not to accept 
information from the opposition at face value. I suspect that the 
. . . I am sure that the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Assume it's true. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well if I were to assume everything 
you people said was accurate, I would have a very strange view 
of the world, and it would contradict itself from one day to the 
next. You people have a . . . I must say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 
want to . . . There's just too much interference when the 
minister is trying to answer the question, and I ask members to 
please quit interfering. If you want the answers, then you should 
listen to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I think Thomas Hobbes's comment 
was that inconsistency is the hobgob of little minds. He didn't 
say it was the stuff of greatness, which is what you people seem 
to believe, because it's all you ever indulge in. 
 
I am sure the minister in charge of SaskTel will be reviewing 
this matter. I am quite sure he will find the facts to be very 
different than what you relate this morning. And I'm quite sure, 
come next week, you'll be on to some other issue which you'll 
be misrepresenting with equal lack of responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Transportation Partnerships Corporation 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've been telling us that your new highway 
Crown is supported by the Saskatchewan road builders. I have 
here an official position of the road builders association 
regarding the new Crown. It says, and I quote: 
 
 This association supports the creation of the Crown 

corporation providing all of the following provisions are 
contained in the legislation: 

 
 (1) all work done by open public tendering; 
 
 (2) that the corporation be specifically not allowed to 

borrow money; 
 
 (3) that there will be no union preference such as the 

Crown corporation tendering agreement; 
 
 (4) corporation be not allowed to purchase construction 

equipment or hire employees directly; 
 
 (5) corporation be responsible directly to the legislature 

and not to any government body other than the 
Department of Highways. 

 
Mr. Minister, do you intend to put all of these amendments into 
that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. Mr.  



March 31, 1995 

 
1273 

Speaker, it's very strange indeed. We have a Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation that is willing to partner with the 
private sector industry to improve roads in the province of 
Saskatchewan — some in the constituency where the member 
lives. Highway No. 1 for an example, may be an example of 
where the partnership can work to twin the highway. And we 
have them in the House saying that the program is no good. 
 
Highways 102 and 905 as an example: in that agreement with 
COGEMA and Cameco, the industry is putting up to $2 million 
into those two highways from La Ronge to Wollaston Lake, at 
no cost to the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. And 
the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, refuse to accept that as an 
innovative and a good program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
are refusing to allow an amendment that excludes the Crowns 
from the union — or this Crown — from the union preference 
policy. The road builders see this as the most important 
amendment. And after what we've just heard about the SaskTel 
tendering, it is no wonder, Mr. Minister, the road builders have 
asked us not to let this legislation pass unless this amendment is 
included; we intend to honour that request. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you include this amendment, or will we be 
forced to push this Bill past your self-imposed deadline, which 
is today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 
member opposite. The Transportation Partnerships Corporation 
will tender its work the same as the Department of Highways. 
It's a Treasury Board Crown, and I've told you that on numerous 
occasions. 
 
What you want to do is stop progress. You do not want to see 
Highway No. 1 twinned right through the constituency of 
Maple Creek. The member from Moosomin does not want the 
highway twinned through the town of Moosomin. You can go 
home and explain to your constituents that you don't want the 
highway twinned. And if that's what you want to do, that's fine. 
 

VLT Expansion 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I hope we have 
more success with the minister that I'm going to be addressing 
now. And I want to actually question the person responsible for 
gambling in Saskatchewan, but since the Premier won't answer 
questions on that, I'll direct this to the member from Regina 
Centre. 
 
Madam Minister, the town of La Ronge is so fed up with your 
VLTs (video lottery terminal) that they're planning to hold a 
plebiscite on this issue. The mayor of La Ronge went on to say 
that VLTs are victimizing the poor in La Ronge and draining 
thousands of dollars out of the local economy. And that money,  

incidentally, Mr. Speaker, is being used to pay for vote-getting 
and pre-election goodies for members opposite. 
 
Madam Minister, why not just allow every community in the 
province to have that opportunity in a province-wide plebiscite? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I never tire of 
answering the member's questions on gaming. 
 
You suggest that the person responsible for gaming expansion 
is the Premier. I'll remind you that gaming has expanded 
steadily in this province since 1969, through several 
governments. And I might add that the particular person who's 
raising a lot of this concern in La Ronge was there through all 
of those expansions, particularly the large bingo expansion that 
took place in the '80s. I don't recall him ever expressing any 
concern at that time, and I would think that there's a little bit of 
politics being played here. 
 
Now you know as well as I know that we are surrounded by 
other provinces where gaming exists, and that our people in the 
hospitality industry have to compete with these other range of 
services that are offered in the hospitality industry. It's our view 
that prohibition won't work any more in the North than it does 
in the South, and because of that we've tried to take a very 
controlled and regulated approach to gaming. Certainly there's 
careful and controlled access. Nobody under the age of 19 can 
enter these establishments. There is a moratorium on the 
number of machines in the province. 
 
I think people might be a little better put to concentrate on the 
positive developments taking place in the North, like the 
northern development fund, the development of Saskatchewan 
gold mine, McClean Lake uranium mine. These are the kinds of 
things that people would be better put to spent their time 
concentrating on as the kind of positive developments that . . . 
people can then choose the activities they care to be involved 
in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm glad 
the minister finally got through reading her script in an attempt 
to answer the question. 
 
It's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we have a 
government-sponsored, government-initiated . . . and a 
government that stands to raise a lot of money for its own 
coffers. That's what's motivating this, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, the mayor of La Ronge is quoted as saying: if 
the province allows us to take it to a vote, we're not going to be 
the only community hammering on the door. And a recent 
survey has shown, Madam Minister, that the vast majority of 
people would welcome the opportunity to have a vote on this 
issue. So what's the problem, Madam Minister? What are you 
afraid of? 
 
Perhaps we have to go one step higher in this hierarchy, and  



March 31, 1995 

 
1274 

maybe we should ask the Premier to answer the question. Are 
you intending to put gambling to a vote? For that matter, Mr. 
Premier, are you planning to put any plebiscite question to the 
people during the next election? Any question at all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll thank the member for his question, 
and I will remind him that the government does not have some 
personal and exclusive way that it spends money that goes into 
the General Revenue Fund. This money is then spun back out to 
communities for health, education, social services, roads. We 
do not use this money for any other purpose than the general 
public purpose, so to suggest that is to mislead people regarding 
the use of government funds. 
 
I don't think there's any particular advantage in pitting 
community against community in this discussion because the 
revenues are shared across the entire province, not on a 
community-by-community basis. And I think that's appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contamination of Water Supply 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I asked 
the minister responsible for Sask Water about the management 
and allocation of a Regina area groundwater which is his 
responsibility. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Environment took 
notice of the questions that day, and we have not yet received 
an answer from Sask Water. So I am obliged today to raise the 
issue again on behalf of my constituents and users of the Regina 
aquifer who, by the way, have experienced the same kind of 
evasiveness from the minister. 
 
In 1989 the city of Regina agreed to remain at its 1989 
groundwater allocation and also agreed that future water 
increases would be dealt with by pipeline expansion rather than 
further pressure on an over-allocated groundwater. 
 
To the minister for Sask Water: will you confirm that further 
licences have been issued to the city of Regina for increased 
allocation of these stressed, possibly contaminated 
groundwaters thereby increasing the risk of rural users as well 
as the people of Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I 
will confirm for the member is that there have been some 
licences issued for new wells in the aquifer that she refers to. 
As other wells are closed, new ones come on stream. I will also 
say to the member from Regina that there is no incremental 
usage. What we have done . . . replaced old wells and allowed 
old wells to be replaced with new ones. 
 
With respect to her concerns about the condition of the water, 
it's been analysed by more than one different government 
department: by Saskatchewan Water Corporation, by the 
Department of Health. The information is being compiled and 
will be sent to her as soon as we have it put together. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, this is what the government 
has said to the people concerned about this issue for a long 
time. We may have serious problems at some of the aquifer 
recharge points for the Regina aquifer, and that's at Wascana 
Creek near the city of Regina sewage treatment plant. 
 
According to a 1988 Saskatchewan Research Council report 
and the 1989 Clifton report, both commissioned by Sask Water, 
which I now table, this has been an area of possible 
contamination of the Regina aquifer since at least 1988. That is 
seven years, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday's Leader-Post article about 
a city council report, warning of possible contamination, just 
reaffirms the possible threat to the first users of the aquifers, the 
farmers, not to mention the people of Regina. 
 
Will the minister assure the farmers that he is taking all 
measures to protect them as the first users of the aquifer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me say to the member that we 
are well aware of her concerns with respect to the aquifer. And 
I would want to say that I wouldn't want her to unduly raise 
concerns with respect to the quality of the water that the people 
of this area are using from that aquifer. 
 
Now she may want to play politics with this issue, and it may be 
good local politics for her. I don't believe it is because I think 
that the people well understand that the Department of Health, 
the Department of Environment, and the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation will fulfil their mandate to ensure that there is a 
good quality of water available to the city of Regina and to the 
people in the surrounding area. 
 
So what I would ask the member is to be a little patient. People 
have spent many, many hours analysing this situation to ensure 
that there is a good quality of water available to the citizens that 
she represents. We will do what we can, working with the 
different departments to ensure on an ongoing basis that she can 
rest comfortably, knowing that this government will manage the 
water quality in this province in a very responsible way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the farmers north and west of 
Regina are worried about the integrity of the Regina aquifer. 
One dairy farmer has had recurrent problems with dying cattle 
and health problems in her family ever since the city put more 
pressure on the overallocated Regina aquifer. She and other 
farmers whose wells access the aquifer have been trying to get 
straight information from you, Mr. Minister, from the 
Department of the Environment, from Public Health and from 
the city of Regina for several years. Mr. Minister, they are 
frustrated and fear the water from the aquifer may be 
contaminated. 
 
Will you be straight with farmers, Mr. Minister, and with the 
people of Regina concerning possible contamination? 
 



March 31, 1995 

 
1275 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me again say 
to the member that if she wants to continue to play politics with 
this issue, that's fine. But let me say to her constituents in the 
Assembly today that, regarding sewage contamination of the 
aquifer that she refers to, the Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management Department have analyzed this; it's 
under their jurisdiction. And they have received no indication 
that there is any contamination due to discharges from the 
Regina sewage treatment facility, and I say that to her today. 
 
She may disagree with that, and she may want to play politics 
with the issue, and I accept that because I understand how 
Liberals do politics. But I want to say to her and, through her, to 
her constituents that the water supply is safe. It is not 
contaminated. 
 
We have been monitoring it. We're working with the 
Department of Health, the Department of Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management and the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation. And we can assure her constituents today 
that the supply of water and those around that we have 
monitored in this regard . . . are consuming a quality that is well 
within the safety limits that are required by the different 
departments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, Sask Water has ignored the 
problem and in some cases increased the burden on the 
groundwater system around Regina. Sask Water has approved 
an irrigation project that is pumping large amounts of 
groundwater to the surface, reducing the water supply that is 
available to other users on McGill Creek. The recharge point for 
this area is also being affected with return of salts, nitrates, and 
farm chemicals associated with this irrigation project. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is Sask Water, a corporation that is supposed 
to protect our water, increasing the strain on local groundwater 
by increasing usage levels and increasing the danger of 
contamination while waiving all environmental reviews and 
public advertising on the McGill Creek project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well the member can make 
allegations, and that's fair, and that's fine. But I want to correct 
her, and I would like to correct her, if I could. 
 
She refers to the allocation from the aquifer, having more 
pressure on it from the city of Regina's source. It's not factual. 
And if she would take time to acquaint herself with the 
situation, she would understand that it's used for peaking and 
when there are high areas of demand. 
 
And if she would also acquaint herself with well technology, 
she would understand that the life of a well, at some time, 
expires, and new wells will have to be drawn. We haven't put 
any more allocation from the city of Regina on the aquifer. The 
allocation from the aquifer remains the same. She may choose 
not to believe that. 
 

With respect to other water projects in this province, whether it 
be irrigation or capturing run-off, she can make all the 
allegations she wants. I would ask her to look at the information 
when we have it from all of the different departments. When 
we've got it compiled, we'll send it to her. She can do an 
analysis of it. And if she still has some concerns with respect to 
this issue, we'd be more than willing to sit down and discuss 
them with her. But I suspect, Mr. Speaker, politics is first and 
foremost on this member's mind — not safe water. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GRIP Surplus 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP blitzkrieg on rural Saskatchewan seems to never come to 
an end. After the closure of rural hospitals, the $188 million 
budget GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) rip-off, and the 
downloading of taxes onto municipalities, the NDP government 
continues to find ways to milk Saskatchewan's rural families. 
 
My question is to the architect of that rural revenge, and that's 
to the Premier of this province. Mr. Premier, can you confirm 
that your government will be looking to retrieve an additional 
$115 million in GRIP money from Saskatchewan farm families 
after the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I can quite clearly 
confirm that we will not. I've gone through these numbers with 
the member opposite a number of times. The wind-down of the 
GRIP program is taking place the same as we wound down 
tripartites. 
 
The agreement calls for each party in the agreement to get back 
their share of the GRIP surplus. We are estimating right now — 
and I think fairly accurately — that the farmers' share of the 
GRIP surplus will be $253 million. And they will receive that 
money through deferments of pay-outs again rather than 
collecting the money from the farmers and paying them back 
$253 million. 
 
At the end of it, we've chosen not to collect it and then not to 
have to pay it back. It will still be $26 million going back to 
farmers. That's our estimate at this point when GRIP is finally 
wound down. There's $112 million of the '94 premium that we 
didn't collect, $115 million of the '93 overpayment that we did 
not collect, and $26 million of final settlement that will come to 
farmers. 
 
So no, we will not be collecting that $115 million. If we do 
collect it, then we'll be legally obligated to mail it back out to 
them, and that would make no sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, no one ever believed that 
you would break their legally binding contracts a couple of  



March 31, 1995 

 
1276 

years ago. Mr. Minister, the fact is that you took $188 million, 
and you balanced your budget with it. Every farm family knows 
that. Mr. Minister, there are over 7,000 farm families with a 
dunner from your government. They understand that, and it 
amounts to $115 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, why should they trust you, after your re-election, 
that the Minister of Finance will not decide to balance her 
books once more on the backs of rural Saskatchewan? Do you 
admit, as you did in estimates . . . or on Bill 23's discussion, 
when you were directly asked that no farm family would have a 
dunner, a payback to your government, and you said you 
couldn't guarantee that? Why are you saying this morning 
something that you wouldn't say the other day? 
 
Will you guarantee that no farm family, Mr. Minister, in that 
115, will have to pay back your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I've said over and 
over and over again in this House, the $115 million is farmers' 
money. Legally and technically, we should have collected the 
$115 million and paid it back. We chose not to collect it and 
pay it back to save administration, to save farmers from cash 
flow problems. The agreement is that the farmers get back their 
share of the $253 million of the GRIP surplus. I've said that 
over and over and over again. 
 
The member opposite would like to mislead farmers and 
confuse farmers on this issue, if he possibly can. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it is very clear. Our policy is clear. The agreement is 
clear that the money will be divided between the parties, and 
farmers will get their share. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates and Supplementary Estimates to the 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Before orders of the day, I move, 
seconded by the member from Prince Albert Carlton, by leave 
of the Assembly: 
 

 That the Estimates, subvotes LG01 - LG06 and 
Supplementary Estimates, subvotes LG03 and LG04 for 
the Legislative Assembly, being vote 21, and the 
estimates for the Provincial Auditor, being vote 28, be 
withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 
Just before taking my seat, I would remind all hon. members 
this is a routine motion which is moved each year so that the 
committee on estimates can deal with this matter, with these 
votes. 
 
Leave not granted. 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — On a point of order, I guess. The reason I did 
what I did is because I don't know what he's . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, Order. Decision has been made. 
 
(1045) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to establish the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation and to enact a Consequential 

Amendment 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please reintroduce 
the officials who have joined us here today before we proceed 
to clause 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left is 
Clare Kirkland, deputy minister of Highways. And behind me 
here is Mr. Dale Beck of the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before we begin, 
by leave, I would introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to 
the members of the Assembly. I want to take this brief moment 
to introduce to you, sir, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, four people that we have sitting in the opposition 
gallery this morning: Mr. Bruce Drake, of course, and Leonard 
Wellings, and two of their companions from the road builders 
association of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would ask the members to please help me to welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — With leave, to add comments to the 
introduction of guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I would also like to welcome the 
members of the road builders. We had a good meeting the other 
day, and I'm glad you're here today to watch the proceedings. 
Please welcome the guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 31, 1995 

 
1277 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess we'll get 
on with the business at hand, which is Bill 22. And I have some 
questions I would like to ask the minister. Are we on? We're on, 
good. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister specifically this 
question. Mr. Minister, yesterday and earlier this day in 
question period we asked you a specific question. That question 
was: would you allow amendments to this piece of legislation 
that would include in principle the following points: (1) that all 
work be done by open public tendering; (2) that the corporation 
be specifically not allowed to borrow money; (3) that there will 
be no union preference or referrals such as the Crown 
corporation tendering agreement; (4) the corporation be not 
allowed to purchase construction equipment or hire employees 
directly; (4) that corporations be responsible directly to the 
legislature and not to the government body, any government 
body, other than the Department of Highways. 
 
Those are the five questions that we have asked on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan road builders association, Mr. Minister. Will you 
allow those points, in principle, each in its own way and in its 
proper place, to be placed, through amendments, into this 
legislation, making it totally clear exactly what everybody is 
going to do; exactly what is going to happen, so that there are 
no confusions and so that everybody will know exactly where 
they stand? 
 
We have, as I pointed out to you, a very sad situation in our 
province, where people in general do not trust politicians. They 
don't trust them no matter what party they come from. And I've 
asked you to help us to alleviate some of that mistrust by 
putting into your legislation here today, the exact words that 
will qualify exactly what you intend to do so that there can be 
no doubt, so that there can be no doubt at all, that you are going 
to do what you're saying you're going to do and not stab folks in 
the back later for political reasons. 
 
So, Minister, will you put these principles into this legislation 
through amendments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to 
the member opposite for his question. We've had many, many 
days of discussion on Bill 22. And I told you yesterday and I'm 
going to tell you again, I don't think you should be playing 
politics on the backs of the road builders, on the backs of 
Saskatchewan industry, on the backs of Saskatchewan people. 
We told you yesterday that we would, in principle, look at your 
amendments, and we will do that, but we will not play politics 
with this Bill. 
 

We told you that there is going to be open and public tendering. 
We've told you that on every occasion. We have told you that 
we will tender the same way the Department of Highways 
tenders presently. It's a Treasury Board Crown. I've told that to 
the road building industry; I've told that to industry; I've told 
that to the people of Saskatchewan; I tell it to you today. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
we will concede that we heard you loud and clear yesterday 
when you said that you would agree to item no. 1. However, 
there are four other important items. And just to cut through the 
chase I might as well go to item no. 3 and ask you specifically, 
are you prepared to include an amendment that will specifically 
spell out this principle, that there will be no union preferences 
or referrals, such as the Crown corporation tendering 
agreement? Will you allow that type of amendment to be put 
into your legislation today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
read one of the amendments, or part from one of the 
amendments that the opposition has sent over: where the 
corporation deems it inexpedient to let the work of the lowest 
bidder, it shall report the matter to, and obtain the authority of, 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Now it's very clear, this . . . we've used this in the Department 
of Highways since I've been there and since before. It clearly 
indicates that the lowest bidder will be used unless there is a 
circumstance and if that circumstance . . . has to go before the 
Lieutenant Governor. Now how more clear can we make it? We 
can, I suppose, go on and on on this, but I tell you right now 
that to play politics with this Bill, I don't think is the right thing 
to do. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think 
it's becoming obvious to everyone that has been listening to the 
debate over the last few years that a stalemate has been reached 
whereby it's obvious that the Minister is saying, well yes, we 
have this in the legislation but we don't intend to use it. That is 
not our objective, he says; union tendering policy alone is not 
what we're after. Yes, it's in there but we won't use it; trust us. 
 
And I know that the people of Saskatchewan, the road builders 
associations, those people that are going to be intricately 
involved and affected by this type of legislation, have simply 
told us, don't accept that. Don't accept the member's word as 
such. If that's what he intends; if that's what the objective is, 
then put it in the legislation. 
 
And we, as the opposition, have attempted to do that precisely. 
And we have those amendments before us. The Minister 
steadfastly refuses to accept that. He says, trust us. We're not 
prepared to do that. 
 
So perhaps what we need is a little bit of a cooling period, Mr. 
Minister, whereby you will come to your senses and realize that 
if indeed those are not your intentions, then there's no harm in 
putting it in legislation, making it law. Because quite frankly, 
Mr. Minister, people don't trust you. 



March 31, 1995 

 
1278 

I'm going to give you that cooling-off period pursuant to rule 
55.1 whereby we ask that Bill No. 22, An Act to establish the 
Transportation Partnerships Corporation and to enact a 
Consequential Amendment, be hoisted for that three-day 
period, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — At the request of the official opposition, under 
rule 55.1, proceedings on Bill No. 22, An Act to establish the 
Transportation Partnerships Corporation and to enact a 
Consequential Amendment, are hereby suspended for three 
sitting days. 
 
(1100) 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to establish The Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
minister to introduce the officials who have joined us here 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 
me I have Dr. Hartley Furtan, who is the deputy minister; I have 
Doug Winsor, who is from the department; and ADM (assistant 
deputy minister) Terry Scott. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
when we were visiting with this particular Bill the other day 
you indicated that you would go back and look for letters of 
intent, pieces of correspondence which your officials have had 
with the federal minister and his officials, indicating the outline 
of this larger agreement and how this fits into it. And how, I 
guess, Saskatchewan farm families can feel more comfortable 
about what you've done on their behalf vis-a-vis the . . . over the 
GRIP payment, the GRIP monies that were taken and turned 
into other programs. 
 
And I'm wondering if you're prepared at this time to table that 
correspondence so that we might have a look at it, to try and 
understand the framework of this agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have the 
pamphlet, the outline of this agreement which has been public 
for many weeks. It consists of an enhancement to the NISA (net 
income stabilization account) program which is already in 
effect and in operation. We have a program for grains and 
oil-seeds  we call it the sector program for grains and 
oil-seeds  which is in effect at this time. It includes crop 
insurance, which is in effect. 
 
The piece of the agreement dealing with the research and 
development side of the equation is here and is outlined in this 
Bill that we're presenting here today, clearly outlines our side of 
this funding. The Act is here for us to approve. The federal 
funding commitment is not in a formal agreement and won't be 
in a formal agreement until we get this particular Bill through. 
 

We have correspondence between myself and the minister, and 
documents between the departments. Again, those are 
documents that . . . letters that were used in negotiation. And at 
this time, I'm not prepared to table those because I do not have 
permission from the federal minister, who is out of the country, 
to table those particular letters at this time. 
 
I can table the document that outlines the agreement. Again, it's 
public knowledge and most pieces of this agreement are being 
put into effect now. This is the last piece, the research and 
development side of it. We need to get this Bill passed through 
here in order to be able to formally sign an agreement with the 
federal government for their $64 million which is committed to 
this fund. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I'm 
disappointed in that. I would have thought that you and your 
officials would have been working overtime in order to come 
up with the problem, our problem. And I clearly remember 
when the New Democrats were in opposition being very, very 
critical of the government coming to the House with time lines 
saying that legislation had to be passed by such-and-such a date 
or else. 
 
And what you've effectively done is come to the opposition 
here and said, we brought this Bill in a few weeks ago. You'd 
better pass it by the end of March, or else I'm in trouble because 
the Finance minister will be angry with me and the Premier will 
be angry with me and I've got to move my money around in a 
different way because it messes up her budget numbers if it 
comes out of '94-95 instead of '95-96. 
 
And you put the gun to the head of the opposition, and have 
people around the province phoning us because they're worried 
 and they're the people that'll legitimately benefit by this Act 
in R&D (research and development), and we're all in agreement 
with R&D — and say, opposition, you don't have any choice 
but you got to pass this Bill by March 31. 
 
And I don't really appreciate that process. And that's why I think 
it has been reasonable for us to ask you about the agreements 
that you have in place. And you say, well I don't have any. Well 
I don't know if you knew the minister was going to muck off to 
South America or not, but his officials and his deputies sure as 
heck knew where he was going. 
 
So he's out of the country; he can't answer. You say, I can't 
answer because he's out of the country and I've got this 
deadline, and you're to blame, opposition, if I don't get this 
through, when you've known for months and months and 
months — since last October, you told me — that you had the 
agreement in place and you were going to put it through. 
 
And the Minister of Finance has got in the road and said you 
can't get it through unless you do it with supplementary 
estimates out of the previous budget year. And then say that I 
and the opposition caucus are at fault for the mess that you're 
in. 
 



March 31, 1995 

 
1279 

And I don't appreciate that. I mean if a guy just wanted to be 
downright ugly, I'd stand up here and just hoist the silly thing 
just to be ornery, just to be ornery. I mean I remember in the . . . 
prior to '91 that's usually what happened in here when there was 
any sort of a deadline. It was, just be ornery — nothing else — 
just be ornery. 
 
Well I don't operate like that. I've always been as reasonable as 
possible with people and that's why I would really clearly like to 
understand the parameters of this agreement. 
 
There is no federal money coming until 1996 as you have told 
us. And not one signature or anything from the federal minister 
that say that there's an absolute guarantee on that. No guarantee 
at all. I'm supposed to take your word for it. And right now the 
media says that you and the federal minister aren't doing a 
whole lot of chatting about anything. And that's the problem we 
have. Plus this deadline. 
 
I mean was . . . Maybe you could answer this. Was it your 
preference to have this deadline or was it the preference of the 
Minister of Finance to have the deadline? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It was my preference to have this 
fund up and operating absolutely as quickly as possible. 
 
That's why we're . . . $18 million is out of '94-95 funding, and 
the member well knows that the year ends on March 31. 
Certainly it was my preference to have this up and operating as 
quickly as possible and without any delay. 
 
That's what it's all about, to get this up . . . get the fund going, 
get the board appointed, and be prepared to get on with the 
value added in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — You didn't answer my question. What, in 
your mind, is the magic about March 31 as opposed to April 
10? Or if you'd have been doing . . . if you'd have got your 
agreement signed with Goodale earlier on, you could have done 
it at the beginning of this session rather than March 31. What's 
the magic about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The magic of March 31, the 
member well knows, it's the end of the '94-95 calendar year, or 
the fiscal year for the Government of Saskatchewan. What this 
Act is proposing is to spend money from the '94-95 fiscal year 
to get this fund up and running. This Bill has been in the House 
a for good long time. You well know the process of bringing a 
Bill to this House. It was introduced and had first reading and 
second reading, and it's been in here twice in Committee of the 
Whole where it's been delayed and held up. 
 
So the Bill is . . . certainly we were prepared to do this Bill. We 
had the agreement. As I said earlier, the agreement that we had 
was as early as last fall and this is the results of this agreement. 
As I say, this is the last piece of the agreement that falls into 
place. 

You may say that there's no legal guarantee for the federal 
government to live up to their agreement. That may well be the 
case. I don't know why delaying this Bill would enhance that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well it's very difficult, Minister, for me to 
keep my temper. This Bill never came into this House until 
February 27 for the first time and went through the normal 
process. It never got to second reading until March 13. You 
know, that's not a great deal of time. 
 
I am responsible as the agricultural critic for the official 
opposition to account to people in rural Saskatchewan for $91 
million of their money — $91 million of GRIP money which 
you and Goodale have turned around and said it didn't make any 
sense to put it out to you in an acreage payment because there 
wasn't enough to affect anything. We're going to do it in a 
different way in research and development and value added, 
and you got to trust us that we're smarter than you are, even 
though we broke your contract. 
 
I mean your explanation to me about why you had to get it in 
here. That hasn't stopped you before. You can break a contract 
just like that. Use this House, change timetables, say anything 
you want — you've done it. You know? There was never any 
hesitation to do that. 
 
So the magic here escapes me. It really does on that . . . on a 
very short amount of time for that amount of money, and yet 
you want this thing passed. No guarantee, no correspondence, 
and ask me to trust you with that amount of money, of GRIP 
money. It's a really tough pill to swallow, Minister, really tough. 
 
Will you commit that before we are done with the estimates of 
the Minister of Agriculture in this House, this spring, you will 
be prepared to table to the House the agreement — and that's 
predicated on you having your legislation passed — that you 
will be prepared to table the agreement that you have with Mr. 
Goodale to ensure that the farmers' GRIP money, which you 
have redirected, will be guaranteed in this program over the 
next four years, before your estimates are finished, which 
should be sometime in the middle of May? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, the process here was, this Bill 
will be passed; an OC (order in council) will be passed where 
we sign a formal agreement with the federal government. And 
once we have that agreement signed, we will certainly table 
that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So you're saying that you anticipate the 
agreement will be signed and the guarantees will be in place 
and that you'll have it to bring to the estimates of the 
Department of Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, I anticipate that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay. I appreciate that. 
 
I yesterday talked to the minister, Mr. Chairman, about some  



March 31, 1995 

 
1280 

amendments that would be possible in various areas of the Bill. 
We had strong concern  and have had conversations with 
people out in agriculture  about who should control this fund. 
Should it be producers, primary producers, secondary 
producers, or probably the people that will receive the funds 
and government bureaucrats, and I think I'd like the minister to 
respond to those initiatives that we've proposed to have 
producer control implemented. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite is quite correct. We had discussion yesterday pursuing 
structure of the board and quorum. I think the member opposite 
has made some good points, and we would be prepared to 
accept the amendments that he has proposed. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That's good news, Mr. Minister, because I 
think most producers out there want to feel some ownership of 
this process. They want to clearly understand that this thing will 
be for their benefit and not the benefit of either politicians 
electioneering or people in the federal or provincial 
bureaucracies who are off on some type of an agenda — that 
the producers will actually have some say in how this goes. 
 
So with that commitment, Mr. Minister, I think we can get on 
with going through the clause by clause of this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have an 
amendment here that will deal with clause 6 and the number of 
representatives that will be on the board for the primary 
producers and the secondary producers. 
 
We discussed it with the minister previously that one-third was 
not appropriate; that it should be some higher number. And we 
have the agreement of the minister on this. 
 
So I would move: 
 
 That clause 6 of the printed Bill be amended by striking 

out the words "at least one-third" where they occur in 
subsection 6(1) and substituting the words "at least a 
majority". 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This one also 
we had some concerns with, about who would form the quorum 
or how many representatives of the producers would be on the 
quorum structure. We have discussed this one also with the 
minister and have his agreement to it. So I would move: 

 That clause 7 of the printed Bill is amended by adding 
the words ", which shall include at least 50 per cent of 
the primary or secondary producers that are members of 
the Fund" immediately after the words "quorum of the 
Board" where they occur in subsection (7). 

 
I so move. 
 
The Chair: — Can we take the amendment as read? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, we just would like 
that read one more time, please. 
 
The Chair: — The question is the amendment moved by 

the member from Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That clause 7 of the printed Bill is amended by adding 

the words ", which shall include at least 50 per cent of 
the primary or secondary producers that are members of 
the Fund" immediately after the words "quorum of the 
Board" where they occur in subsection (7). 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to 
thank the officials for coming in and helping out with the 
deliberations on the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we'd like to thank the 
opposition for their consideration and cooperation and working 
with on us on the Bill, and also the officials for the information 
that was supplied. 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you. With leave, I'd like to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, to you and through 
you to my colleagues in the Assembly, I'd like to introduce two 
young men seated in the west gallery, Kevin Baker and Jim 
Bobst, who have in the last little while shown a great deal of 
interest in the political process. And I'm delighted to see them 
here, and I would ask you to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move the committee rise and report 
considerable progress, although not as much as we would have  



March 31, 1995 

 
1281 

liked, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

SUSPENSION PURSUANT TO RULE 55.1 
 

Bill No. 22  An Act to establish the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation and to enact a Consequential 

Amendment 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, first I want to advise you 
that at the request of the member for Rosthern, under rule 55.1, 
proceedings on Bill No. 22, an Act to establish the 
Transportation Partnerships Corporation and to enact a 
Consequential Amendment has been suspended for three sitting 
days. 
 
(1130) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to establish The Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read the first and 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move Bill No. 23 be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I'm advised it will be 
about 15, 20 minutes before His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor is able to join us for Royal Assent. I think we'll 
therefore go into Committee of Finance. I have to beg people's 
patience because we'll have to rise from Committee of Finance, 
I think, to receive the Lieutenant Governor. So I think we're 
going into Committee of Finance now. When he arrives, we'll 
rise and receive the Lieutenant Governor in the usual fashion. 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 
Vote 25 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, I would ask the 
minister to introduce the officials who have joined us here 
today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. I'd like to introduce with 
me today . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. I'd like to introduce today  

Marv Hendrickson, the deputy minister of SIMAS 
(Saskatchewan Indian Affairs Secretariat); Ernie Lawton, 
assistant deputy minister of Indian Affairs; and John Reid, the 
executive director or policy and planning. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I'd 
like to begin . . . I have a have a few questions that have been 
. . . I guess are nagging questions, especially in the rural 
community. 
 
And coming back to some of this treaty land entitlement and the 
number of the land sales that are now taking place throughout 
the province, certainly in my area and other jurisdictions or 
areas of this province where settlement of native land claims 
. . . in some cases we have Crown land that is being used to 
honour some of the agreements and honour settlement. And 
some of that land or a fair portion of that land happens to be 
land that is presently utilized as pasture land, Crown land that is 
being utilized as pasture land. 
 
I realize some of that is out of your jurisdiction as it's PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Association) run pastures, but there 
are some provincial pastures as well. 
 
And I'm just wondering, Madam Minister, what your 
department is doing to alleviate some of the fears and the 
problem that . . . The major concern that is being raised and is 
being brought to our attention is the uncertainty as to whether 
that pasture land will now be available for grazing  whether 
the department is into or has an understanding with the federal 
government regarding PFRA pastures and whether there's an 
understanding with regards to ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and any of the pastures that they 
would maintain, whether this land, if it does transfer under the 
treaty land entitlement, will be available to these ranchers and 
to these farmers who do lease land. 
 
Because if it isn't, Madam Minister, a number of producers find 
themselves in a predicament as to where they find the pasture 
then to graze their livestock either this year or in the years to 
come. 
 
And I'm wondering if you can kind of bring us up to date where 
we are on that agreement and how we are addressing or how 
your department is addressing those concerns that are out there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, thank you for the question. 
An agreement was signed in 1992 which provided the 
framework for treaty land entitlements. And the main principle 
in this agreement was to resolve outstanding treaty obligations. 
But a very important principle that was included in this was the 
concept of willing buyer/willing seller. And certainly the 
province and the federal government and the Indian bands have 
been working on a principle of discussing and negotiating with 
people who have interest — third party interests — in the land 
to try to reach agreement. 
 



March 31, 1995 

 
1282 

Now sometimes that's difficult. But my experience is that in 
most instances the actual use of the land itself often doesn't 
change at all; all that changes is who's administering the land. 
In the case of our pastures, 75 per cent of the people who use 
the pasture must agree. And in the federal instance, they're not 
obliged to the 75 per cent, but they are obliged to discuss with 
other persons who use the pastures. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So, Madam 
Minister, what you're basically saying is that on the provincial 
side, on the provincial scenario, you have an understanding 
whereby the patrons of that pasture that's provincially owned, 
75 per cent of those patrons must agree to a land sale. 
 
What I'm wondering, when we talk about agreeing to a land 
sale, in the discussions you've had, the fact that this land may be 
up . . . and you talked about equal buyer . . . or I mean, I don't 
know. I just don't remember the exact word you used about the 
fact that a fair buyer/fair seller or other person has that 
opportunity to sell it or purchase it. 
 
In this agreement with regards to pastures and the fact that the 
75 per cent in favour, what . . . how does the agreement . . . or 
what type of agreement have you reached that would allow 
producers to have a confidence in the fact that they still have 
access to the pasture if they vote in favour of it then? 
 
When I'm saying that, Madam Minister, I'm suggesting that 
there must be something that says that the producers themselves 
do have access to continue use or lease of this pasture land for 
an indefinite period of time or for a long enough period of time 
to allow them to seek alternative sources if, down the road, that 
pasture is then going to be taken out of access to them. And so 
I'm wondering . . . Because it seems to me there's no sense 
going to the producers to get their approval unless there's an 
understanding of what you really mean by making this land 
available for native land entitlement process. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What ever agreement would be signed 
with an Indian band would be as legally binding as any 
agreement that we would currently have with the people who 
occupy that land. In the initial stages of some of the settlements, 
what we're trying to do is establish a model for how this would 
proceed in other areas. 
 
And Thunderchild would be a good example of that. All the 
stakeholders have been involved, and we are really working on 
the notion of long-term arrangements as opposed to short-term 
arrangements. So I think that people who enter into these 
agreements can do so in the confidence that all parties have 
thoroughly considered their obligations and will live by them. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Toth: — So does that mean, Madam Minister, that the 
negotiations that are taking place, you're basically talking to the 
producers out there as well as the native bands in the area who 
would be looking at possibly purchasing that land? Or does the 
government have a clear-set policy whereby you just go to the  

producers and say, this is what we're proposing? Does it look 
good enough to you? Or is there an involvement from the 
producer community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The agreements, when you're referring 
to producer involvement, the agreements are between the first 
nation and the producer. And either our department, SIMAS, or 
the Department of Agriculture may well get involved in helping 
to work through the process. But it is primarily an arrangement 
between the first nation and the producer. And we'll also take 
other special steps like contracting with a mediator to help the 
community resolve the issue. 
 
But really I guess one of the advantages of this process is the 
community undergoing these discussions that may not have 
taken place in the past and certainly need to take place in order 
to proceed in the future with the different kind of relationship. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So basically what 
you're saying then is as the discussion takes place and if a 
provincial pasture happens to be part of that discussion or be 
part of an area that a native band would look to as fulfilling 
some of the land entitlement, that that band then will — 
representatives or the band itself — will take the time to sit 
down with the actual producers and come to some form of 
consensus or agreement before an actual agreement is laid out. 
Is that what I understand? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that would be an accurate 
statement. It has to be formally signed. 
 
And I might mention that some discussions have been going on 
for some generations. So this is not always a very speedy 
process although we have been trying to move along from the 
signing of the 1992 agreement. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess another question that comes up, Madam 
Minister, is the fact of maintenance of roads and certainly 
hospital and education taxation that local schools and hospitals 
have that they derive from RMs (rural municipality) at the 
present time. 
 
But I think the biggest concern is road maintenance. And 
certainly it is a concern, even more so this year in the area of 
the province that I represent because of the extreme weather 
conditions we've had over the past month. About three weeks 
ago it looked like well, we're into it. We had some good 
snowfall, and we've had a nice snowfall. This snow is starting 
to melt, and  boy  it's going to be a good spring because 
we're going to have moisture around, but the roads are going to 
dry up — no major problems. 
 
And then we ended up with two . . . We thought one wet 
snowstorm with rain was bad, but we've had three since then 
and some of the roads are really atrocious. And in fact, most 
RMs have really set a limit as to the weight load that can travel 
on the roads. 
 
And the concern that I'm raising is when you have a parcel of  



March 31, 1995 

 
1283 

land . . . Okay, you've got a willing buyer over  say  on the 
north-west part of an RM, and then there's an area where 
someone decides no, I want to continue to farm this land, and 
then you get down to another about two or three miles down the 
road. So you've got a parcel of land that now becomes part of 
native treaty land entitlements. 
 
And the concern is, who is going to maintain that road 
especially . . . are the RMs going to get compensation for the 
maintenance of that road and property? Are the natives being 
included in helping to compensate for road maintenance? Or are 
they going to expected to provide the road maintenance? 
 
What access and what channels do people have with to view, if 
they feel, at the end of the day that the road program or the 
roads in this area are really being destroyed because there's a 
section that's properly maintained? And then you've got a 
section that may be part of a treaty land entitlement that isn't 
properly being maintained? 
 
What agreements have you arrived at? And I realize we've had 
some discussion on this, but a period of time has lapsed since 
that last discussion. Has there been any more movement, any 
more understanding? I'm sure you've probably met with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) officials. 
They're got that concern. Where do we sit today in relation to or 
regard to all of this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for your question. The first 
thing I would like to respond to is the concern over SARM 
being included in these discussions. And I would say that we 
are working very closely with SARM on all of these related 
issues that affect them. 
 
There is a formal provision for tax loss compensation in the 
1992 agreement. It includes 25 million for RMs, which applies 
fairly specifically to roads, and 25 million for school boards. 
 
As far as service goes, each first nation would sign a service 
agreement that suits the particular circumstances in the area 
where they are. Existing road agreements between 
municipalities and reserves are 20 years old. And in some cases, 
some of those are now being renegotiated. And one example I 
would bring to your attention is Big River which has reached a 
very satisfactory conclusion, and we're hoping that Big River 
can become a model for other agreements that are signed on 
service. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
you indicated 25 million for roads and 25 million to school 
boards. Where is that funding coming from? Is that coming 
from the provincial treasury or is this a joint agreement between 
the federal and provincial government, or is most of this money 
coming out of the federal government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Under the agreement, the 
compensation, tax laws compensation, is a shared arrangement 
between the federal and the provincial government with each 
party paying 50 per cent. 

Mr. Toth: — And how is this money distributed? Is it a 
cost-share basis, or are you looking at a percentage of the funds 
being allocated over a period of time? Or is this money invested 
in a fund, and then each RM that would be affected, as far as 
road maintenance, would get a percentage of the investment 
return per year so it basically then goes on into perpetuity, I'm 
suggesting, or in school boards? Is that basically the same way? 
Is that's how it's being handled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The monies are paid into a trust fund 
that's administered by SARM, and annual grants in lieu of taxes 
are paid to the municipality out of the trust fund in perpetuity. 
And the same exists for school boards within that same fund. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
based on that, that's one of the thoughts I had in the back of my 
mind. And I'm getting away a bit from Indian and Metis Affairs, 
but when I look at the Crow benefit and how it's allocated, that 
was certainly something that I thought might have been an 
avenue whereby the province of Saskatchewan certainly could 
have maintained, if you will, a transportation type of program. 
And it's unfortunate that possibly that avenue wasn't pursued a 
few years ago when there was the potential for a fair amount of 
funds. 
 
And I realize that you weren't here, and it's certainly not within 
your department's purview, but I think what you have arrived at 
. . . or the decision and how you're handling it, I would suggest, 
is certainly a fair and equitable way to handle the fund. And it 
continues to be there, rather than a lump sum that's dispersed 
today, gone tomorrow, and then an RM down the road 10 years 
has nothing to compensate it. So I appreciate that. 
 
Madam Minister, we had a bit of a discussion the last time we 
met over the audit investigation of the Metis Nation’s finances 
and the fact that the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
decided not to charge the MNS (Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan). I'm wondering, have there been any further 
involvements regarding this? Are there still concerns arriving 
from this? 
 
It seems to me the Metis Nation . . . some of the Metis people 
are not totally satisfied with how the process has been handled, 
or was handled at that time, and I'm wondering where we sit 
today and whether there are still concerns being brought to your 
attention that should be reviewed, or what the department has 
done. Or is this basically a matter that is now closed and 
complete and everyone has basically accepted the 
recommendations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I wanted to provide the member with a 
bit of background on some of the history and then bring it up to 
date with the current situation. Any criminal or investigative 
activity that was taking place is all over and completed. And 
last year the province did provide funding for Deloitte & 
Touche to get involved in working directly with the 
organization — reviewing all of their systems, their finances, 
and to provide direction and advice to them on that. 
 



March 31, 1995 

 
1284 

Now at the end of that process, the MNS and ourselves and the 
federal government accepted the plan that was arrived at, and 
our information to date is that they still want this kind of 
assistance in dealing with their finances. 
 
They do still face serious issues of debt retirement and cash 
flow, but certainly in any of my meetings with representatives 
in the last while there is a strong desire within the organization 
to be accountable, to be seen to be accountable, and to restore 
some public confidence in their operations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
believe when we had completed our discussions the last time 
we were here, we were discussing, or we were in the process of 
discussing, sentencing circles. And if I'm not mistaken there 
was a headline in the paper just the other day, and I just failed 
to grab the headline talking about sentencing circles and how 
they are working, how well they're working, how they are 
meeting the needs of our native community. 
 
The one headline I do have actually goes back a little while, and 
what it basically is is . . . and I'm going to quote from an article 
that says: Many people are unaware of what this means — 
meaning regarding sentencing circles. Why is the offender not 
given a sentence by the court like everyone else? What is a 
sentencing circle and how does it work? Why is a circle 
preferable to the regular sentencing process? How can an 
offender get into sentencing circles? And this article I'm 
quoting from, is I believe it's out of the Star-Phoenix, addresses 
these questions. 
 
And there were a number of general ideas brought forward as to 
the process of sentencing circles, and I'm wondering if you can 
inform us to date, Madam Minister, how that process has 
worked — that sentencing process of using sentencing circles 
— has worked in the past; how you perceive it working into the 
future? 
 
(1200) 
 
It would seem to me from my observations that it certainly has 
provided an avenue whereby the native community can have 
some involvement in addressing some of the problems in 
dealing with crime and dealing with, if you will, offenders out 
of the native community regarding sentencing and regarding the 
justice system. And it would appear to me that this may be a 
fair and equitable way of addressing some of the concerns and 
hopefully, at the end of the day, rather than — if I can use the 
phrase  building more institutions, we maybe can address 
some of the compensation factors that arise from a number of 
the crimes. 
 
In a lot of cases a lot of these crimes are fairly minor crimes — 
and I'm not saying it's not just the native community, it certainly 
is all segments of society that we have this type of criminal 
activity. And yet people themselves feel that they do not receive 
the compensation, that the proper sentence isn't . . . a person 
isn't really reprimanded for the actions done and the effect it has 
had on the innocent bystander. 

And so I'm wondering, Madam Minister, can you bring us up to 
date as to where we are, how the process is working, and how 
you see it working into the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member from 
Moosomin for his thoughtful comments on the subject. It is a 
new area as far as implementation goes, and because of that I 
think there'll be many discussions that need to be taken before 
the thing works as everybody hopes it has the potential to do. 
 
You will realize that it is the Minister of Justice who has total 
responsibility for this. So, although I'm familiar with some of 
the discussions around this, I have no direct involvement in it. 
 
I will say that there have been discussions over concerns raised 
between the chief of the federation, the Minister of Justice, and 
the federal government, on improving and defining further the 
role of sentencing circles. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess that's 
. . . I would just . . . The reason I raised the question is because 
it deals with the native area and the native responsibility of your 
department in some ways. Even though it comes out of the 
Department of Justice there's still, it would seem to me, an 
avenue whereby the Indian and Metis Affairs is possibly 
involved or questions are raised as to how they deal with the 
process. And any involvement or any ideas that may come . . . 
arrive out of your department that the Justice Department could 
implement or use in their arguments, if you will, or their 
justification of this type of a sentencing . . . and that's the basis 
on which I was raising it. 
 
And I guess the question would be, does your department 
cooperate with the Justice department and native organizations 
in planning sentencing circles? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. You may be familiar with a 
document that was just recently released, Towards a Shared 
Destiny, which lays out the Government of Saskatchewan's 
commitment to its relationship with aboriginal policy and with 
the community affected by that framework agreement. Certainly 
the concept of sentencing circles and the idea of some self-
determination in the conduct of justice flows from this 
agreement and the principles outlined in the agreement, so 
you're right in the sense of, it is part of the policy framework. 
 
Within this document, under justice reform, we've laid out the 
broad objectives of reducing the incidence and the effects of 
crime, promoting understanding of and respect for positive 
justice values and processes, and fostering a justice system 
that's more respectful of and respected by aboriginal peoples 
and therefore more likely to be honoured. 
 
The one comment I would make, seeing as you were waxing a 
little bit philosophical, is one of the things that's happened 
when our society has worked with other people is we've quite 
often taken the position that they should adjust to all of our 
ways of doing things. And I think what we're moving into is an 
era where perhaps we're able to look at practices that have  



March 31, 1995 

 
1285 

developed in other cultures and to see whether in fact there's 
other things that we could benefit from that have been 
developed in other areas. And certainly sentencing circles, in 
terms of community accountability and accountability of people 
to their community, is a useful principle to explore within the 
broader justice system. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At l2:08 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 23  -  An Act to establish The Agri-Food Innovation 

Fund 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:10 p.m. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, before we go to 
Committee of Finance, I think perhaps it might be well if this 
House were to express its appreciation to the Lieutenant 
Governor. His Honour delayed a meeting which was important 
to him, just to be here. So I think it might be well if this House 
just expressed its appreciation for his courtesy in attending here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With leave, I move we go to 
Committee of Finance. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
Madam Minister, it's come to my attention that in some areas of 
the province certain literature is being passed around that is 
derogatory to our native citizens. And some of this has been 
found in my own constituency. It's been found in Estevan. It's 
been found in Prince Albert, and various other areas of the 
province. 
 
In particular I am talking about a booklet that's titled No. 2 
Word Search Puzzles, and perhaps you're familiar with the 
particular pamphlet. I would call on the pages to make a 
photocopy of it and send this over to you. There's also been an 
article in the paper dealing with this particular issue in the 
Leader-Post, written by Trevor Sutter, who's dealt with this, 
talked to Donna Greschner about it. 

I'm just wondering, what is your department prepared to do or 
what is your department doing about this particular booklet. 
The person who brought this up to me in Carlyle said that she 
went on a search to find out just how widespread this was. She 
found that not only in Carlyle but also in Estevan in our area, 
and according to the newspaper report it's also been found in, as 
I said, Prince Albert and Moosomin. So, Madam Minister, what 
are you doing about this particular type of literature and what 
are you doing to prevent it from coming into our province? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I want to go through a little bit of 
the broad context for this so you can get a sense of the larger 
context that specific items would be dealt within. We are 
committed as a government to dealing with and overcoming 
inequities and barriers based on racial and cultural differences. 
 
We do recognize that all citizens of the province should 
understand and appreciate the history and culture and status of 
Indian and Metis peoples, and we take a promotional and 
educational approach to developing understanding and 
appreciation for Indian and Metis cultures. There's some 
initiatives in curriculum development and in a range of other 
areas. 
 
Preventative measures are important, but on particular issues 
when things arise like this, we would pursue those kinds of 
things directly with the Human Rights Commission. And I 
appreciate the member for being concerned and for bringing 
this material to my attention. I hadn't seen it directly. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. It 
seems that this particular booklet had been around some time 
previously and reappeared again. So it's not the first time. 
 
In fact when the lady who contacted me phoned . . . when her 
friend who initially found this phoned the company that was 
producing it, or where it had come out of, they said they had 
pulled this particular book off the shelves nine months before. 
And yet within our area it was being found on the shelf still. 
 
So it seems to be a problem that doesn't go away after the first 
complaint; it keeps reappearing. And I'm not just sure how 
these booklets get transferred around — whether, if somebody 
pulls them off the shelf, if they pop back up some place else 
later because they sell them cheaply, you know, as a bargain, to 
somebody else. 
 
I'm not . . . I wonder if you could look into that, Madam 
Minister, to try and ensure that this does not reappear. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we would undertake to do that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
One of the other issues that comes up in my own constituency is 
dealing with the Pheasant Rump Reserve, and there has been 
some concerns there about the operation of the band, and it's  



March 31, 1995 

 
1286 

been under investigation. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, if you can give us an outline of 
what's happening there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The particular situation that you're 
referring to at Pheasant Rump is a specific claim, and as such 
it's not under the 1992 agreement. So this is something where 
the band is dealing directly with the federal government on this 
issue. 
 
And we'd like to help with the situation and we have tried to put 
ourselves forward to the federal government to assist, but they 
are really not interested in us being involved in this. It's 
between themselves and the band. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
It always also seems to be a problem on some of the reserves as 
to how welfare is dealt with. Now is your department and the 
welfare . . . Social Services department deal only with natives 
when they're off the reserve as far as welfare is concerned, so 
you actually have no impact on how the circumstances may be 
dealt with on the reserve? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There is an agreement that in regards to 
on-reserve assistance — that's all federal government . . . and 
there is some limited instances where in the North some bands 
are delivering some off reserve as well because of the nature of 
what would be effective in a more remote location like that. 
 
The general principle is that the federal government follows 
provincial rates in making sure that there is a level 
playing-field, because of course you would have people 
choosing where to live if there was a lot of difference between 
the two approaches. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, do the bands have any 
input on whether or not a recommendation that a band member 
who is living off the reserve, perhaps because no housing is 
available on the reserve . . . do they have any input on who does 
receive welfare? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Generally, no, would be the answer to 
your question. 
 
There is good communication between the bands and our 
department and we try to work closely on these questions. 
There is no particular input on housing. And it's really the band, 
the band administration, and the federal government that works 
on this. And the federal government really performs more of an 
audit function. It's more the band that administers it itself and 
the federal government that just reviews and satisfies 
themselves as to the conduct. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well in circumstances, Madam Minister, 
where there is not enough housing on a particular reserve, does 
Sask Housing become involved in housing off of the reserves 
dealing with band members who, because there is no housing,  

have to live off of the reserve? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll try to divide the answer up into two 
pieces. Where that kind of a situation does apply is, in some of 
the urban areas there's federal-provincial, cost-shared programs 
between SHC (Saskatchewan Housing Corporation) and CMHC 
(Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) through 
Indian-managed boards in urban areas to provide housing. And 
this would tend to occur in the larger urban centre. 
 
As regards other housing, it would just fall under the regular 
social housing programs in the province and would have no 
particular direct attachment to being for band members. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So bands would have no input on 
housing outside of the reserve jurisdiction. So when someone 
from the band can't find housing on the reserve and goes 
outside of the reserve to find that housing, the band has no 
impact on that whatsoever? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Their input would be primarily through 
the boards of these housing corporations that I referred to in the 
previous answer. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. And these boards though are only 
dealing in urban circumstances. Now am I to take urban 
circumstances to mean the cities, or a small village in rural 
Saskatchewan would also classify as an urban setting, would it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's mostly in large urban centres, but 
there is the odd place like Fort Qu'Appelle that does have some 
provision. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, what kind of impact or provisions 
do the bands have with housing off of the reserves, and would 
that housing deal with Sask Housing or some other agency? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The boards are made up of the Indian 
band members, and the policies are developed in direct 
cooperation with CMHC and SHC. I guess maybe some of 
comments that are at the source of your question is yes, there is 
a shortage of housing. There always has been, and it's a difficult 
thing to overcome because the need is greater than the supply. 
But certainly every effort is made to keep cooperating and 
working on these issues together. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I don't think it's 
any secret that there's a shortage of housing on reserves, and I 
don't . . . That hasn't changed in the last three and a half years, 
and it probably hasn't changed in the last 100 years, so I don't 
hold my breath in waiting for there to be a surplus of housing 
on reserves. So, Madam Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Turn blue? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I have been blue for a long time, Madam 
Minister. 
 
I'd like to go back to the welfare side of it a bit if I could,  



March 31, 1995 

 
1287 

please. On the reserves, the federal government deals solely 
with . . . in conjunction with the native bands on the reserves in 
supplying welfare to their citizenry. Off the reserve it's supplied 
by the provincial government. Are there any inputs, 
recommendations, any provisions for some sort of 
communication between the band and Social Services to deal 
with welfare off the reserve? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There clearly have been two 
administrative systems over the years, and of course this is not 
particularly useful as far as even keeping track of the whole 
system. But there are discussions going on about changing the 
way that process is managed and having a single-service 
provider, which may in fact end up being a tribal council that 
then is able to know the people they're dealing with more 
directly and are able to deal with the movement on and off 
reserve in a more direct way. 
 
So those kinds of discussions are taking place. There's nothing 
concluded yet, but we see this as the direction it's going in. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you 
have joint federal-provincial delivery of the program, what form 
of monitoring do you have in place to ensure that a person isn't 
receiving assistance both on the reserve, federally, and off the 
reserve, through the provincial system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I wouldn't want to venture much 
further into these questions because it is a Social Service 
purview. But I'll say that Social Services and the federal 
government meet on a monthly basis and review these kinds of 
matters. So I think there's a system right now that adequately 
handles that, but you might want to ask the minister responsible 
for Social Services more detail about that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I can 
certainly understand your reluctance to answer any questions in 
this area. Even the Minister of Social Services is reluctant to 
answer any questions in this area. 
 
Madam Minister, when you talk about turning the system . . . or 
changing the direction of the system and turning it over to a 
tribal council decision base, where they would review and know 
the clientele somewhat better than perhaps the department does, 
what form of accountability have you been considering in that 
area? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There are formal discussions taking 
place between Indian bands, the federal government, the 
provincial government. But what I would say is that whenever 
an agreement is arrived at in any area that involves transfers of 
authorities, a fundamental part of those agreements is also the 
transfer of accountabilities. And what the principle has been to 
date is largely what applies to the provincial system also applies 
to the other system in terms of accountability. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I have  

some concerns in this area, and I can't say that these concerns 
reflect the general mood across the province, but it has come to 
my attention that at times, particularly on the reserves 
themselves, that the delivery of social assistance can be a very 
haphazardous thing that is perhaps influenced at times by your 
relationship within the community. 
 
And if the whole delivery of social assistance on the reserve 
and to those band members outside of the reserve . . . I see 
some potential hazards there. And band members have brought 
forward concerns to me about this particular type of delivery 
that's already in place on their reserves. Now whether that's an 
isolated circumstance to one reserve, I don't know. But there is 
a concern there, Madam Minister, by some of the band 
members who would then be eligible to receive social 
assistance. It may depend on your relationship to the other 
community members as to how that would be delivered to them. 
 
And so I'm wondering, what do you contemplate in place if you 
go to, as you suggested, a tribal council delivery system to 
ensure that all members receive access to the benefits based on 
their need and not some other criteria? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What you've actually managed to do is 
portray quite accurately all of our concerns with federal 
government offloading. They sometimes provide some dollars 
to deliver the actual service but not for the administration of the 
service and the program management of the service. Certainly 
there is difficulties created when there's shortage of housing and 
other pressures that get created by the federal government not 
honouring its obligations for first nations people. 
 
And the province takes the position of continuing to push these 
responsibilities to the federal government where they belong 
because obviously they have more capacity as well as 
jurisdictional and financial responsibility for dealing with these 
issues. 
 
Where the province would have some difficulty at times is that 
for compassionate grounds you end up sometimes dealing with 
situations that really belong in the federal jurisdiction. So any 
assistance you can provide us in continuing to remind the 
federal government of their obligations and help them live up to 
them would be very helpful. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam 
Minister, coming back to an issue that we dealt with just a little 
bit prior to this debate, and one area that I didn't get into, was 
the debate that is taking place regarding urban reserves. And we 
see that there has been a debate certainly in the Fort Qu'Appelle 
area regarding the establishment of an urban reserve, and that's 
been enhanced somewhat by the fact that FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) has agreed to some certain terms 
on the gambling question and the fact that there may be some 
casinos placed on reserves and what will happen. Would Fort 
Qu'Appelle basically . . . may be one of those locations. There's 
the possibility of Saskatoon. 
 



March 31, 1995 

 
1288 

And I know there are a number of issues that have arisen over 
the past few years, specifically about the establishment of urban 
reserves and how you deal with land claims, how you settle, 
how you work out, how you negotiate and establish the 
formation of these urban reserves, and how you address the 
questions that arise, both from the native and the non-native 
community. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could basically bring us up to 
date on the discussion that has taken place. How many, if any, 
urban reserves have been established and how they have 
worked out that process? What has been done to address the 
taxation question regarding urban reserves, and basically the 
process that the department may be involved in as this 
evolution, if you will, takes place, whether the department is 
involved in mediating some of the terms or the terminology 
regarding urban reserve development? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for your question. It does 
create a number of interesting dynamics when we discuss the 
creation of urban reserves. Urban reserves weren't covered in 
the 1992 agreement that I've referred to several times. They are 
governed directly by the Department of Indian Affairs and 
under their policy covering additions to reserves. 
 
Now we basically took the position with the federal government 
— and they agreed — that they would not grant urban reserve 
status unless there was a formal agreement signed between the 
band and the municipality that dealt with by-laws, taxes, and 
service agreements. And this is the principle that's being 
followed now. And there's been a great deal of progress with a 
number of locations, Saskatoon being a good example. 
Apparently the agreement signed in Saskatoon is being taken as 
a model across Canada for how to proceed with this kind of 
development. 
 
And I met a few weeks ago with the REDA (regional economic 
development authorities) from Saskatoon, and they're very 
actively involved in economic development initiatives. And the 
agreement there is between Muskeg Lake Band and Saskatoon. 
But there's other model agreements such as for smaller centres, 
Fort Qu'Appelle and Star Blanket Band, and in Yorkton with 
the Sakimay Band. So we now have three very good examples 
of how this can proceed and address the kind of issues that 
concern people. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So do I take it from 
your answer, Madam Minister, that to date we're into three basic 
agreements regarding urban reserves? Are there any further 
developments as far as further urban areas? And how many do 
you anticipate may be involved in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The only two areas right now that 
there's I think really much discussion going on. Prince Albert 
has had an agreement for a long time, but now they're talking 
about developing a new agreement. And they've just passed a 
minute at their city council meeting to enable this to happen. 
North Battleford, apparently, is also considering some kind of  

arrangement but hasn't reached any conclusion on it. 
 
I think these developments all fit within the principles that 
we've enunciated with the treaty land entitlements, with the 
gaming agreement, and with other agreements that we're signing 
where these things really do need to be worked out between the 
bands and the municipalities in order for them to proceed. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, a 
moment ago you indicated that most of the discussions have 
taken place with Indian and Native Affairs. I would anticipate 
that you're referring to the federal department as they have the 
greater responsibility. 
 
But as well, it would seem to me that we do have a department 
in this province that for most people in general . . . would look 
to the provincial department as having some involvement or say 
in representing them because we're the individuals that are a 
little closer to the action. And so the question I would have is, 
what role does your department play in the discussions that are 
taking place, whether it's rural or whether it's urban reserve land 
settlements? 
 
And as well, do the municipalities . . . and let's bring this down 
to the urban municipalities as well. They would, I imagine, 
basically have a lot of the same concerns that the rural 
municipalities would have, and is there involvement of the 
urban municipalities in many of the discussions regarding the 
urban reserves? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We will participate directly in meetings 
where the municipalities request that we do because we agree 
with your assessment of the situation that we are the closest to 
the communities. And therefore we are responsible for making 
sure that things proceed in a reasonable way. And we would 
certainly be happy if the federal government was as available to 
look after their responsibilities in this area. 
 
In some instances we've been involved in direct coordination, as 
with the Fort Qu'Appelle-Star Blanket development, and we're 
recognized for our role in helping resolve that situation. 
 
In the last two years, there's been a lot of discussions with 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
SARM around these questions, and some resources have been 
provided to SUMA and SARM to help work on these things 
and to meet with first nations on these issues. In fact a round 
table has been established particularly for the purpose of airing 
these kinds of discussions and concerns. 
 
And it sounds like what you'd really like is for me to increase 
my budget, so I could do all of this stuff better. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I have this day received a call from a Mr. Perry Windjack of 
Maple Creek, Saskatchewan. And he has expressed  



March 31, 1995 

 
1289 

considerable concern about an issue that is related to your 
department, and so I will take just a brief bit of time to explain 
to you what is happening out there. 
 
You are obviously aware that we are going to have a new 
healing lodge built on the reserve, the Nekaneet Band reserve, 
south-east of Maple Creek. The construction program has 
gotten underway. I understand that the power lines either have 
been put in or have been decided to be put in and that sort of 
thing. 
 
Also the other form of energy required out there is natural gas, 
and of course that requires the construction of a natural gas line. 
Because the line will be running through the reserve, in order to 
get to the healing lodge which is also located on reserve 
property as we understand it, the Nekaneet Band was asked to 
help to select the route that the line would take in order to hook 
up the gas. 
 
My understanding is that there will be natural gas provided to 
the homes of the native people that are living on the reserve as 
well as to the healing lodge. However I think the problem is 
here that there has been a lack of communication and a lack of 
knowledge of what was going on off of the reserve, and that's 
what I want to bring to your attention. 
 
I believe that, as it was explained to me, the native people chose 
the route that was the most cost-effective. And they chose that 
route because they were told that that would be the way it 
would most easily get done and the quickest. 
 
However, unknown to them I believe, is the reality that quite a 
few farmers and ranchers who live just a little bit further east of 
the proposed route would also be willing to pay the very 
exorbitant high price that SaskEnergy asks for farm hook-ups. 
Even though it's an exorbitant price, they would be willing to 
pay that to get hooked up. Now if they did get hooked up, even 
though the line would be a little longer, it would still be more 
cost-effective because of the extra users and the extra gas used. 
We don't believe that the Nekaneet people knew that these folks 
off of the reserve wanted that line. And so the decision is being 
made today, we understand, as to what the route will be. 
 
And now a new proposal has been offered, we understand, 
through a Mr. Bryce King of Maple Creek who works for 
SaskEnergy. And he is supposed to be delivering that for 
consideration today, and a decision is supposed to be made. 
 
We're not sure if the communication is good enough to trust 
that that has all happened. And so I'm asking for your assistance 
in terms of good public relations between the native community 
and the rest of the people in the community out there in Maple 
Creek. And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you would 
consider checking into this matter today to see that SaskEnergy, 
in fact, does consider the needs of the off-reserve people, as 
well as the needs of the Nekaneet Band. 
 
Obviously it couldn't make any difference to the band members 
if the line runs a mile or two one way or the other and does, in  

fact, have a little extra gas in it that would help other folks out. 
And I don't believe that they would have picked a route that 
would eliminate their neighbours if they knew, in fact, that their 
neighbours wanted the gas and were willing to pay the price to 
get it. 
 
So I'm asking you, very simply, would you contact the minister 
in charge of SaskEnergy? Would you contact the Nekaneet 
Band office, perhaps the chief or whoever's in charge out there? 
And would you talk to Mr. Bryce King? And would you talk 
perhaps to whoever is in charge of the Crown corporation end 
of SaskEnergy to make sure that this new proposal and the 
needs of the folks are considered before that final decision is 
made today so that everyone can have the natural gas benefits 
that certainly are good for rural people, good for the healing 
lodge, and good for the Nekaneet Band? 
 
Folks out there have always gotten along really well. We hold 
up the race relationship between the Nekaneet Band and the 
people in Maple Creek as an example of how people in the rest 
of the world should live, and we definitely don't want that to 
break down. 
 
Could you assist us, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for providing us with that 
information, and I would just affirm that what you say is true, 
that there have been good relations out in that area, and we 
would certainly want them to continue. We'll check with the 
energy people on this question, and we'll get back to you with 
the information. And perhaps you could relate directly to the 
people who are raising the issue with yourself, but we will deal 
with the department on that question and get back to you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I really do appreciate 
that spirit of cooperation, and I certainly will pass on to Perry 
Windjack and his neighbours, your willingness to assist. And I 
would hope though that you might, in your capacity, talk to the 
people in the Nekaneet office. They too might want to not feel 
left out. I'll give them a call, but I would appreciate it if you 
would call them as well to make sure that all the bases are 
covered. Would you do that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam 
Minister, there's one area, and I keep . . . for some reason land 
claims keeps popping up, but one area I wanted to discuss just a 
little further. And we're getting away from the native land 
claims in particular, as far as dealing directly with native land 
claims, and the discussion and the suit that was filed by the 
Metis Nation of Saskatchewan and their assertion that they 
should be involved or they have a right to a settlement of land 
or the establishment of land or a land base for themselves. 
 
The Leader-Post, Wednesday, May 4, '94 talks about 
government rejecting that land claim. The Metis Nation, it says, 
has no claim to a large section in north-western Saskatchewan 
because it is not a legitimate government, and Metis people  



March 31, 1995 

 
1290 

never lived in the area as a distinct group, says the statement of 
defence filed by the federal government. 
 
And of course, the government was responding to that suit filed 
by the MNS and 34 Metis citizens on March 1. And they 
claimed they had access or should be given consideration, and 
they were looking at roughly 144,000 square kilometres in the 
north-west as what they would feel would be appropriate in the 
whole process of native land claims settlement. 
 
And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, has there been any 
further discussion to date? Where is the department in regards 
to the claims by the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan? Or is the 
case, as it were, basically just closed? Or has the Metis Nation 
decided that it isn't in their interest to push for further 
developments in this area or push for reserve status? Madam 
Minister, exactly where do we sit in regards to this claim today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Sorry to take so long. This is a bit of a 
complicated situation. 
 
Regarding the court case, because it's in court, there's 
limitations what I can say on that. But on the broader question 
of Metis land claims, historically the federal government has 
dealt with Metis land issues. And there is a section of the 
constitution, 91(24) that addresses itself to federal 
responsibilities for Indian peoples which, for the purposes of 
that clause, certainly we've interpreted to include Metis and due 
to historical practices of the federal government in that regard. 
 
Now we've had a discussion with the federal minister of 
DIAND (Department of Indian Affairs and Northern 
Development) on this topic, and at this point I would just have 
to say that both we and the Metis are in the dark regarding how 
they intend to deal with this or what position they intend to take 
in the future. But historically we would certainly say that it's up 
to them to deal with those issues. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:57 p.m. 
 
 


