






















































April 11, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 11, 1995 

 

 
1511 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have today from 
the town office in the town of Maple Creek, a petition that I 
will read the prayer of: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1, 
rather than allocating these funds towards capital 
construction projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these are mostly from the town of Maple Creek and the 
residents therefrom, and I'm happy to table these today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The prayer on 
my petition reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Alida, Wakaw, Carnduff, and 
Kerrobert areas of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
petitions as well with regard to the gun issue in Saskatchewan. 
These petitions come from the Kerrobert, Dodsland, Regina — 
a number of areas across Saskatchewan. And I'm pleased to 
present them on behalf of those people today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you and through you to other members of the Assembly, seated 
in the second row of the west gallery, my uncle, Mr. Ed Morgan 
from the city of Regina who's retiring from the Provincial 
Archives Board this year, and also my cousin, Valerie Howard, 
who's from Brandon. And she's visiting Regina and here to 
observe the proceedings today, and I'd ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming both my uncle and my cousin. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canora Credit Union 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Canora Credit Union, which is in my new constituency, has just 
recorded its best year in its history. After paying interest, 
operating expenses, and income tax, the credit union has 
showed a surplus of $468,000 which was allocated to the 
contingency reserve, a reserve that now stands at $4.1 million, a 
very favourable level. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the entire provincial credit union system 
enjoyed a very successful year, and there has been very 
encouraging details included in the annual report. Total deposits 
were up. Sales of mutual funds, savings bonds, and RRSPs 
(registered retirement savings plan) were good. And this item 
which I find most interesting and most telling — there were 535 
new memberships taken out in 1994. The total number of active 
memberships at the end of the year was 8,634. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if our towns are dying and rural depopulation is 
the order of the day, someone better tell the people in Canora 
because I think this is very, very good news. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Wildlife Week 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each year National 
Wildlife Week is celebrated during the week which 
encompasses April 10, the birth date of the late Jack Miner, 
who is often referred to as the father of wildlife conservation in 
Canada. 
 
This year's theme for Wildlife Week is: wildlife, yours to 
recover. This is particularly appropriate for Saskatchewan 
where many species of plants and animals have declined in 
numbers. For example, despite the best efforts of many people,  



April 11, 1995 

 
1512 

including landowners and conservationists, the number of 
burrowing owls continues to decline. In fact this unique prairie 
species should be upgraded from the threatened to the 
endangered category on Canada's list of species in trouble. 
 
While a majority of species are declining in number, we have 
helped some species to recover. The Canada goose is once 
again a common breeding species throughout southern 
Saskatchewan, thanks to the efforts of many. Mountain 
bluebirds and tree swallows have increased in numbers and 
have in fact expanded their breeding range, thanks to the 
hundreds of people who built and set out nest boxes. 
 
Our cities and towns have become an oasis for many species of 
wildlife because of the water bodies, the planting of trees and 
shrubs in urban parks. Habitat is the key to the survival of 
wildlife. Landowners, conservationists, organizations, 
volunteers, and governments, must work together to secure 
habitat and natural areas in Saskatchewan. Only then will we 
ensure the opportunity for our children and grandchildren to 
enjoy and appreciate the wildlife that we have enjoyed and 
often take it for granted. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me that 
one purpose of these statements is to inform the general public 
and ourselves of non-earth-shattering but nevertheless 
significant facts. Here is one such fact: Saskatchewan is 
defending champion of the North American indigenous games 
which are held every two years. 
 
Partly as preparation for these games and partly for good fun 
and fellowship, the Yorkton Tribal Council this weekend is 
hosting the 10th annual Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games. 
The games are to be held this year in Kamsack. Last year they 
were held in Montreal Lake, sponsored by the Prince Albert 
Tribal Council. 
 
Eight tribal councils in Saskatchewan will send teams with the 
total number of participants expected to reach 1,000. These 
games are for participants aged 8 to 17. The events are 
badminton, broomball, hockey, boxing, and volleyball. 
 
As well as the athletic events, the tribal council will sponsor 
wellness workshops and provide powwow demonstrations. As I 
said, Mr. Speaker, these are contests designed to showcase 
ability and to provide education and fellowship. For those 
anxious for summer, the Indian Summer Games will be held at 
Poundmaker Reserve near Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations Sports Commission for establishing and 
overseeing these games, and I wish each contestant the best. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Milestone Holds Indoor Rodeo 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend the fourth annual 
Milestone indoor rodeo took place and was a huge success. 
Over 200 contestants from Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta, 
Montana, and North Dakota, tested their strength, endurance, 
and courage, and put on a great show. 
 
The Milestone rodeo is not simply a rodeo, it is a community 
get-together. During the three-day event, there were two dances, 
a bingo, a ranch rodeo, and a church service. And like last year, 
over 500 pounds of beef-on-a-bun were served to 2,000 
participants and spectators. 
 
A special, unexpected highlight this year was the escape of all 
the stock late Friday night. With great community effort, a 
round-up occurred, and all animals were recovered by early 
Saturday morning. 
 
Events like the indoor rodeo are important to local economies, 
Mr. Speaker. Several businesses in my constituency benefited 
from increased sales due to the influx of people. 
 
The rodeo of course does not just happen by itself. The hard 
work of the Milestone rodeo association, local fire-fighters, 
curling, hockey, and figure skating clubs, has made our rodeo 
one of the top 10 in the province. 
 
I especially want to thank the association for what they bring to 
the community beyond the three days of fun. Last year, Mr. 
Speaker, the association donated more than $4,000 to build new 
bleachers at the Milestone recreation complex. Over the past 
three years, the association has given back $23,000 to local 
charities, churches, and recreation associations. For their 
continuing work in making Milestone a great place to live, I 
want to congratulate the rodeo association and all of its 
volunteers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Landing's New Marina 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, the constituency of 
Rosetown-Elrose, which I'm honoured to represent, probably 
has the longest shore line of any constituency in Saskatchewan. 
The entire western and northern shores of Lake Diefenbaker 
bound my riding. 
 
Lake Diefenbaker is one of Saskatchewan's treasures. The 
potential for recreation and tourism development on Lake 
Diefenbaker is tremendous. 
 
Last summer we announced the development of a new marina 
at Saskatchewan Landing, a new idea for us landlubbers. This 
project will make even more attractive the access to this 
wonderful lake by fun seekers and nature lovers from as far 
away as the northern States and from the southern half of 
Alberta. This project is creating jobs and supporting local 
businesses in my riding. The great news is that the project is  



April 11, 1995 

 
1513 

two weeks ahead of the most optimistic schedule. 
 
I'm looking forward to saying to the people of Kyle, Swift 
Current, and the great south-west, ship ahoy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
GRIP Premiums 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, once again the opposition has the opportunity to bring 
the views of Saskatchewan citizens to the Legislative Assembly. 
Over the course of this session, Mr. Speaker, we have been 
inundated with literally tens and dozens and hundreds of 
individuals who wish to take part in the democratic process. 
And today I have the opportunity to ask the very first question 
of the Premier, and this comes from Mr. Adolph Sushko of 
Pelly. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, Mr. Sushko says: I want to know why you 
changed the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program 
and had no monies to help out the farmers and now all at once 
you have excess GRIP money, which you are putting into the 
diversification program, for one. If there was no money when 
needed, where did it come from now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, that is a very good 
question. The money we put into GRIP was there. As much 
money as we could afford, we put into the program. It was 
designed to pay out if grain prices stayed where they were or 
had they gone down. What happened was grain prices instead 
went up and farmers got more out of the market-place and 
therefore it didn't trigger the pay-out. 
 
We redistributed the farmers' share back to them. We took our 
share and put most of it into ag diversification and value added, 
which is, we think will be, the future of rural Saskatchewan. 
And that's the reasoning that we put that money there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
have a question. And this comes from John McKnight from 
Saskatoon who puts his question very succinctly, I believe. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why the bureaucratic bafflegab? 
Pay the GRIP surplus directly to farmers. Please respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well again for the constituent who 
wrote in, this was a program that was designed to pay out if 
grain prices had stayed the same or gone down. Instead they 
went up, and there therefore was a surplus in the program. 
 
We distributed the surpluses the way we did with all other 
agriculture programs, the way we wound down the tripartite 
programs. Farmers got their share of the GRIP surplus back, 
based on what they contributed. Provincial government got  

back our share of what we contributed and we put most of that 
back into agriculture. The federal Liberals took more than half 
of their surplus without putting it back into agriculture. 
 
We in this province, because of our commitment to agriculture 
and to rural Saskatchewan, put our money back into agriculture. 
We put it back in where we thought it would do the most good 
and get the most bang for our buck. And that's the reason for 
the distribution of the surplus. 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 
comes from Keith Bartlett from Regina. Mr. Premier, I want to 
know why, after doing a fairly good job of balancing the 
budget, you would cave in to the interests of organized labour. 
As a businessman who was leery of your government in the 
beginning, but who started to see some merit in your 
government, I have now decided you are nothing more than a 
reincarnation of Allan Blakeney and company. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can't resist that 
question because after 11 years of government, Mr. Blakeney's 
government, a government which is characterized by 11 years 
of good employment and balanced budgets and tax reductions 
and programs for people, if I could be cast in that mode as 
compared to, without putting too fine a point on it, other 
previous governments, I would be very, very pleased indeed. 
 
This is not a question of caving in, this is a question, as the hon. 
member knows, of making sure that there is a sensible policy in 
place for a limited field of Crown corporation activity so that 
there is skilled workforce around and a level playing-field in the 
bids for contracts that are available for people to bid on. 

 
MLA Term Limits 

 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a question 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, this question comes from Shirley 
Lomheim from Saskatoon. Mr. Premier, I want to know if 
legislation could be considered to limit the length of time an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) can serve. 
 
It was suggested by the member from Regina Albert South and 
the member from Wilkie that two terms should be the limit. 
This would allow other citizens to represent their communities, 
offering fresh views and insights into affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I don't know the 
answer to the question from a legal or a constitutional point of 
view. I would simply say, perhaps parenthetically, that under 
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the right of people to 
elect and to be elected, there probably would be some charter 
prohibition against term limitations, if I can put it this way. 
 
But quite frankly, this is an importation of an American value to 
the parliamentary system — term limitations — which, by the 
way, the Americans themselves just recently turned down after 
an extensive debate. We hear lots about Newt Gingrich  



April 11, 1995 

 
1514 

and his contract with America. I'm not sure if it's contract with 
America or contract on America. But none the less, Gingrich's 
approach is one of term limitations. 
 
And this, I think, is one which is flawed because — while I 
know the Liberals provincially here and the Conservatives 
provincially here are vying each other in this context — it's 
flawed because what it does is it basically says the intelligence 
of the average voter cannot be trusted. Every election time is a 
time when MLAs comes up for term limitations. The public 
either elects you or defeats you. And why not leave that in the 
court of the most important body, the court of public opinion, to 
decide. I have faith in the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan; I think the hon. member does as well. And I 
think that while we might be able to learn some aspects of the 
United States system, let's not get carried away with the kind of 
strait-jacketing which has resulted in what obviously I think is a 
less desirable form of democracy than we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is also to the 
Premier and it comes from Margaret Frizzell from Strasbourg. 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government took the provincial spouse pension away 
from farmers' wives like myself, and did not do anything about 
the pensions to civil servants. We had paid into the pension 
until I was 65 and I thought it was great, but now I get $24 a 
month. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I thank the member opposite for bringing that question 
forward. As we had to do when we became the government, we 
had to ensure that all of the programs that the government was 
providing to the people of Saskatchewan were affordable. 
 
Unfortunately as we looked at the cost of providing that 
program as it existed at that time, we had to modify it to ensure 
that in the long term the program could remain affordable. I 
would remind the member opposite the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan is still in place, and because of the changes that we made, 
we can ensure that people will have the confidence it will be in 
place at the end of this century as well. 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question comes 
from C. Richardson from Kindersley. Mr. Premier, I want to 
know when you are going to do something about the 
gold-plated pensions enjoyed by the MLAs of this province. I 
don't agree that they should be such privileged individuals when 
the rest of the population is struggling. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 
member opposite on this very issue in a very similar question, 
we await the call of the Board of Internal Economy committee 
which will look at the proposals that Mr. McDowell's  

committee has put to that committee. 
 
I'm not sure whether the Leader of the Opposition is on that 
committee or not. I know the Leader of the Liberal Party is and 
we look forward to discussing this issue at the earliest 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, keeping track of the 
Premier's pension is a little bit like watching Telemiracle — 
every day we get a new total and it just keeps getting higher and 
higher and higher. The difference is, the difference is, Mr. 
Premier, Telemiracle is a good cause, and the people choose to 
contribute. The Premier's pension is a lousy cause, and the 
people are forced to contribute. 
 
Mr. Premier, don't you think that Saskatchewan people have 
contributed more than enough to your retirement fund? When 
are you going to simply do the right thing and roll back your 
obscene pension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
opportunity to respond again because this has become a daily 
event and I'm pleased that the Premier is back in here today  
his pension hasn't gone up by $20,000  which it was daily as 
the members exaggerated while he was away doing the business 
of government. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, obviously the problem that 
you speak of is obviously not a problem today because the 
Premier who is doing the work running the government of this 
province, balancing the books of this province, working with 
businesses to create jobs, has no intention for the foreseeable 
future of collecting any pension, so I wouldn't worry about it 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Premier, with all the bonuses, the Premier's pension now stands 
at over $122,000 per year. This is the first time I've ever heard 
of someone's pension being higher than their salary. 
 
This must be part of the NDP's election strategy. I guess the 
Premier's going to tell the voters that it's cheaper to re-elect him 
than to boot him out. 
 
Mr. Premier, I don't think that the taxpayers should be penalized 
for booting you out of office; I think they should be rewarded 
for doing that. 
 
Mr. Premier, we recently had an independent commission set up 
to ensure that MLAs' salaries were fair to the taxpayers. Mr. 
Premier, do you think it's fair that your pension plan is now 
higher than what your current salary is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well as the member obviously  



April 11, 1995 

 
1515 

knows, the pension of the Premier, if he were to retire today . . . 
which I'm sure his wife Eleanore is encouraging him to do, 
given the vast exaggerations that are going on in the Assembly 
here today. 
 
But I say to the member opposite that again, as the deputy 
leader indicated last Friday already and we answer for the 
umpteenth time, if there are inordinate increases which occur as 
a result of the McDowell commission, we will obviously want 
to discuss and meet on this issue. 
 
I say again in all fairness, the members of the press and the 
public will know that when the meetings were held in the Board 
of Internal Economy, not one member across, including the 
Liberal leader who now raises it as a hopeful election issue in 
the dying days as she tries to get some issue going, having 
failed to get anything going on jobs, misleading the Assembly . 
. . now comes to the House on a daily basis misleading the 
public again, or attempting to, on yet another issue. 
 
So I say we will meet, hopefully within the confines and the 
openness of the committee, and discuss what it is that is 
bothering you on that issue. But for you to continually 
exaggerate about what the Premier might get if he ruled in the 
province for another 40 years and then lived to be 147 or 
whatever it is today that you're talking about, is ludicrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Premier, we don't need legislation to roll back these obscene 
pensions. We don't need the Board of Internal Economy to deal 
with this at all. All we need is for the Premier and his 
colleagues to show a little self-restraint. 
 
In fact under section 28(2) of the MLA superannuation Act . . . 
allows members to voluntarily opt out of the old plan and to opt 
into the new plan after the end of their political career. All they 
have to do is sign a letter. 
 
We've even gone further than that for you, Mr. Premier. We've 
gone to the trouble of preparing that letter. Will you, Mr. 
Premier . . . And I'll be tabling this at the end of my comments 
and certainly sending a copy across to you, sir. All you need to 
do is sign a letter that will allow your pension to be rolled back. 
 
Will you voluntarily, Mr. Premier, will you voluntarily roll back 
your pension by signing this letter today that I'm tabling and 
will be sending across? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite, 
I can quite understand why the Leader of the Opposition and 
the Leader of the Liberal Party are so concerned about pensions. 
But the fact is, is that the roles are here reversed. Because quite 
honestly I have not heard or seen the Premier worrying much 
about his pension because he doesn't intend in the near future to 
be collecting it. 

Now you people may be concerned about your pensions 
because you haven't been around long enough to pay very much 
in, but I say to you that there is an important issue here, and that 
is where members of the former Conservative government, Mr. 
Eric Berntson for example, is double-dipping — is 
double-dipping — taking a pension as well as collecting a 
senator's staff . . . senator's salary. 
 
My challenge today is not to the Leader of the Opposition 
because I don't think he has much hope of being around here or 
being appointed to the Senate. But I would challenge the 
Liberal leader to swear on a stack of bibles today that if she is 
defeated in the future, she will promise not to double-dip, 
taking a salary of a senator and a pension from the legislature at 
the same time. I challenge you to make that commitment here 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP has implemented policies on gambling that will have a 
lasting impact on individuals, communities, and society as a 
whole. And they've done so without any credible research, 
selective consultation, and virtually no follow-up. 
 
My question is to the minister of Gaming: can you explain why 
not one question — not one — was asked in your most recent 
government polling about the impact of your gambling policies 
and what they are having on individuals and charitable 
organizations and local communities in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I'd be pleased to answer that question for the member from 
Greystone. I do however find it interesting that she's not 
speaking about her $1.1 million pension, instead rehashing the 
old gaming issue that's been ongoing for many, many weeks, 
many months. 
 
Let me say to the member from Greystone that the minister in 
charge of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority is 
well aware of the expenditures on different forms of gaming in 
this province, whether it be bingo, whether it be break-opens, or 
whether it be the video lottery terminals. I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that there has been an ongoing monitoring of gaming 
as it has evolved, since we took power in 1991 — and as a 
matter of fact, even before. 
 
But what I really would like the member from Greystone to 
clarify is, for once and for all, does she support gaming? 
Doesn't she support gaming? Does she have a policy or doesn't 
she have a policy, as her officials say. 
 
I mean I recall, Mr. Speaker, in the legislature a short time ago 
she tells us to hurry up — we forgot about $60 million in video 
lottery terminal revenue; get on with the program. The next day 
she's up saying it's no good. 
 



April 11, 1995 

 
1516 

Mr. Speaker, she really should clarify what her position is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. These 
people have been completely irresponsible in this province. 
Now the NDP have determined to ignore not only the research 
that predicts the fallout from expanded gambling, they don't 
even want to deal with the evidence that happens to be staring 
them right in the face. 
 
Now Professor Robert Goodman, a renowned gambling 
researcher, and I've raised this time and time again in this 
House, who produced the definitive study on governments in 
the gambling business said, and I quote: pathological gamblers 
tend to engage in forgery, theft, embezzlement, drug dealing, 
and property crimes, to pay off gambling debts. 
 
Now my question to the minister today: precisely how is your 
government today monitoring the relationship between 
expanded gambling and increased levels of crime. You say 
you're doing it, sir. What is your system of tracking this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying 
that this government has put more into social impact funding 
than any jurisdiction in Canada, and the member knows it. And 
I want to say all she needs to do to confirm whether or not we 
have a responsible policy is to pick up the telephone, phone the 
Liberal leader in Alberta whose critic is urging the Alberta 
Tories to introduce and implement the Saskatchewan model 
because it's working; it makes some sense. Just pick up the 
phone, phone your counterpart in Alberta, and you may have a 
little bit of enlightenment on the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now 
the government may choose to spend tax dollars polling for 
political information instead of gathering useful data. But do 
you know what? The truth is coming to light anyway, Mr. 
Speaker. The facts are showing up all across Saskatchewan in 
crime statistics. 
 
In January the Saskatoon city police reported break and enters 
were up 67 per cent; the mayor of La Ronge says crime is up by 
50 per cent; now the Regina city police report 64.6 per cent 
increase in breaks and enters over last January and February. 
 
And we have learned, Mr. Speaker, the Regina city police has 
compiled a report that shows the correlation between increased 
gambling and increased levels of crime and law enforcement 
costs. Obviously the police in this city see the connection, even 
if the government does not. 
 
My question: Mr. Minister, what studies has your government 
done on this issue, and will you agree to table your studies and 
the conclusions immediately? Obviously the police care enough 
to do this, do you? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying 
that the law enforcement agencies keep statistics, and have kept 
statistics over a long period of time, with respect to break-ins 
and other issues. And I want to say, and the member will know, 
that those figures have been very static over a long period of 
time. 
 
I also want to say to the member that the fact that this 
government has put a million and a half dollars towards dealing 
with gaming addiction, would quite clearly indicate that we do 
have concerns. We're concerned about pathological gaming; 
we're concerned about people who have that problem. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we're also concerned about 
pathological liars and we're concerned about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. Order. I ask 
the minister to please withdraw the unparliamentary statement. I 
ask the minister to withdraw the unparliamentary statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the 
statement. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. All 
that the people of Saskatchewan want is a direct answer, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to know the correlation between these 
increased crime statistics and increased gambling after a more 
prolific video lottery play in Saskatchewan. 
 
I have one question, sir: will you table today the full range of 
studies that your government is doing on gambling? And if you 
aren't doing any, why aren't you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member from Greystone that quite clearly this government is 
concerned with gaming addiction. We have done a lot of 
analysis with respect to other jurisdictions and what we might 
expect when we introduce the video lottery terminal program. 
And that is why, madam, we have put forth a program funded 
with a million and a half dollars, administered through the 
Department of Health, to train counsellors, to have programing 
in place to deal with people who have that problem. 
 
And I want to say though to the member from Greystone, you 
can't have it both ways. One day you urge us to hurry up and get 
on with the program and the next day you're suggesting that the 
program shouldn't be around. It's another example of your 
flip-flopping; it's another example of your indecision. It's 
another reason why people in Saskatchewan don't see you as a 
prospective premier of this province, because frankly, madam, 
they don't know where you come from. 
 
You can't be on both sides of an issue; you need to at some 
point in your political career make a decision, take a stand — 
are you for it or are you against it? Let us know today if you  



April 11, 1995 

 
1517 

would. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I've 
been listening to much debate over the last month pertaining to 
MLAs' retirement pensions. It has been difficult to listen to the 
opposition parties playing politics in their attempt to mislead 
the public that certain MLAs that belonged to the old pension 
plan, prior to 1979 . . . is such a lucrative plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these MLAs and the media should research their 
statements before making them, because if they checked with 
the Public Employees Benefits Agency like I did, they would 
find in most cases, the MLAs that chose the new plan in 1979 
or since, have the more lucrative plan. I was also informed of 
other benefits the new pension plan has prior to the one in 
1979. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the Premier or whoever 
wants to answer the question. I have a letter from the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency in answer to my request to explain 
the two plans. I will read you a short sentence of the letter and 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member must put his 
question. I've been generous with him in the time, and I want 
the member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, 
will be pertaining to the letter that I received effective June 1, 
1995: your monthly pension benefit from the old plan would 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Does the member have a 
question? The member is to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, if I could just . . . my question 
won't mean anything if I can't read . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member is to ask his question, otherwise 
I'll ask another member. 
 
If the Government House Leader has any further comments I 
wish he would get to his feet and direct them to the Speaker at 
that time rather than from his chair. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Then my question 
will be: seeing that the difference in my pension plan from the 
old . . . or new is only $300 a month, I ask you if you agree with 
me that the opposition parties have misled this House and the 
people of Saskatchewan pertaining to the pension plan benefits; 
and if you do agree with me, would you explain why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I tried to follow the 
question as closely as I could, but with all the interruptions . . . I 
want to say clearly to the member opposite that it shows the  

complication, I guess, of the pension plans and the individual 
circumstances that might be around. 
 
I have no idea whether you are better off or worse off under one 
pension plan or the other. But what the member should do is 
table the letter so that we could see . . . or better yet, because 
the Board of Internal Economy is an open committee, come to 
the committee, take part in the discussion. But one thing the 
question does, I think, is outline the complicated nature of the 
pension plans — new and old — of the members of the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Protection of Endangered Spaces 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 
today and speak about our progress towards the protection of 
representative natural areas in Saskatchewan. At the end of my 
remarks, I will be moving the following motion: 
 
 That this Assembly support the work of the Minister of 

Environment and Resource Management, his 
department, and conservation organizations, in their 
efforts to achieve the goals of the World Wildlife Fund's 
action plan for endangered spaces; and go on record 
during National Wildlife Week as being in favour of 
protecting our province's natural heritage, specifically 
efforts to complete a representative areas network across 
the 11 ecoregions of Saskatchewan as part of our 
commitment to maintain the province's native biological 
diversity. 

 
I would like to begin my remarks by quoting a recent message 
from Monte Hummel, president of World Wildlife Fund 
Canada. I quote: 
 
 April 22 will mark the 25th Anniversary of Earth Day 

— a time to celebrate the wonders of our natural world 
and renew our commitment to protecting our fragile 
planet. The need for that commitment has never been 
greater. 

 
 Shrinking fish catches, disappearing natural habitat, 

declining bird populations, and the depletion of fresh 
water supplies are now affecting every corner of the 
earth. For example, data compiled by Birdlife 
International of Cambridge, England shows bird 
populations dropping on every continent. Of 9,600 
species, only 3,000 are holding their own. The other 
6,600 are in decline. Of these, the populations of some 
1,000 species have dropped to the point where they are 
threatened with extinction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, biologists estimate that there are from 5 to 30  



April 11, 1995 

 
1518 

million species inhabiting our planet. Only 1.4 million species 
have been identified. We are currently losing over 100 species 
per day in the tropics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has not escaped the worldwide 
trend of a deteriorating environment and declining wildlife 
species. Here in Saskatchewan we have lost 40 per cent of our 
wetlands, 80 per cent of our aspen parkland has been destroyed, 
and 75 to 80 per cent of our native grasslands are gone. In 
summary, southern Saskatchewan contains one of the most 
modified landscapes in the world. 
 
From 1976 to 1981, in a five-year period, we lost another 2 
million acres of habitat, working out to over a thousand acres a 
day or 44 acres an hour day and night. On the Regina plains, for 
an example, over 99 per cent of the habitat is gone. 
 
Because of the loss of habitat, many species here have declined 
in numbers; 20 per cent of our native plants are listed as rare 
and endangered and disappearing further. 
 
Our duck numbers in the 1950s numbered 20 million returning 
to Saskatchewan each spring. In recent years, less than 4 million 
have returned, a decline of over 80 per cent. 
 
At the current rate of decline, the once familiar burrowing owl 
will be extinct in Canada in less than 10 years. 
 
In our lifetime we have witnessed once common species like 
jackrabbits, yellow lady-slippers, and killdeer, and hundreds of 
other plant and animal species steadily decline in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan is not exempt from this decline either. 
Whole families of birds, including wood warblers and thrushes, 
are disappearing. And native species such as woodland caribou 
numbers are precariously low. 
 
But despite the dismal statistics, Saskatchewan is still looked 
upon as a leader in wildlife habitat conservation programs. 
Ducks Unlimited, formed in 1939, began its work here on the 
prairies to conserve wetlands. In 1970 the wildlife development 
fund was created, at the request of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, to purchase habitat. 
 
In 1974 the wildlife federation again came to the forefront and 
recognized landowners who agreed to protect habitat on their 
private land with the introduction of the acres for wildlife 
program. Today this program, now called wildlife tomorrow, 
contains over 370,000 acres signed up voluntarily by 
landowners. 
 
In 1981 the heritage marsh program was launched in 
Saskatchewan to conserve some of our last large wetlands. 
 
From 1982 to 1992, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act was 
implemented, and added to over a 10-year period. As a result, 
we have 3.4 million acres of our Crown land secure from sale 
and being broken up. And meanwhile, ranchers and farmers  

continue to graze livestock on these lands, but they will not be 
sold by the Crown or be allowed to be broken up, drained, or 
bulldozed. 
 
More recently, in 1989 the North American waterfowl 
management plan was launched here in Saskatchewan. A 
number of other jurisdictions throughout the continent are 
looking to Saskatchewan for its leadership role, with some of 
our habitat programs being adopted and implemented in other 
provinces and states. 
 
Despite our impressive achievements, if we consider all of our 
natural areas that have some form of protection, including 
parks, wilderness areas, wildlife lands, etc., we have only 
managed to secure about 6 per cent of our natural landscape. 
This falls far short of the recommendations contained in the 
Brundtlund Commission report on the environment and the 
economy, which states a minimum of 12 per cent of an 
ecoregion must be maintained to ensure species diversity and 
survival. 
 
(1415) 
 
The member from Saskatoon Sutherland will be providing more 
comments as to where we stand with regard to protected areas 
in our 11 ecoregions in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to identify specific areas that we must focus on in 
the next few years if we hope to achieve a system of 
representative areas throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
With 75 to 80 per cent of our native grasslands gone, it is 
imperative that virtually all remaining native grasslands, on 
public and private land, be retained in a natural state. 
Grasslands evolved over millions of years with grazing 
undulants, a major species or group of species on the 
grasslands. 
 
Controlled grazing is a compatible use for native grasslands. 
We commend the vast majority of livestock producers for their 
good stewardship of the range. Rotational grazing regimes in 
recent years further enhances the productivity of grasslands for 
both wildlife and livestock. Many prairie species, however, do 
thrive on heavily grazed areas. We must work hand in hand 
with ranchers, farmers, and biologists, in managing and 
protecting our grasslands. 
 
The Grasslands National Park, first proposed 38 years ago in 
1957, is still not a reality. This park should be completed as 
soon as possible, with the controlled grazing regime an integral 
part of the management plan for the park. 
 
It is Parks Canada's policy not to permit grazing in national 
parks. Probably for most other national parks this is a good 
policy; however, grazing and fire are natural management 
practices for a grasslands park here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our federal and provincial community pastures contain some of 
the last areas of native grasslands throughout the province. It is  



April 11, 1995 

 
1519 

essential that the native flora be maintained and managed 
sustainably in these pastures. Range management in 
government pastures has improved in recent years, and this is a 
tribute to those in charge of our pastures. 
 
Our aspen parklands continue to disappear at an alarming rate. 
With 80 per cent or more of this productive ecosystem gone, 
habitat fragmentation is a serious problem, resulting in pieces 
of habitat too small to support species, and too scattered to 
allow movement from one piece of habitat to another. 
 
Much of the remaining aspen parkland habitat is located on 
private land. Since the beginning of agriculture, government 
incentives have promoted the conversion of natural areas to 
cultivated farm land. These incentive programs must be 
reversed so as to reward landowners for maintaining habitat, not 
penalizing them. 
 
Most landowners appreciate wildlife and would be glad to 
receive a little recognition and reward for protecting habitat on 
their land. Long-term easements, tax refunds, adequate 
waterfowl and big game crop damage compensation programs, 
permanent cover programs for erodible land, will all help 
farmers and wildlife together. 
 
Our wetlands are considered to be one of the most productive 
ecosystems in the world, and as mentioned earlier, 40 per cent 
of them are gone. The North American waterfowl management 
plan was launched in the late 1980s as an 11th hour effort to 
conserve our vanishing waterfowl resource. 
 
This program again is being launched in Saskatchewan because 
of our leadership and conservation efforts and because of the 
important of Saskatchewan to our wildlife and wetlands in 
general. 
 
On one hand we have governments and conservation 
organizations contributing money to the North American 
waterfowl plan to protect wetlands; on the other hand, we have 
Sask Water, a part of government, using government funds to 
drain wetlands. It is imperative that we very quickly get a water 
management policy for Saskatchewan so that we do not have 
one arm of government conserving wetlands and another arm of 
government draining wetlands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: — We can also restore some of our wetlands that 
have been drained that have not panned out for agriculture 
production. It is much easier to restore wetlands than it is for 
aspen groves and grasslands to be restored. Many people are 
saying that we do not need to drain more wetlands; instead we 
need to conserve them because there's many benefits of our 
wetlands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: — A third area of concern is our northern forests. 
The most common use of our forests is logging. Like elsewhere  

around the world, logging on a long-term basis has not been 
sustainable. Gone are the days of selective tree harvesting, 
which was sustainable, and it has been replaced with 
clear-cutting. Clear-cutting is not acceptable to many people 
and has not proven to be sustainable in Saskatchewan and many 
other parts of the world. 
 
The statement has been made that clear-cutting mimics forest 
fires. This is like saying summer-fallowing mimics prairie fires. 
It just isn't so. The management or mismanagement of our 
forests over the years leaves a lot to be desired. There is an area 
of cut-over forest the size of P.A. (Prince Albert) National Park 
in Saskatchewan that remains to be reforested. 
 
The forest along the east side of the province has been 
harvested to the extent that a long-term forest management 
agreement may not be possible. It is imperative that 
representative natural areas in all ecozones be identified and 
excluded from cutting before an east side forest management 
agreement is reached. We also need to look at the other areas of 
our forests and work with existing forestry companies in 
establishing representative areas in these regions as well. 
 
Like agriculture lands in the South, forest lands in the North 
must be managed on an integrated approach with all interests 
being considered in a long-term, sustainable management 
policy. Mr. Speaker, as decision makers in this Assembly, we 
must make long-term, economically viable and environmentally 
sustainable choices when it comes to managing and protecting 
our natural resources for future generations. 
 
One of the first steps in this process is to identify and protect a 
network of representative areas covering all ecozones of the 
province. These benchmarks will ensure species diversity and 
survival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that landowners, industry, first 
nations, conservationists, governments, and the interested 
public, all work cooperatively with an eye to the future as we 
pool our resources and expertise to achieve a network of 
representative areas throughout the 11 ecoregions of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is therefore my pleasure to move the following 
resolution, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland-University: 
 
 That this Assembly support the work of the Minister of 

Environment and Resource Management, his 
department, and conservation organizations, in their 
efforts to achieve the goals of the World Wildlife Fund's 
action plan for endangered spaces; and go on record 
during National Wildlife Week as being in favour of 
protecting our province's natural heritage, specifically 
efforts to complete a representative areas network across 
the 11 ecoregions of Saskatchewan as part of our 
commitment to maintain the province's native biological 
diversity. 

 



April 11, 1995 

 
1520 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure to 
speak to this resolution today, all the more so because last year 
we had essentially the same resolution that came to the floor of 
the House and it never was voted on due to time constraints. 
 
And that in a sense typifies some of the problem in terms of 
dealing with endangered spaces in our province and in our 
country, that time marches on and in some respect very little 
happens. And so I think it's important to get beyond talk and to 
emphasize the importance of action to secure representative 
areas and ecosystems across our province. 
 
And that's why it's so important to revisit this resolution this 
year, to increase public awareness of this important issue, and 
more than that  to secure a common consent of the House to 
act to implement the endangered spaces plan and to complete 
our representative areas network here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to begin by quoting from a professor emeritus of the 
University of Saskatchewan, one of the deans of ecology here in 
Saskatchewan, Dr. Stan Rowe, on the importance of conserving 
systems, ecological systems. And he writes: 
 
 What is important today is to change our understanding 

of the world, to focus on ecosystems rather than on the 
individual species and organisms that are parts of them. 
Such changed understandings of the realities around us 
will affect fundamentally how we live on our planet 
home. 

 
And I think that's very well said. And we're beginning to 
understand the importance of living in ecosystems and having 
human activity that is in concert with biological activity and 
life. 
 
And that's why the province has recently worked to complete 
the representative areas network here in Saskatchewan, a 
network that has 11 different ecoregions; four different 
ecozones: the Taiga Shield, the Boreal Shield, the Boreal Plain, 
and the Prairie regions. And this is further broken down then 
into 11 different ecoregions, and then beyond that 150 other 
subdivisions of ecological zones across the province. 
 
Some people might be saying: well wait a minute, when we're 
talking about the World Wildlife Fund's action plan for 
endangered spaces, aren't we really talking about 12 per cent — 
protecting 12 per cent of natural spaces? 
 
And there has been an evolution, both with the World Wildlife 
Fund and with federal and provincial governments, that says the 
12 per cent figure isn't the be-all and end-all; it's only a 
guideline or framework for securing representative areas. 
 
And therein is the rationale for the representative areas network. 
We need to not just secure a 12 per cent land base, but more  

particularly we have to look at the scientific base for identifying 
certain representative areas in our province that need protection. 
 
And then, in order to do that, we need to do what is called gap 
analysis — to map out in a very deliberate fashion those areas 
that need to be protected and are not presently protected. 
 
And we can see, if we look at the protected areas, the ecosystem 
plan for the province, that an area such as the Taiga Shield has 
absolutely no protection, no formal protection, in Saskatchewan 
right now. 
 
Other areas will have more protection. The mid-boreal upland 
forest has substantial protection. But this is an area of the 
province that is under increasing threat, as the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley indicated, from clear-cutting. 
 
And so we need to take a very studied, scientific view of what it 
is we're going to protect here in Saskatchewan before it is gone 
and we lose the opportunity to protect it. 
 
But I think the good news in this regard is that in the course of 
the last year the province has produced the ecosystems region 
map. And the Department of Environment and Natural 
Resources deserves immense credit in this regard because for 
the first time we really have a comprehensive framework upon 
which planning can proceed. 
 
On this framework we can identify areas that need to be 
protected, as I said. We can expand our knowledge and 
integrate the knowledge of plants, animals, ecological 
processes, and the impact of human activity and development in 
these ecoregions. 
 
The percentage of areas that need to be protected really is not 
the most important issue at this stage. At this stage of the game 
we need to complete the protection of ecoregions in our 
province. 
 
And I want to quote from the director of . . . the Saskatchewan 
coordinator of the World Wildlife Fund here in Saskatchewan, 
Alan Appleby, when he writes: 
 
 The World Wildlife Fund Endangered Spaces Campaign 

has made a difference in the planning, designation and 
management of our remaining natural areas and 
wilderness over the past few years. It will take a 
continued effort by all of us to ensure that we meet the 
goal. 

 
We are now at about the halfway point in the World Wildlife 
Fund's endangered spaces campaign. It was initiated in 1989, I 
believe, and the goal was to have the areas protected by the year 
2000. The province, I must say, is committed to this plan. In the 
new forest management policy framework that was issued by 
the Government of Saskatchewan just a few months ago, there 
is expressly an ecosystem approach to planning based on the 
ecoregions of the province. 
 



April 11, 1995 

 
1521 

And I can say from my contact with groups in northern 
Saskatchewan who are concerned with clear-cutting and 
harvesting operations, that we need to apply integrated planning 
and ecosystem planning to the forest community here in 
Saskatchewan. There's an urgent need to protect our land base 
while we have it. Clear-cutting in northern Saskatchewan 
clearly threatens some of the ecoregions that have not been 
protected yet adequately. We have an obligation to future 
generations and we need to honour that obligation by acting 
now. 
 
(1430) 
 
As is indicated in the World Wildlife Fund's endangered spaces 
book, which really kicked off the endangered spaces campaign 
a number of years ago, there really are only three basic or 
fundamental options for us. The first, that we consciously 
decide that the wilderness is important and we plan our future 
accordingly. A second option would be to muddle along in our 
present state, having made no conscious decision, and let 
whatever shakes out constitute what we get in the end. And the 
third option of course is to consciously decide that wilderness is 
important and to plan our future accordingly. 
 
We don't have for ever to make such decisions. We need to act 
now, not just for ourselves but for future generations. And that's 
why I urge all members of the House this year to vote in favour 
of this resolution, to send a clear message to people across 
Saskatchewan that the preservation of our 11 ecosystems 
regions is a very important priority, not just for government but 
for Saskatchewan people as well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm very 
pleased to join in the debate this afternoon on what is a very 
significant and rather important feature of Saskatchewan and 
indeed of the entire world, when we start talking about our 
environment and the management of our environment. 
 
It seems to me that this Assembly is seeing an instant replay 
from last year, because the government members have the same 
motion as last year; they have the two same speakers as last 
year; and if I am not incorrect, I also was following along in 
Hansard as they repeated the speeches from last year, 
essentially. 
 
But I say that in a little bit of jest because we also have the 
same speakers as we had last year, because our objective, Mr. 
Speaker, is still the same. And essentially we agree. We agree 
with the sentiments that were being expressed by the members 
opposite. 
 
One thing, before I get into my remarks, that caught my 
attention is that, Mr. Speaker, I, as an outdoorsman, as a hunter, 
as a naturalist amateur type of thing, I am somewhat concerned 
about the clear-cutting that goes on in our province in the forest  

industry as well. I abhor the degradation of the beauty of the 
North, when you drive along on the roads and there's the road 
and there's the ditch and there's the ploughed-up field that used 
to be forest. And that's essentially what we're seeing. 
 
I noticed, Mr. Speaker, in passing, that both members opposite 
expressed concern about that very same issue. And I would 
remind those two members that they do have the reins of power, 
they do have the reins of government. They are in a position to 
do something about that. 
 
I'm not saying that clear-cutting is something that has to be 
eliminated, but certainly kept on top of. And I still want 
someone to prove to me that indeed, as the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley said, that people are telling us that clear-cutting 
in a forest is like a forest fire, and comparing that to 
summerfallow and a prairie fire, that they're akin to each other. 
 
And I would suggest also, and agree with you, that that's a little 
bit of a stretch of the imagination, I think, and is drawing a long 
bow. 
 
But because we are limited, Mr. Speaker, I should get on with 
some of the salient features of my remarks, and that is that the 
member from Indian Head I think should be commended for his 
commitment as an individual, as a member of the wildlife 
federation and so on, as he tries to live up to a commitment of 
preservation of Saskatchewan's wildlife and wildlife habitats 
and wildlife spaces. And I know he's involved with many 
organizations for that end. 
 
And being that it is National Wildlife Week, at the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, it's very appropriate I believe that we're talking 
about this particular topic today because you cannot isolate 
wildlife from the spaces as such. 
 
So I'm not opposed to the member's motion. However, I think it 
can be improved upon and I will be moving at the conclusion of 
my remarks, Mr. Speaker, an amendment to his motion. 
 
Now it's the official opposition's opinion that the minister has 
not done enough to assist conservation organizations and the 
World Wildlife Fund in achieving their goals. And I don't 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that he has done enough to achieve 
unanimous support of this Assembly, so therefore we will be 
making that amendment that I referred to. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, during National Wildlife Week, it was 
my pleasure to speak to the similar motion. But prior to that 
debate, I had the opportunity to meet with a gentleman that the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland referred to, Alan Appleby, 
to discuss with him Saskatchewan's endangered spaces. And I 
was able to hear from him firsthand about the goals and 
aspirations of the World Wildlife Fund and its endangered 
spaces campaign. 
 
And after our meeting, Mr. Speaker, it was obvious that an 
amendment was necessary because Saskatchewan's marks on 
the endangered spaces campaign report card were essentially  



April 11, 1995 

 
1522 

quite poor. The goal of the endangered spaces campaign is to 
establish protected areas representing all of Canada's natural 
regions by the year 2000. And that campaign, I might add, is 
supported by not only the members of this legislature, I'm sure, 
but 550,000 other Canadians — all of these supporters have 
signed the Canadian wildlife charter. 
 
Now last year in my meeting, Mr. Appleby informed me and 
other members of our caucus that the endangered spaces 
campaign supporters included the Premier and most of his 
caucus, and that's good to hear. However, it's strange that a 
government whose members publicly support the endeavours of 
the World Wildlife Fund have actually done rather little to live 
up to that commitment. 
 
Every year a report card is handed out by the World Wildlife 
Fund. They prepare a report card and, Mr. Speaker, do we live 
up to our 12 per cent of our spaces? No, we do not, Mr. 
Speaker. We had less than 5 per cent of the land area in 
Saskatchewan that has been protected. 
 
So Saskatchewan's grade did go, because of the areas that we 
have, Saskatchewan's grade did go from C to B, to B minus 
actually. 
 
But today I'm afraid and I suspect that we're not very much 
better off, Mr. Speaker. The report card hasn't been issued yet. I 
understand the report card is only coming out next Wednesday, 
and I certainly hope that by that time that I will be proven 
indeed that Saskatchewan has improved. Last year we only had 
3 of the 36 natural regions that were fully represented by 
protected areas. 
 
Now what I'm concerned about — and I was last year, and I am 
again this year — is a government that says yes, we believe in 
protecting our endangered spaces. However in the Meadow 
Lake area and the Bronson forest area, we've got 58,000 acres 
that were put under a parks plan in order to protect it that is 
now going to be sold off to the Thunderchild Band. And to me, 
Mr. Speaker, the reason it was put under the parks plan was 
because that was the proper thing to do. 
 
So there's a whole host of questions that could be asked on that 
particular aspect. The minister says that he has the right to do 
that according to section 4.07 of the land treaty entitlement that 
gives him the authority to do that, as I quote: that the land can 
be sold in exceptional circumstances. 
 
And because this is part of the land entitlement situation, that's 
a special circumstance that warrants the selling of this land to 
the Thunderchild Band as I understand it. For what purpose, 
Mr. Speaker? I don't know for sure. And therein lies the danger. 
We would like to think that they will continue to be good 
husbands . . . or practise good husbandry practices. But there is 
no definition. Is it going to be used for logging? Is it going to be 
used to put in more oil wells? 
 
Those are areas in that region that it could very well be, Mr. 
Speaker. So I just raise that as part of the concern perhaps that  

instead of making progress, we might indeed, and in fact, be 
taking a step backwards. And we certainly intend to ask the 
minister for update of those negotiations, and we understand 
they're still going on. So hopefully that it will happen that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, as I'm running out of time here, I 
will make an amendment, a motion now, an amendment to the 
original motion. I move: 
 
 That all the words following the word "Assembly" and 

preceding the phrase "conservation organization," be 
deleted and substituted with: 

 
 "encourage the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management to live up to commitments made to." 
 
And that section will be inserted, and this is going to be 
seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington. 
 
We're not objecting to the main motion, Mr. Speaker. We think 
it's a little bit too kind. What it is doing is complimenting the 
minister. What we're saying is, you've still got a ways to go, and 
that's the intent of the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I will sit down 
so that you don't have to get up. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Draper: — . . . permission to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker, sir. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Draper: — In the west gallery is seated my daughter, 
Ingrid Fedorof, who is visiting us from Toronto. She's just 
completing a Ph.D. in psychology at the University of Toronto. 
 
She's accompanied by my wife Erica, of course, who doesn't 
even have a grade 12, but nevertheless she's the best 
psychologist I know. And I'd like you to welcome them to the 
proceedings this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Protection of Endangered Spaces 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to second the motion by my colleague from Rosthern. 
 
As the member from Indian Head-Wolseley has pointed out, the 
World Wildlife Fund endangered spaces campaign is an 
important organizational move. The World Wildlife Fund is the 
largest private conservation organization in the world, with over 
5 million members around the globe. 



April 11, 1995 

 
1523 

The endangered spaces campaign is a cooperative effort to 
establish protected areas representing all of Canada's natural 
regions by the year 2000. Specifically, achieving this goal 
involves setting aside at least 12 per cent of Canada's lands and 
water — a target in the federal green plan. 
 
Since its inception in 1989, the World Wildlife Fund's 
endangered spaces campaign has been endorsed by 11 of 
Canada's 13 senior governments. In fact one of the first public 
discussions of endangered spaces was held in Regina in 1989 at 
the federal-provincial parks conference. 
 
There are over half a million Canadians who have signed the 
organization's charter, Mr. Speaker, and is also supported by 
such organizations as the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, the 
United Church, the Girl Guides, and the hundreds of 
environmental and conservation organizations. 
 
The goal for the endangered spaces campaign is simple, 
straightforward, and measurable. This goal is to conserve our 
biological diversity by ensuring that a representative sample of 
each of Canada's 340 natural regions is saved as a park or other 
protected area by the year 2000. 
 
We have to remember that the year 2000 is only five years 
away. 
 
So how is Saskatchewan doing so far, Mr. Speaker, in reaching 
this goal? The most recent numbers show that less than 5 per 
cent of the land area in Saskatchewan is protected, and only 3, 
only 3 of our 36 natural regions, are fully represented by 
protected areas. As my colleague mentioned, new numbers will 
be released next week, and I also hope that our province will 
have made an improvement over last year's efforts. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the World Wildlife Fund states that in 
our province, there are no long-term plan in place to ensure the 
completion of this task. No long-term plan, with only five years 
to go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
Those words sound familiar, very familiar, Mr. Speaker, when 
speaking about the Saskatchewan NDP's government. They also 
have no long-term plan. Instead of developing long-term plans, 
the government is sending very mixed messages when it comes 
to endangered spaces. 
 
Evidence of these mixed messages appeared last year, Mr. 
Speaker, on March 17 when a Canadian Press story stated that 
the Saskatchewan's provincial government, quote: wants to ease 
its park system into one that emphasizes wilderness protection 
over recreation. 
 
An admirable goal — we'll protect the environment over 
recreational needs. Yet five days later we learned that the 
provincial government was negotiating to sell large tracts of the 
Bronson forest and recreation site to the Thunderchild Indian 
Band. 

How does such a move emphasize wilderness protection, has to 
be the question. How does that enhance the amount of territory 
within Saskatchewan that will be protected as a wilderness 
wildlife area? How does it fit into the goals of the World 
Wildlife Fund's endangered spaces campaign? Will it become a 
logging area, Mr. Speaker? Will there be natural gas drilling? 
Just what is the government doing to ensure that the Bronson 
forest and other areas will continue to be protected? 
 
Originally the Bronson forest was designated as a recreation site 
so that it would be under the umbrella and protection of the 
park system, which made sense, Mr. Speaker, because then we 
had another ecological biosphere that was being protected. 
 
Evidence like the Bronson forest sale goes directly against the 
goal of keeping 12 per cent of our surface in its natural state, 
even though the minister said last year, on March 22, that his 
government is committed, with every other country around the 
world: 
 
 to helping to establish that 12 to 13 per cent of the 

earth's surface in its natural state so that our biodiversity 
on which all life is based can be maintained. 

 
That's out of Hansard last year, Mr. Speaker, page 1072. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has on many occasion stated that 
they are out to create wilderness areas and recreation sites in 
Saskatchewan. Just how great is that commitment when the 
same areas that the minister claims to be committed to are in the 
process of being sold off? It doesn't make any sense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The endangered spaces campaign operates through the 
affiliation and cooperation of many groups and people across 
Canada. The actions necessary to meet the goal of this 
organization, in their own words, are, and I quote: largely the 
responsibility of governments. 
 
It's important to note that a national Environics poll asked 
Canadians whether their federal, provincial, and territorial 
governments should be held to their original commitments to 
complete a representative network of protected areas by the year 
2000, be given more time, or be required to complete this goal 
even faster. In response to this poll, 48 per cent of Canadians 
polled, representing a wide range of occupations, education, 
and income, said do it on time. And 21 per cent said, step up 
the pace. Only 28 per cent were prepared to grant any 
extension. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, a second national survey by Statistics 
Canada indicates that over 90 per cent of Canadians contribute 
to spending 5.6 billion annually on wildlife-related activities. 
And over 60 per cent are willing to pay increased taxes or 
higher prices if these were needed to conserve the wetlands, 
forests, and other habitats on which wildlife depends. Now any 
time taxpayers say they are willing to pay higher taxes, the 
government should be listening. 
 



April 11, 1995 

 
1524 

When fishing expenditures and U.S. (United States) tourism 
spending is factored in, the annual direct total spending on 
wildlife-related activities in Canada exceeds $9 billion. This is 
what StatsCan dispassionately calls a significant outlay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is completing a network of protected 
areas official public policy in Canada, with clear commitments 
and responsibilities acknowledged in writing, but there is a 
widespread, popular mandate to deliver on these promises. 
Therefore I urge the Minister of the Environment and Resource 
Management to work toward achieving the goals outlined by 
the endangered spaces campaign. 
 
In addition I urge the elected members from all levels of 
government, concerned citizens, and volunteers, to work 
collectively to ensure this goal is met. It might help us all to 
keep the slogan for this year's Wildlife Week in mind: wildlife, 
yours to recover. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the motion moved by my 
colleague from Rosthern. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak to the motion put forward by the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley. 
 
Recent news events about Canada's fish wars have driven home 
a point about our environment and our economy. That point, 
Mr. Speaker, is that our economic fortunes are often tied to our 
environment, and when we abuse our environment in the short 
term, it means that we have jeopardized ourselves economically 
in the long term. In the example of the Atlantic fishing industry, 
that point is, where there is no wilderness, there is no work. 
 
The tragic consequences of a declining fish stock should be a 
loud and forceful message to us about the importance of 
protecting our natural resources. These resources, which once 
seemed endless, have proven to be finite and irreplaceable. For 
this reason, we must not only respect our environment and our 
wildlife, but in many cases we must protect them. 
 
The endangered spaces campaign of the World Wildlife Fund 
was born in 1989. The goal of the campaign is to conserve our 
biological diversity by ensuring that a representative sample of 
each of Canada's 340 natural regions is saved as a protected 
area by the year 2000. 
 
According to the most recent report of the World Wildlife 
Fund, only 3 of Saskatchewan 36 natural regions are fully 
represented by protected areas, and there is no long-term plan in 
place to ensure the completion of the original goal with only 
five years remaining. 
 
Today's debate is perhaps a week premature, since Wednesday 
— that's this coming Wednesday — the World Wildlife Fund 
will release its fifth endangered spaces progress report, the first 
one since September 1993. In the last report, Saskatchewan's 
progress received a grade of B minus. Also, as I just mentioned, 
this last report indicated that only 3 of Saskatchewan 36 regions  

have been adequately represented with protected areas. An 
additional 13 are either moderately or partially represented, and 
20 have little or no representation. 
 
We will watch, with much anticipation, next week's 
announcement about our province's progress toward its 
endangered spaces goal. 
 
According to a statement just three months ago by the World 
Wildlife Fund president, Monte Hummel, there is still no plan 
or strategy as to how Saskatchewan Department of Environment 
and Resource Management intends to achieve the goal of 
protecting the province's natural heritage. How much has 
changed in three months? We shall see next week. 
 
I want to say in closing that the Liberal caucus encourages the 
government to live up to its agreement and commitment to 
protect Saskatchewan's biological diversity. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to stand in support 
of the original motion from my colleague, the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley, and just say a few words about this 
motion. 
 
It's often been said that a journey of a thousand miles begins 
with a single step, and I think that we as a government have 
taken some significant steps to ensure that the endangered 
spaces in this province are protected. We all realize — the 
people of Saskatchewan and this government — that 
Saskatchewan has a tremendous diversity and a variety of 
landscape. And we all understand that it's important to protect 
and to preserve them. 
 
Saskatchewan in fact is most fortunate in its variety. And I'd 
just like to read a little description which is from the 
introduction of Ecological Regions of Saskatchewan about the 
variety of regions that we have here: 
 
 Saskatchewan exhibits a variety of landscapes from the 

49th parallel to its northern limits at 60 degrees latitude, 
for nature over many years has created characteristic 
zones that reflect a specific relationship between 
climate, soils and vegetation. 

 
 The southern prairie grasslands gradually blend into 

aspen parkland. The latter then merges into mixed 
deciduous and coniferous forest that extends to the 
southern part of the Precambrian Shield. Farther 
northward lies a complex of lakes, rivers, bogs, patchy 
forests and rock outcrops. Deep wind-modified sands 
occupy a large area south of Lake Athabasca in the 
northwest. The northeast corner is characterized by 
subarctic forests on a coarse drift plain. 

 
 As the landscape changes, the communities of 

mammals, birds and other animals also vary. Man's  



April 11, 1995 

 
1525 

occupations also change, from a rancher in the south, to a 
farmer or woodsworker in the central area, to a 
fisherman or trapper in the north. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the government is working very hard to preserve 
Saskatchewan lands. We have a system of parks that works 
towards protecting our lakes, our streams, our wildlife. And 
preserving our natural resources is a very high priority. 
 
We're committed to developing a comprehensive system of 
representative areas, and my colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland-University, has talked a little bit about 
the recently completed project of Environment and Resource 
Management which was the release of the Saskatchewan 
ecoregions map, the first step towards developing a 
representative areas network. So progress is being made. 
 
Having a representative area system will help us preserve and 
protect the province's native biodiversity as well. Biodiversity, 
while a relatively new concept, is a priority for our government. 
It's a complex concept, but in basic terms it includes not only all 
the species we have, but also their genetic variability and our 
ecosystems. If one part of an ecosystem is damaged, it affects 
the interconnected world of which biodiversity is a part. So it is 
very important to Saskatchewan and its people that our 
province's natural biodiversity be preserved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the World Wildlife Fund has challenged each 
province to protect 12 per cent of its natural heritage by the year 
2000. It sets annual goals and issues a yearly report. 
 
We're very pleased in Saskatchewan to be able to talk about our 
park system plan which has adopted and gives high priority to 
protection of Saskatchewan's natural heritage. We've endorsed 
the Canadian Wilderness Charter and committed Saskatchewan 
to substantial progress by the year 2000. 
 
In 1992 we added 24 per cent in land and water base to the park 
system, and an additional 1.5 million hectares of Crown land 
were designated as wildlife habitat lands. We were very pleased 
in 1994 to establish one new provincial wilderness park, 
Clarence-Steepbanks Lakes; a new protected area to protect 
watercourses within Grasslands National Park; and we added 
another 203 hectares to three provincial parks. 
 
Our park system focuses on natural area representation, 
protection, and recreation. The parks are of great importance to 
the people in this province. And while I haven't had the 
opportunity to visit all of them, those I have visited are truly 
beautiful and very representative of Saskatchewan's diversity. 
You can canoe or kayak in Saskatchewan's great rivers. You can 
fish or sail on her lakes. You can ride in the grasslands, and you 
can spend many hours walking in the forests. And in all of these 
parks, you can study and learn about the various plants and 
animals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the challenge today is to find ways to preserve and 
protect Saskatchewan's natural heritage. Educating people about 
Saskatchewan's wonderful variety is important, and our schools  

and teachers are doing that. Encouraging people to visit our 
parks and see this variety for themselves is equally important. 
 
Working with other groups and organizations to achieve this 
common goal is commendable. And, Mr. Speaker, it was my 
pleasure last week to open an art show at the Norman 
MacKenzie Art Gallery which was entitled: Save our 
endangered spaces. 
 
Saskatchewan artist Darlene Hay created 20 canvasses which 
represented selected special and ecologically important areas in 
Saskatchewan. And what was so interesting about this art show 
was that it combined the scientific and abstract idea of 
endangered spaces and it brought it to life in the beautiful 
paintings that Darlene had painted. She had representation there 
of the Matador hills, the grasslands, the rivers, the Athabasca 
Sand Dunes, and other areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all have to make a commitment to work hard 
and work together to preserve Saskatchewan's incredible 
diversity. And I believe we are doing that. So I'm very pleased 
to support the original motion before us this afternoon. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the amendment . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I am sorry. You are absolutely 
right. Under the new rule . . . I thank the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland-University for reminding me. Under rule 
17, unless there are more speakers, we will now begin the 
question and answer period up to a maximum of 10 minutes. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to clarify my 
remarks here. I understand from last year's debate that a 
member does not necessarily need to ask a question, but they 
can further elaborate? Yes. I'd just like to comment on the 
inconsistency in the amendment that is being made. On the one 
hand, the official opposition moves an amendment to encourage 
the Minister of the Environment to live up to commitments to 
conservation. And on the other hand, they say that there is no 
plan and that there is no commitment. 
 
They can't have it both ways. I mean either there is a 
commitment that the minister does need to live up to or there is 
no commitment. But they can't have it both ways. 
 
I would say today that there is a commitment on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to live up with the plan. As the 
main motion itself indicates, the government is working on a 
representative areas network system. As I indicated in my 
remarks, the government is doing gap analysis, which is 
essentially finding the pieces of the puzzle that are still needed 
to complete the ecological picture and the protection here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I think it's very clear that the Government of  



April 11, 1995 

 
1526 

Saskatchewan and the department of environment and natural 
resources is committed to a representative areas network. They 
have taken the first step in publishing a comprehensive map 
which is really a framework or touchstone that we've never had 
before. And I don't think it's good enough to say that nothing is 
happening. There is a lot happening. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
whether it's in rebuttal or whether it's a question or a comment 
— I'm not quite sure — I don't think . . . I didn't hear all of my 
colleague's speech on this side, but I definitely know that I was 
not at any point suggesting that nothing had been done and 
nothing was being accomplished. 
 
We know that 5 per cent of Saskatchewan has already been 
declared an endangered space. The goal is 12 per cent. What I'm 
suggesting is that there is a big difference between 5 per cent 
and 12 per cent as a goal, and what we're looking for is a plan 
where their commitment is going to be met. That's all that we're 
looking at. 
 
And then when I see some such things as Bronson forest being 
sold out from under the plan, then I am . . . that is the part that 
we are questioning. We're hoping that their commitment is solid 
and we're hoping that there is a plan in place to achieve that, 
and we're going to support that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is our situation, that's what my comments were intended 
as, and so that is my response to you. 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some brief 
comments. I'm certainly very pleased that all members that have 
spoke today are very supportive of the principle of establishing 
and securing representative areas of our ecosystems here in the 
province. And so that is certainly encouraging. 
 
I guess I would also like to add, as we get into the 
implementation of the plan, there will be a number of issues 
that will have to be dealt with, third-party interests and so on 
and so forth. So hopefully we can also have as equally a 
cooperative atmosphere as we've had here today as we proceed 
on this agenda to identify and secure these natural areas. 
 
The department has done an excellent job in producing a map 
of the areas, the various ecoregions of the province. So we do 
have a framework to build upon and it's a matter of getting on 
with the job. And this will only be successful with the 
cooperation of all political parties, but more importantly, 
industry, landowners, first nations, conservation groups, local 
communities. It's going to be a very difficult task but I think it's 
one that we all believe firmly in, that we must achieve. 
 
And as the hon. member from Rosthern said, 5 or 6 per cent of 
our natural areas protected in one form or another is not 
sufficient. A minimum of 12 per cent has been identified by the 
Brundtlund Commission. And so I encourage us to pursue on 
this path to identify and get these natural areas established 
throughout the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Amendment negatived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By leave 
of the Assembly, I move that we turn our attention to the 
Committee of the Whole, Bill 33, An Act respecting the 
Donation of Food. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Permission to make a comment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — All right, I'll permit the member to make a 
comment, if that's all right with the House. I assume that the 
member can make a comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, we are certainly prepared to 
give leave; it's on the understanding that when this matter is 
over, we'll return to the private members' business as we were 
proceeding. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — It is so understood. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to business of the committee, 
I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With leave, for the 
introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To you and through 
you to members of the Assembly, I would with great pleasure 
like to introduce Mr. Ed Bloos who is sitting in the Speaker's 
gallery. He is from the Regina food bank and he has joined us 
this afternoon as he is very interested in the proceedings this 
afternoon with respect to The Donation of Food Act. 
 
So I'd ask all members to please welcome him here this 
afternoon, and I'm sure he'll be enjoying what we're going to be 
doing here in the next few moments. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to join with the Leader of the Official Opposition to welcome  



April 11, 1995 

 
1527 

Mr. Bloos on behalf of the government members. And of 
course we all have a great interest in the work that Mr. Bloos, 
his board, staff, and volunteers are doing. And I had the 
pleasure of spending some time with him recently, so I would 
like to join the hon. member and again invite Mr. Bloos and I 
know all members will give him another round of applause. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Donation of Food 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to make just a couple of comments, 
and I have a couple of questions for the Leader of the 
Opposition, who is the sponsor of the Bill. 
 
I think the leader knows and the opposition know that we have 
commended him for at least coming up with an idea that could 
make a difference for low income people. And we've also . . . 
we respect that, and we've also of course did our own 
consulting with the food banks and with other jurisdictions as 
to whether or not this has made some difference in terms of 
bringing in additional food supplies. 
 
In some cases this has made a difference, in our survey, and in 
some cases it hasn't. But if of course there is any chance that 
additional food will go to the food bank, then we're very 
supportive of that. 
 
One of the points I would like to make before I ask my 
questions to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition is to indicate 
that of course this is an immediate response. This is not a 
long-term solution. This is not an intermediate solution. This is 
an immediate response that may make some difference, and to 
that degree we're supportive. 
 
The key of course is to providing low income people with the 
needs that they have and with the hope that they need to have, is 
providing good economic development climate, is getting the 
fiscal house of the province in order, which I think most would 
agree is the case in the province today, and of course making 
sure that meaningful, long-term jobs are created. 
 
And the strategy of the government, which is working very 
well, Mr. Chair, is the strategy of the Partnership for Renewal, 
complemented by shorter-term programs like the initiatives of 
New Careers Corporation where some 6,400 opportunities for 
jobs, training, and education are provided for people on 
assistance — also, Mr. Speaker, programs like Future Skills and 
JobStart, designed to support people on assistance, young 
people, and low income people to access employment options 
which again that is the long-term solution to this. 
 

And I know that the Leader of the Opposition wasn't here as 
late as 1990 when his party would not acknowledge that 
poverty existed in Saskatchewan. I don't hold him accountable 
for that, but certainly poverty in this province grew 
tremendously during the 1980s. Where in 1982 there were no 
food banks in the province, by the time the previous 
administration left office, there were 10 food banks in this 
province and growing rapidly. 
 
We're trying to of course reverse that trend. And there's good 
news, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, that the case-loads are down 
across the province in 8 out of the 11 district offices in Social 
Services. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess what I want to challenge the Leader of the 
Opposition to think about is, in the past you will know, last year 
you will know — we don't know how you're going to vote this 
year — but last year you will know that you voted against, in 
fact your entire . . . all of your members voted against the child 
development and nutrition program which provides $1 million 
to school lunch programs, some 47, 48 school lunch programs 
across the province. Now you voted against that. 
 
You also voted against the budget of Social Services last year 
which gave an increase of about 9 per cent to low income 
families. And I think it's important to know, it's important for 
the public to know, that you, sir, voted against that increase, 
that increase which lifted the cap off utilities for low income 
people, where we are paying now the actual costs for utilities 
for people on assistance so that they don't have to subsidize 
their utility costs by dipping into their food allowance. You 
voted against that budget. 
 
You also voted against a budget whereby we're giving the . . . 
where you take single parent families on assistance, we're 
giving the oldest child in the single parent family a food 
allowance as equivalent to if they were an adult. You voted 
against that, sir. You also voted against the northern food 
allowance of $50 per child in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you voted against all of those initiatives designed to help 
low income people. And so what I'm asking . . . The first 
question I'd like to ask you is: unlike last year and the year 
before where you voted against those initiatives, to be 
consistent with this Bill, which we're supporting, will you 
promise me, will you promise low income people, will you 
promise people who use the food bank, that you will not vote 
against those initiatives this year which give them more money 
to put more food on the table? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we're trying  very difficult  on this side of the House to 
keep this debate at a level that doesn't involve politics, doesn't 
involve politics, sir. And you're trying your very best to score 
some political points on something that is very, very 
fundamental to the people of Saskatchewan, and that's to have 
good, adequate food services available to them. 



April 11, 1995 

 
1528 

This is part of a long-term solution and we recognize that, and 
that's the reason we brought it forward. We would ask you, we 
would ask you if you can for a moment, to set aside your 
partisan leanings and do something that is good for the people 
of this province and be a part of the solution to this. Be a part of 
the solution rather than trying to score political points on this. 
You can save that for another day, and you know very well that 
you can do that. 
 
I respect your opinions and your judgement and all of that when 
it comes to all these other issues. We're dealing with this at the 
moment. And I would ask you if you could just for a moment, 
Mr. Member, please try and set aside that. Take the high road 
on this for one opportunity in your career here and take the high 
road and let's just get this done. Let's just get on with it and get 
it finished. 
 
We are prepared to pass this immediately. We believe this will 
help deal with the problems of hunger in this province. We 
believe that the people are waiting for this kind of thing. We 
believe that the food banks across this province are in need of 
this type of measure. We believe that people are waiting for 
this, sir. And they are not waiting any longer for any political 
speeches from the minister who I think is just trying, as I said, 
to score some political points on this. 
 
All across Canada there are food banks. We all have to 
recognize that. Jurisdictions all across Canada, whether they are 
under any political stripe, are all faced with the same types of 
problems, sir. In Saskatchewan, the same thing exists. And 
that's why in other provinces they have brought about 
something of this nature to deal with it. And that's why we are 
bringing it forward in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are not trying to score any political points on this. They 
never did right from the very outset. You can try as you like, but 
the fact of the matter remains, this is good for Saskatchewan, 
this is good for Saskatchewan people. This does not cost one 
dime for the people of this province in terms of taxation. 
 
What we are saying to you is, join with us now, join with us 
now and get this finished, get this Bill completed this afternoon 
so that the food banks will have food to give to the needy 
people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Chairman, I obviously touched a 
nerve. All I'm saying to the hon. member — and he didn't 
answer my question — all I'm saying to the hon. member is I 
told you we supported the Bill. And I tell you if that's the high 
road, we support the Bill. 
 
All I'm saying to you is this is one Bill. The agenda for low 
income people is a whole package. All I'm suggesting to you is, 
will you be consistent? Will you support . . . I'm going to 
support the Bill. I'm asking you: will you support the child 
development and nutrition grants which give $1 million to feed  

hungry families? Will you support that? That's not a political 
question. 
 
Will you support the Social Services budget which, as I 
outlined, gives special provisions to low income families over 
and above which was the case a year or two ago. That's all I'm 
asking you. Will you be consistent and support that? 
 
I could say to you, would you also withdraw your Bills that ask 
the government to reverse the labour legislation where we're 
trying to give some part-time benefits to part-time workers. I 
mean if you're consistent and concerned about low income 
people, I would hope that you would admit most working 
people want part-time benefits for part-time work. 
 
So all I'm suggesting to you is we're going to support your Bill, 
but I asked you, and I guess you're not prepared to answer it, I 
asked you would you be prepared to be consistent and to 
support the other measures that make a difference to low 
income people? That was my question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yes, I'm finding it very difficult, Mr. Member, to 
try and trade off — and that appears to be what you're doing — 
trying to trade off support for this, trying to trade off support for 
this Bill, with trying to get support for some of your initiatives. 
We will be very happy to look at your pieces of legislation, all 
of your Bills as they're presented, and we'll judge them on their 
merits at that time, as we would similarly wish you to judge this 
on its merits now. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, the third 
party caucus would just like to support the intention of this Bill 
and urge that it be passed as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you and, Mr. Chairman, Madam Member, 
we certainly welcome your support for this initiative. We 
welcome the non-partisan nature that you've given us that 
support this afternoon. 
 
As I've said earlier, we are very sure that this will help. We do 
not believe it is the total solution but we believe it will help. 
And that's what we are trying to do with this piece of legislation 
this afternoon. We believe it's good for Saskatchewan, and we 
just say that with the support of the government and the third 
party, I think we can move on and finish this up here. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Donation of Food 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 



April 11, 1995 

 
1529 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Young Offenders Pilot Project 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to rise in this Assembly today to move a motion 
addressing the problem of young offenders in our society. And 
I'm going to move this motion at the end of my speech, remarks, 
Mr. Speaker, and I believe it will be seconded by the member 
from Souris-Cannington. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion I'm presenting to this Assembly reads 
as such: 
 
 That this Assembly urge the government to immediately 

establish a young offenders pilot project based on the 
programing recently implemented in Manitoba, where 
young offenders are sentenced to serve time in boot 
camps (closed custody facility), work camps (open 
custody), and intensive custody; and that after a 
predetermined time the pilot project be studied and the 
degree of success be determined in terms of the 
potential for rehabilitation of young offenders in 
comparison to the current system we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt that many people are very 
concerned with the Young Offenders Act and the fact that so 
many young people, minors if you will, are becoming involved 
in more and more aggressive criminal activity and abhorrent 
crimes against society. 
 
And this past weekend was just another example of where 
young individuals who haven't received . . . and I'm not exactly 
sure, but I would suggest they haven't received the love and care 
and attention at home. And because of that, whether it was peer 
pressure or what it was, three young children, ages 13, 14, and 
15, in Montreal, bludgeoned to death an elderly couple in their 
early 70s. And that was a story that was right across this country 
on news media on Friday evening and I'm sure shook the people 
across this nation. 
 
And as I've heard over the weekend, as people have been 
bringing to my attention, there's a real concern as to how we 
treat individuals who would abuse the rights and the livelihood 
of other individuals. And in this case, two senior, retired people 
who were probably enjoying life and enjoying their time 
together, resting after the fruits of their labour, only to have it 
abruptly ended by three young individuals, individuals that 
under our present system and under the present Young 
Offenders Act will not be named. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm not exactly sure what process the law is 
going to follow as they would try these individuals, in view of 
the heinous attack and the murder that was committed. But I 
know that many people across this nation, and certainly in the  

province of Saskatchewan, are becoming very concerned and 
would like to see different methods implemented that would 
allow and, if you will, rehabilitate many of our young people 
who may become, in many cases, Mr. Speaker, not necessarily 
involved in a criminal activity because they themselves thought 
it up, but possibly because of the peer pressure or the crowd 
they're with, or even the fact that maybe there isn't that home 
environment that they would dearly love to have and that so 
many of our young people are privileged to have. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would dare say that one of the problems in our 
society today is the fact that we have a society that is made up 
of families who feel it more important to have both members at 
work, both members out drawing an income to have as 
substantially high an income as possible with the idea, it seems, 
that they can buy their children happiness just by generating 
enough activity, income activity, and then buying the things 
their children need rather than . . . failing to realize that what 
most children are looking for is a home environment where 
there's love and there's friendship. 
 
And in most cases where you will find, Mr. Speaker, where 
children have the opportunity to come home and they open the 
door and there are nice, warm aromas flowing through the 
house, of fresh bread or fresh cookies or something in the oven 
for supper, and the greeting of, hi Mom, and the mother 
responding — or if it happens to be the father who happens to 
be home that day — and just saying hi to their children, those 
are things that children are looking for. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Guidance. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And my colleague just raised it — young people 
are looking for some guidelines, to establish some guidelines. 
They're looking for, if you will, even discipline. 
 
And the interesting part about the events in Montreal, Mr. 
Speaker, when the cameras went and interviewed a number of 
young offenders in a camp — and I believe it was in Ontario — 
one of the young offenders who I don't believe was any more 
than 18, may not have even been 18, indicated that he felt if 
there were more stringent laws, he may not be in the situation 
he was in. He said young people commit crimes because there's 
basically no punishment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that doesn't speak well for our 
society when as parents we neglect our responsibility to train up 
our children. There's a biblical principle that says you train your 
child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not 
depart from it. 
 
And I believe parents have a responsibility to teach their 
children how to grow up and respect not only their elders, but 
other people in their society regardless of who they are — 
regardless of their race, religion, nationality, or creed. 



April 11, 1995 

 
1530 

And because we lack that ability to discipline, because parents 
have given away that opportunity and that responsibility to 
discipline their children, because they haven't set any guidelines 
for their young people, many young people find themselves 
looking to others for that discipline, looking to others for that 
love, looking to others for that acceptance. And unfortunately 
many young people end up in the wrong crowd, committing 
criminal crimes such as we've seen in the past week. And 
certainly even, I believe, just last evening there was a major 
chase with the police in this city with a number of young people 
who had stolen vehicles again and wrecked them. 
 
So what it basically speaks of is young people really have no 
respect for other people's property, and that's unfortunate. Mr. 
Speaker, I realize that the day and age when I grew up and 
possibly the day and age when you grew up, Mr. Speaker, and 
many others in this Assembly, we all grew up when parents 
believed in applying discipline, administering discipline, setting 
some guidelines for us. And if you crossed the threshold and 
were disobedient, there were penalties. There was punishment 
involved. 
 
And some of that punishment may have been you missed your 
supper for the evening or other forms of punishment. I'm always 
reminded of the fact that my dad used to love that portion out of 
Proverbs where it says, if you spare the rod, you spoil the child. 
And I guess maybe it didn't do me all that much harm. But I 
think there are still places for those type of principles. 
 
And while I suggest that families, that parents administer 
discipline, I'm not giving parents the ability to turn around and 
take advantage of their young people, take advantage of their 
children, and abuse the rights of young people as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what do we do with individuals who may lack 
that feeling of love, may lack that feeling of friendship, or 
feeling of being accepted? What do we do with young people 
who feel they have no alternative but to be out with the crowd 
and at the end of the day find themselves in an activity that 
breaches the laws of the land and breaches the rights of others? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I do not personally believe that we 
incarcerate everyone who breaks the law, especially as young 
people. For minor offences, I believe there are better ways of 
teaching children and of helping them grow and develop in our 
society. 
 
And I want to bring to the attention of this Assembly what the 
Manitoba government has done to try and address the problem 
with young offenders in their province. Last year, Mr. Speaker, 
the government in Manitoba implemented some bold and 
innovative changes to the young offender program. Mr. 
Speaker, what they did was they revamped the entire system 
which now focuses on rigorous confinement, austere 
conditions, defined expectations and consequences, highly 
structured activities, and a release preparation and supervision 
program. 
 

Young offender programing was radically changed in Manitoba 
because of community concern. Mr. Speaker, I know that 
Canadians across the country share this same concern and fear 
that the citizens of Manitoba were feeling. 
 
And this morning I had the privilege of stopping in at 
Moosomin at a customer appreciation day at one of the 
dealerships. And it's interesting to note that that was one of the 
subjects that was brought up by people I talked to — the 
concerns they have and the fact that there seems to be no lack 
of . . . or no respect from our young people; and that there seem 
to be so many people, young people just aimlessly wandering in 
our society, and we've got to find ways in which we can reach 
out and help them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the only difference between Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan is that the government in Manitoba has indeed 
made a move and changed the system. Saskatchewan residents 
also want changes to the rules and regulations governing young 
offenders. 
 
And of course we've had a fair bit of debate in this Assembly 
with some of the recent happenings in our Assembly regarding 
the Young Offenders Act and breaches of that Act. And 
certainly I've raised that concern, not just recently but even in 
the past as we've debated with the Justice ministers in this 
Assembly about how we change it. 
 
And I trust that at the end of the day as the federal government 
reviews the Young Offenders Act, we come up with some strict 
and straightforward guidelines that would set up a policy 
whereby we address problems created by young offenders more 
fairly. 
 
I realize that the province's hands are tied to federal legislation. 
However, I also know that the province may administer the 
programing so that it follows federal guidelines. The federal 
government does allow latitude as far as how young offenders 
programs are offered within these facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the province must abide to sentencing 
brought down by judges in our courts, it is necessary to take full 
advantage of the leeway allowed the province once the young 
offender is committed to a facility like the North Battleford 
youth centre. 
 
Many will argue that youth crimes are not on the increase, but I 
beg to differ. The Social Services '93-94 annual report shows 
otherwise. It shows that the average number of youth on 
probation increased by more than 20 per cent over the past five 
years, and that the average daily count of youth in custody in 
'93-94 increased by 8.9 per cent over the '92-93 period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any increase indicates to me that the rate is much 
too high and the offenders' attitudes are too brazen for the 
province to sit idly by and do nothing to treat the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's consider the problems experienced recently in 
Regina with the Oldsmobile gang. The individuals being caught  



April 11, 1995 

 
1531 

for these offences, Mr. Speaker, were repeat offenders. What it 
tells me is they didn't learn from their mistakes or the 
punishment dispensed by the courts for previous offences of the 
judicial system and of the law. 
 
Consider the actions of the young offender who participated in 
the attack on Mr. Dove from Whitewood, or the repeat offences 
of youth in the country stealing gas, and random acts of 
vandalism. 
 
And as I indicated the other day, Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate 
where young offenders are involved and where residents in, 
whether it's in urban or rural settings or in the country where 
gas is stolen or buildings are ransacked, where property is 
damaged, the individual at the end of the day has had all this 
damage done to his property but doesn't face the opportunity of 
restitution. 
 
And we may fine the young offender or offenders, and they 
aren't even really brought to a position of understanding the 
consequences of their actions. I believe it's high time for 
Saskatchewan to take a look at what other provinces are doing 
to address the problem. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I say this, I'm not suggesting that the 
government go full speed and adopt all methods implemented 
in Manitoba. I'm suggesting that a pilot project be implemented 
in Saskatchewan, a project where the results can be tracked in 
terms of rehabilitation of the offender. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba's system is made up of three 
components: boot camps, work camps, and intensive custody. 
The boot camps replace the secured or closed custody programs 
previously in place in Manitoba. The young offenders are 
involved in community service work, structured educational 
programs, and intense intervention programs designed to 
modify the attitudes and beliefs which lead to criminal activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the offenders are not immediately granted 
privileges. They must earn privileges that they currently take for 
granted. They have very limited recreational activities. They 
cannot spend an hour or two playing billiards or watching 
television. They spend time taking classes, clearing bush, 
gardening, and assembling mailings for non-profit groups. They 
participate in community service work. 
 
Some examples of the type of community service work that has 
been conducted by young offenders in Manitoba includes 
assisting in the set-up and clean-up of events such as the 
muscular dystrophy bike-a-thon; participating in the adoptive 
highway program where youth clean and maintain a stretch of 
highway; preparation of information kits and similar projects 
for non-profits groups such as UNICEF (United Nations 
Children's Fund) and the multiple sclerosis society; and making 
wooden toys for the Christmas cheer board. Also gardening 
work that supplies fresh vegetables to other correctional 
institutions and helps defray food costs; working in the purple 
loosestrife elimination program; and providing yard clean-up 
and snow shovelling services for needy seniors in Portage La  

Prairie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their behaviour and attitudes are closely 
monitored, and they must earn, Mr. Speaker, they must earn the 
right to secure privileges. I don't think that these conditions are 
too harsh for young offenders in closed custody facilities. I 
think that they should adhere to a rigorous schedule of work, 
educational classes, and counselling. Every opportunity should 
be granted to these young people that will enhance their 
opportunities upon their release. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in these camps, unacceptable behaviour is not 
accepted in boot camps. In fact it may mean the loss of 
privileges if you do not follow the guidelines of the camp. 
Consequences include a loss of privileges, additional work 
assignments, or even further confinement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these youth are not put in solitary confinement for 
unacceptable behaviour, which I know happens here in the 
province; that it is not right to be confined without any 
rehabilitative treatment available. Additional duties and an 
extended term is acceptable. 
 
The Manitoba model also includes work camps and intensive 
custody. The work camps are distinct from closed custody and 
are designated for low risk youth. It prepares the youth for 
release into the community and allows more choices to the 
youth. On the other hand, intensive custody is for those youth 
who refuse to accept the limits and responsibilities of boot 
camp. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that all members of this Assembly will 
agree that there is a value in making changes to our young 
offender programing. I think it would be a valuable exercise for 
the provincial government to consult with Manitoba and 
embark on a process toward implementing a pilot project here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, I believe this is a very 
important, very fundamental issue. And I was pleased the other 
day, as we were addressing a number of concerns in Justice, 
that the former minister of Justice, the member from Churchill 
Downs, indicated that the federal government is presently 
reviewing the young offenders legislation, and that we do have 
a member from the department who is on this committee 
reviewing this legislation. I believe it's very important that we 
take the time to review it very closely and very clearly. 
 
(1545) 
 
I also am very supportive, Mr. Speaker, of programs that help 
and assist young people to determine who they are, to determine 
what they are, and how they can become a benefit to society. 
 
I believe, as we've seen and as we see in the Manitoba example, 
the fact that they have educational programing available is very 
important. And it's fundamental to the basis of helping young 
people to understand who they basically are and their  



April 11, 1995 

 
1532 

responsibility in our society. I believe, as well, it gives them an 
opportunity to look ahead to the future by giving them an 
education that will allow them the opportunity of a job that may 
be available when they are released from a closed custody 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe many young people are looking for 
options. I believe many young people are looking for 
alternatives. And it's imperative that we give them those 
alternatives. And I would like to cite an example of a camp in 
our area, down at the Kenosee Park. There we have a young 
offenders camp in the park and the individuals who are brought 
out to the camp are individuals who are considered young 
people who have committed minor crimes and certainly people 
that you can feel you can trust. And they are brought out to the 
camp and they actually assist in clean-up in the park, and in 
many cases, cutting down of old trees and trying to beautify and 
beautify the park area. 
 
And it's a program . . . while some people would really question 
— especially those who live in the park may question — who 
comes there and would like to know that there are some very 
stringent guidelines as to the type of young person that will be 
brought out to the camp to work in the camp, on the other hand 
it is also been a very beneficial program to many young people. 
 
And I can remember myself personally going out to pick up 
some firewood. And when I drove into the camp and talked to 
the camp director, and he called a couple young people, the 
young fellows were there right now, just ready to go and help 
unload this firewood. In fact I hardly had to lift a finger to load 
firewood. They were just, bang, ready to do it right now. And I 
was quite impressed, Mr. Speaker, with the way these young 
people just pitched right in. 
 
And it seemed to me that there appeared to be a feeling of 
acceptance and a feeling that they finally had an idea of what 
was expected of them. And they were ready to show society that 
they could provide and have a very positive influence in our 
society if given the chance. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that a number of the 
programs that have been implemented by the province of 
Manitoba should be seriously looked at by this province. And 
that indeed we should take the time to possibly address a pilot 
project and see how it works, compare notes. And maybe there 
are other ideas that we could bring forward as to addressing the 
needs of young offenders in our society and in our province. 
And we could add those too, and we could build upon that 
program that Manitoba has already brought forward. 
 
So that at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is 
we are returning to society individuals who will feel that they 
have something to offer, will feel that they have something to 
give, and individuals who can become wage-earners, that can 
become family members and have families and raise families in 
our society and provide a positive contribution to our society. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from  

Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That this Assembly urge the government to immediately 

establish a young offenders pilot project based on the 
programing recently implemented in Manitoba where 
young offenders are sentenced to serve time in boot 
camps (closed custody facility), work camps (open 
custody), and intensive custody; and that after a 
predetermined time the pilot project be studied and the 
degree of success be determined in terms of the 
potential for rehabilitation for young offenders in 
comparison to the current system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today in support of my colleague's motion. 
 
We have seen quite a number of problems across the country in 
the last few years, Mr. Speaker, dealing with violence of young 
offenders. Most recently we have heard of the dreadful case in 
Montreal, of the youth who killed an Anglican minister and his 
wife. Last night we heard of another circumstance in Edmonton 
where a taxi driver was murdered. Mr. Speaker, it's, well 
perhaps not rampant; it's certainly well-known amongst the 
public, the events that are happening. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have usually been able to feel safe and 
distant from the crime problems of the country's larger urban 
centres. However, as we have already heard, that's no longer the 
case. From the Oldsmobile gang to the Dove case to sexual 
assaults by youth, the cases of youth violence across this 
province is increasing. 
 
We seem to have been infected by the same virus that has long 
since ravaged the rest of the country but to which we thought 
we were somehow immune. And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, at 
this rate it will not be long before incidences of stabbings and 
beatings on our school grounds become common. 
 
The examples of other jurisdictions show us that we must act 
now before we reach that point. The disease of youth crime is 
growing so quickly that we have no time, no time, Mr. Speaker, 
to sit on our hands and worry but do nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Statistics Canada figures show that last year violent youth crime 
rose by 8 per cent; sexual assaults, rapes and indecent assaults 
by youth rose from 2,076 in 1994 from 1,793 in 1993, Mr. 
Speaker, an increase of almost 300. 
 
Assaults by youth involving a weapon rose to 3,836 from 3,685. 
And I'd like to point out, in reference to those last statistics — 
violent crime with a weapon — that in most cases the weapon 
involved was a knife, Mr. Speaker, a knife, not a firearm. 
 
It's rather ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government is 
bent on turning thousands of innocent, responsible gun owners  



April 11, 1995 

 
1533 

into criminals while the youth offenders Act protects the very 
real criminals. This irony was displayed this past November 
when two groups, two groups held rallies on Parliament Hill on 
the very same day, November 4. 
 
The first rally called for mandatory firearm registration. The 
second one was in support of tougher youth offenders 
legislation. It had been initiated by the parents of Joshua Baillai, 
a four-year-old boy who had been killed in a car accident. 
 
A young offender who was fleeing from the Ottawa police had 
struck the van in which Joshua was riding. Joshua's mother 
recalled the night of the accident, and I quote: 
 
 I see Josh in his grandmother's van getting crushed, 

covered in blood, broken and bruised. I see him lying in 
the intensive care unit — bloody bandages, neck brace, 
stitches, casts, staples holding him together, tubes 
everywhere. 

 
Well the national firearms registration is now before the 
parliament, but Joshua's killer walked after a year in custody 
and is probably already out stealing cars again. That's a 
disgrace, Mr. Speaker, a disgrace. 
 
But this action clearly spells out the government's agenda — the 
federal government's agenda in this particular case — of 
politics before solutions. The federal government seems to 
believe they have found a simplistic diversion for voters in their 
gun control legislation, rather than providing solutions to the 
actual, real problems — the real problems of poverty and crime, 
Mr. Speaker, the real problems of unemployment which leads to 
poverty. 
 
Although the Young Offenders Act, Mr. Speaker, is a federal 
matter, we on the provincial level must do what we can to use 
the custody system to prevent cases like Joshua's from 
happening here. 
 
These obvious public safety concerns are the most important 
reasons we have brought this motion to the House. Other 
reasons include the costs and efficiency of the system proposed. 
As criminology professor Tony Doob has pointed out in the 
Leader-Post on October 28 of 1994, the biggest problem with 
the young offender system is that it can't distinguish between 
violent crimes and petty crimes. We have a system where kids 
who sneak into the movies can end up at the same facilities as 
hardened criminals and they all cost the taxpayer between 2 and 
$300 a day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's clear that we need to find new ways of dealing 
with this problem. The Minister of Justice, along with the 
mayor of Regina, have been making speeches to the press about 
how they will push the federal government for tougher 
sentences for young offenders. But, Mr. Speaker, we all know 
how much success the Minister of Justice has had in his 
speeches with Allan Rock to date on other matters. 
 

We say that the provincial government, Mr. Speaker, has to take 
some responsibility and has to act on these particular issues 
before more and more crime becomes the case. We have seen 
the case of the Oldsmobile gang in Regina, Mr. Speaker, how 
the situation just seemed to perpetuate itself. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, a solid example of how creative 
solutions can be found through the actions of the Manitoba 
Conservative government in bringing in a boot camp/work 
camp system to deal with young offenders. 
 
The justice system, when you are directed to a youth custody 
centre, at present not only gives light sentences, but the terms of 
the sentence, Mr. Speaker, can hardly be considered to be any 
kind of a deterrent. At these youth centres, offenders hang out, 
they watch TV, play pool all day long. There they can wear their 
own clothes and do almost whatever it is they wish with their 
own time. 
 
These are the dire circumstances that they have to tolerate, Mr. 
Speaker, for one or two years to a maximum of five years for 
crimes as serious — as serious, Mr. Speaker — as murder. And 
actually, Mr. Speaker, for some this particular environment, 
physical environment, is an enhancement of what they face in 
their own homes. 
 
This system, Mr. Speaker, under the Young Offenders Act, 
clearly does nothing at all to deter the young offender. It neither 
provides a deterrent nor does it do anything towards 
rehabilitation of youth, nor does it provide any serious 
protection for the community. 
 
The boot camp model, Mr. Speaker, is very different. Its focus 
is first and foremost on deterrent and rehabilitation. For youth 
in Manitoba's boot camp system, they are kept in secure, closed 
custody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think an old maxim has some merit for these 
young offenders — it's that idle hands lead to mischief. In the 
boot camp system they are expected to work on community 
service projects like clearing brush or charity work such as 
building toys for children. There is very little time allowed for 
recreational activities. 
 
And for some youths, even this system is too loose. And for 
those cases, Manitoba has instituted what is called intensive 
custody. That is, in essence, maximum security for youth 
offenders. 
 
At the other end of that spectrum, Mr. Speaker, many youth can 
be trusted with greater responsibility and are allowed more 
privileges than under the boot camp system. For these there is a 
modified institution called the work camp. 
 
This is not just a lock them up and throw away the key system; 
it also includes measures that keep young offenders who have 
committed minor offences to stay in the community under 
intense supervision. It is a balanced approach, a balanced 
system, and one that should be emulated and considered here. 



April 11, 1995 

 
1534 

This is what we're proposing today, Mr. Speaker, and what 
we're asking members to support. And it's just not us, Mr. 
Speaker, that are asking that this type of system be considered. I 
have some quotes here I'd like to read. And this is from the 
Saskatchewan Valley News, November 16, 1994, and I quote: 
 
 The Saskatchewan Valley School Division wants the 

SSTA to ask the provincial government to provide 
increased support to schools having to deal with young 
offenders. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, under the Manitoba system, that kind of 
enhanced educational opportunity is provided. In the Manitoba 
system, the curriculum is the same as the public schools, with 
more emphasis on individual needs and learning patterns. 
Emphasis is placed on basic language skills, including reading 
and writing, and the basic math. Courses try to provide the 
necessary skills needed to return to community-based schools 
for further training. Schooling will be held year-round. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's not only an opportunity for these youth to 
provide something in return to the community through their 
work efforts, it's also an opportunity for them to gain and to 
improve their education. 
 
Another quote I would like to read, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Leader-Post of October 26, 1994, and I quote: 
 
 Older teenagers charged with serious crimes should be 

automatically tried in adult court without a chance to 
head back to youth court, says the Canadian Association 
of Chiefs of Police. 

 
 "If Parliament is really serious about addressing violent 

youth crime, then they can strengthen the section by 
providing simply . . . (an) automatic transfer for serious 
offences . . . without provision for return to youth 
court." 

 
 The Canadian Police Association, which represents 

police officers, seconded the proposal by the chiefs. 
 
(1600) 
 
Another quote, Mr. Speaker, again from the Leader-Post, 
September 14, 1994: 
 
 Young offenders like those in the so-called Oldsmobile 

gang should more often face closed custody, says 
Regina mayor Doug Archer. And Saskatchewan Justice 
minister, who met with Archer and Regina police chief 
Murray Langgard for about 45 minutes on Tuesday to 
discuss what can be done about the city's rash of car 
thefts by juveniles, agreed. 

 
Another quote from the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, 
Leader-Post, September 16, 1994: 
 
 "We've got a citizenry that is fearful and insecure. It's all  

 very well to be concerned about the rights of accused 
persons. I am just as concerned about that as anybody is, 
but I'm also concerned people in our communities, the 
elderly people living alone, feel safe in their homes." 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people across this province who 
are concerned about youth crime and how it's going to be dealt 
with and what solutions can be found to discourage it in the 
future. 
 
We've commented on some of the opportunities that are 
provided within the Manitoba system for the youth that are 
incarcerated there to spend their time. What do they do while 
they're sitting there, rather than simply playing pool or watching 
television? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, under the community service work in 
Manitoba, the youth there are assigned to setting up . . . 
assisting in the set-up and clean-up of events such as muscular 
dystrophy bike-a-thon, the Portage fair, the Manitoba 
Development Centre annual fair, and other community-based 
activities; participating in the adopt-a-highway program where 
youth clean and maintain a stretch of highway; stuffing and 
labelling envelopes for preparation of information kits and 
similar projects for non-profit groups such as UNICEF and the 
muscular cirrhosis society; making wooden toys for the 
Christmas cheer board; gardening work that supplies fresh 
vegetables to other correctional institutions and helps to defray 
food costs; working in the purple loosestrife elimination 
program; participating in closely supervised warehouse work 
for Habitat for Humanity; helping with the annual clean-up of 
the Garrioch Creek in Portage la Prairie; and providing yard 
clean-up and snow-shovelling services for needy seniors in 
Portage la Prairie. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while I'm sure that a number of people across 
this province view boot camps as forcing kids into uniforms 
and brush cuts, doing push-ups all day long, Mr. Speaker, there 
is a lot more involved in it than that picture people have in their 
minds. Under these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba 
. . . and since I live right on the Manitoba border, we hear 
comments coming out of Manitoba dealing with these issues 
. . . that the people there are supportive of this particular 
program because the youth are not simply waiting in a very 
loose custody situation, but rather they're busy. They're 
learning, and they're providing a service to the community, Mr. 
Speaker, and a very worthwhile service. 
 
When they're cleaning up a stretch of highway, Mr. Speaker, we 
all benefit, and there is some repayment to society, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore I am very pleased to second the motion as presented 
by the member from Moosomin. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members from the 
official opposition have made a lot of good points and raised 
some serious problems on a serious issue here today. But I was 
struck, Mr. Speaker, by the impression, listening to members of 
the official opposition, that young people generally should be  



April 11, 1995 

 
1535 

tarred with the same brush, that is, that they needed to be put 
under better control because they're apt to commit crime. 
 
And I want to say that I'm sure the members opposite in fact 
don't mean to tar all young people with the same brush because 
I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that young people today are every bit as 
good as people were 20 years ago when I was a teenager, and as 
they were a few generations ago, too. Most young people are 
very good, as we all know, and there are some that have 
problems and cause problems in society and those problems 
have to be dealt with. 
 
I think that there are certain principles that should be brought to 
bear in dealing with those problems. I want to say at the outset 
that we support, on this side of the House, a review of the 
Young Offenders Act at the federal level because we know 
from talking to our constituents that there are problems with the 
administration of the Young Offenders Act, and people want to 
see some change. 
 
Having said that though, I want to say too that I don't think it's a 
good idea for anybody to bash young people or talk about crime 
and youth crime in a political way — that is, as political 
window-dressing — in an effort to whip up support for their 
own political party. 
 
I think that what we really need in our society is a balanced 
approach to crime. I think there are certain principles that 
should be brought to bear in any discussion of youth crime and 
what we should do about young offenders. 
 
I want to say — going to get into this more, Mr. Speaker — but 
I want to say that many of the things that the members opposite 
are talking about as taking place in the province of Manitoba 
are, guess what, taking place in the province of Saskatchewan, 
which actually pioneered most of the things that are being done 
in the province of Manitoba. 
 
The members opposite didn't go into that, and I don't think the 
members opposite have familiarized themselves with what is 
being done with young people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I heard the member from Moosomin say, for example, that 
people who commit crimes should be accountable to the victims 
of their crimes. And I heard the member from 
Souris-Cannington talking about the Oldsmobile gang and 
what's happening with them. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, what is taking place with the people that 
were involved in the Oldsmobile gang situation is quite unique, 
because various community agencies and the police and the 
courts are getting those young people together with the victims 
of their crimes. And they're sitting down and talking about what 
they've done and the consequences of it, and they're making 
them accountable because there's going to be restitution. 
 
And that's the sort of thing that should be done in our society. 
And some of the things that are being done are good things 
because they're getting people together, they're making young  

people accountable, and making them account for what they've 
done by providing some restitution to the victims of their 
crimes. 
 
And I don't say any of this, Mr. Speaker, in an effort to say that 
what the opposition members raise is not important. It is 
important. Or to say that these concerns aren't valid. They are 
valid. What I say is that when we're talking about youth crime 
and young people and trying to deal with what are difficult 
problems in our society, we should talk about the facts. And 
that's what I propose to do. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think we should have an 
approach to youth crime that reflects the fact that sometimes 
crime results because personal and family situations are such 
that the developmental needs of youth are unmet, or met 
inconsistently, inappropriately, or inadequately. And sometimes 
offending behaviour by youth occurs as a way of attempting to 
have his or her needs met or to bring attention to his or her 
situation. 
 
And if we're going to talk about dealing with young offenders, 
then we should realize that reoffending is going to be less likely 
if a youth's developmental needs are appropriately and 
satisfactorily addressed and if young people are challenged and 
supported to identify problems with their attitude and behaviour 
and examine and change their attitudes and behaviour. 
 
And there are several principles that should be brought to bear 
in dealing with young offenders. The most obvious is . . . or the 
primary principle, I should say, is that society, all of us, 
including members of society who are young people, and 
sometimes the victim of crime, not just by young people by the 
way, but sometimes the victim of crimes committed by adults, 
but society first and foremost has the right to be protected from 
dangerous offenders. There's no question about that. And if that 
means tougher penalties and a review of the Young Offenders 
Act, then that's what it means. Society has to be protected. 
 
A second principle is that youth who commit crime, like adults 
who commit crime, should be held accountable for their 
actions. 
 
A third principle is that young persons who commit offences 
require supervision, discipline, and control. There's no question 
about that. But they also require guidance and assistance and 
appropriate programing. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that what bothers me about the 
motion put forward by the member from Moosomin is not so 
much the idea behind it as the fact that it totally ignores what is 
actually going on in the province to deal with the problem of 
youth crime. This problem is not one that can be dealt with 
through simple solutions. It is one that is somewhat complex. 
 
And I think in dealing with it, I said a few minutes ago, Mr. 
Speaker, that we should recognize that we should not generalize 
about young people and say that they're prone to commit crimes 
or that this generation is worse than the last generation, which  



April 11, 1995 

 
1536 

was worse than the generation before it, which is something 
that I think has been said by every generation probably for the 
last 2,000 years, if not longer. I don't believe young people are 
inherently bad; I think they're inherently good  probably 
getting better if the truth were known. But I also want to say 
that everybody, including young offenders, as everyone is part 
of our community . . . But I want to talk about what the 
province is actually doing in this area. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has developed a youth model for 
delivery of services to youth in conflict with the law. The model 
is based on the knowledge that youth who break the law have 
often been raised in family situations wherein their 
developmental needs have not been appropriately, consistently 
and/or adequately met. And many, Mr. Speaker, have been 
physically, emotionally, or sexually abused. Others have been 
neglected from a very early age. And I believe that offending 
behaviour by youth is quite often the visible result of other 
problems in the youth's life. Consequently I believe that to 
reduce the long-term likelihood that youth will reoffend, you 
have to address the underlying problems. 
 
(1615) 
 
Many youth have grown up in families where they develop very 
antisocial values and beliefs. And until they're encouraged and 
insisted, Mr. Speaker, to have a serious examination of those 
values and beliefs and begin to change them, it is likely there 
will be little long-term change in their behaviour. 
 
The motion we're presented with today ignores the reality of 
what is taking place in Manitoba and ignores the reality of what 
is taking place in Saskatchewan. It ignores the reality of what is 
taking place in Manitoba because when the opposition uses the 
term boot camp, they really want to appeal to a sentiment out 
there that says, we're going to get tough on our young people 
and our young offenders. It's political window-dressing because 
they want to garner public support by saying, tough on crime, 
tough on young offenders, by using the term boot camp. 
 
But the boot camps established in Manitoba — which are called 
boot camps by the Government of Manitoba because it has its 
own political agenda coming into an election this year, and last 
September the Minister of Justice announced they were going to 
have boot camps — actually don't bear much resemblance to 
the military style programs in the United States, as I think the 
member from Souris-Cannington pointed out. 
 
The Manitoba programs are designed for male youth convicted 
of serious crimes and sentenced to secure custody. And the 
interesting thing is, Mr. Speaker, that basically they're quite 
similar to the programs taking place in Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan's secure custody facilities. What's the difference? 
The difference is, they're called boot camps in Manitoba; in 
Saskatchewan they're not called boot camps. 
 
The opposition wants to say to the public, oh we're going to do 
something different for you. We're going to bring about boot 
camps in the province of Saskatchewan, the same as they have  

in Manitoba. They're not telling the people that the programing 
that they've talked about, available in these so-called boot 
camps in Manitoba, is already available in Saskatchewan in 
facilities that we have here. So I say let's talk about the facts. 
Let's talk about what is going on and not ignore the reality of 
what we're doing in Saskatchewan with respect to young 
offenders. 
 
We already have in this province, closed custody and open 
custody facilities, which the motion calls for. And these 
facilities are not places where, as the member said, there would 
be idle hands. They are places that are very structured, very 
disciplined, and which essentially stress a disciplined daily 
work schedule, which is what a boot camp also does. And I 
want to refer to the daily schedule from the Paul Dojack Youth 
Centre which is a secure custody, in other words a closed 
custody facility. 
 
At 7:30 a.m. wake-up begins; 8 o'clock, complete wake-up — 
breakfast, personal hygiene, institutional chores; 9 o'clock, shop 
and school, work programs, life skills, cultural programing, sex 
education, intervention programs. 
 
Now the members opposite were talking about having qualified 
teachers working in the so-called boot camps in the province of 
Manitoba. Yes, so what? There are qualified teachers working 
in the closed custody and open custody facilities in 
Saskatchewan. There are certified teachers. They run the same 
kind of disciplined regimen of personal hygiene, chores, work, 
personal development, school, vocational counselling, as they 
do in Manitoba. 
 
That was just the morning I referred to. Then it's noon. They 
have lunch, then clean-up. After that, more shop and school 
work programs, life skills, cultural programing. 
 
At 3:30, individual counselling, passive recreation, resident 
phone calls, and some short free time until supper at 5 o'clock, 
after which again they have to clean up; 6 o'clock, study time, 
individual counselling, and intervention programs; 7 o'clock, 
group meetings to try to deal with some problems; 8:30, 
mandatory group activity; 9:30, personal hygiene, facility 
chores, individual counselling, resident phone calls, passive 
recreation; 10:30, everybody in their rooms; and 11 o'clock, 
lights out. 
 
Now I don't know why the members opposite have to go to 
Manitoba to find a program to deal with young offenders that 
puts them into a daily schedule and forces them to deal with 
some of their problems and to try to improve their schooling 
and so on, because you don't have to go that far. At least you 
don't have to go that far unless your intention is simply to raise 
some political points or make some political points by saying 
we need boot camps to do this and that, when actually we don't. 
 
Now these programs in closed custody facilities in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are mandatory. They're 
mandatory for anybody who's sentenced to one of those 
facilities. Residents in them are required to participate in  



April 11, 1995 

 
1537 

academic or vocational education or work training and work 
placements; structured active sports and recreational activities; 
cleaning of the facility, which we heard a bit about; food 
preparation and gardening; group meetings and counselling by 
staff. 
 
There are intervention programs to try to deal with the problems 
some of these young people have because, as I said before, 
there are often underlying causes for the fact that someone is 
acting out. Sometimes there aren't, but often there are. And the 
residents in closed custody facility have to participate in 
intervention programs like anger management, substance abuse 
education and treatment, budgeting and life skills instruction, 
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) and STD 
(sexually transmitted disease) awareness and education, access 
to elders, and cultural awareness programs. 
 
Now because of that kind of programing, the kind of 
programing the opposition says we need to import from 
Manitoba even though we had it before they did, and their 
Minister of Justice decided last September to announce to the 
world that she was implementing boot camps with this kind of 
programing, the result of that kind of programing, which we 
have and we have pioneered and we're a leader in, is that 
unstructured time available to residents of closed facilities in 
Saskatchewan is limited to two short periods once or twice a 
day. 
 
The facilities operate using a system with consequences for 
breach of rules, something the members again called for which 
is already in place — consequences like loss of privileges for a 
variety of possible infractions. This is how the system operates. 
This is what the members say we needed to implement. 
Interesting. 
 
The members opposite should visit the closed custody facilities 
we have in the province of Saskatchewan and the open custody 
facilities we have. The member from Moosomin said he had 
been to the Kenosee camp, I think, and I commend the member 
for that. And I think he said that there were some worthwhile 
activities going on there. 
 
There are a lot of worthwhile programs going on. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that to improve the level of knowledge of 
members of this House, and myself included, I'm willing to go 
with the member from Moosomin and the member from 
Souris-Cannington and anyone else in the House to some of 
these facilities, like the Paul Dojack Centre in Regina which 
I've never been to, or the Yarrow Youth Farm near Saskatoon 
which I'm sorry to say I've never been to, since I live in 
Saskatoon and I probably should have. 
 
I'm willing to visit those facilities with the members opposite 
and get the facts about what's going on, and talk to the people 
running those facilities and talk to the young people too about 
how they're doing and what their problems might be. 
 
And I don't want anybody to think, Mr. Speaker, that any of this 
has anything to do with condoning people murdering other  

people, as the members referred to. Young people are being 
raised to adult court every day for those kinds of violent crimes, 
and so it should be. And those kinds of violent crimes have to 
be dealt with in an appropriate way. And we need to reassess 
the Young Offenders Act, or the federal government does, and 
we're participating in that process. 
 
But not every young person that comes in conflict with the law 
is guilty of that kind of offence. And there's lots of hope for 
people that have minor brushes with the law and can be dealt 
with in an appropriate fashion. 
 
The member from Moosomin, I wonder if he knows that the 
Echo Valley Park Correctional Camp here in Saskatchewan for 
youth is really about the same as the Manitoba Youth Centre in 
Winnipeg in that it has a structured-type discipline approach. 
And I think we should visit that camp too and see it, and I invite 
the member from Moosomin and any other members that want 
to go. I'll go with them to Echo Valley Park Correctional Camp 
and Paul Dojack and Yarrow Youth Farm in Saskatoon at any 
mutually convenient time. 
 
But I think the members should know and the public should 
know that what is being done at the Echo Valley Park 
Correctional Park in Saskatchewan is the same as what is being 
done in Manitoba. In fact they've probably been at it longer, and 
yet people are being told that we need to have something called 
boot camps because they have something called boot camps in 
the province of Manitoba, which are essentially no different 
than the programing we have available here. 
 
I talked about people in closed custody facilities, Mr. Speaker, 
and now I want to talk about youth in open custody facilities 
here in Saskatchewan because they're involved in a variety of 
programs. I'm a bit surprised because the member from 
Moosomin talked about being at Kenosee and seeing the youth 
there do some work in the park and so on. And then the 
members are asking that we have programs to make young 
people do worthwhile things even though that's taking place 
already. 
 
But in any event, youth in open custody are actively involved in 
a variety of programs, including community service work such 
as wood cutting; park maintenance; home maintenance and 
sidewalk shovelling for seniors; activities related to the 
operation of a rural acreage like raising animals, gardening, 
maintenance of outside buildings and pens; school attendance 
for those who need to continue their education; and other 
programing designed to meet the developmental and ongoing 
needs of adolescents. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that these day programs for 
young people which are structured also involve a fairly tight 
schedule that the young people are required to follow. And I 
want to bring to the attention of the House the schedule of the 
Kenosee youth camp that the member from Moosomin was 
talking about: 6:30 a.m. — wake up, room clean-up, showers; 7 
o'clock — breakfast; 7:30 — facility chores; 8 o'clock — 
assigned work projects with provincial park, community service  



April 11, 1995 

 
1538 

work, community-based school program; noon — lunch. That's 
after chores starting at 7:30. Not bad . . . 12:30 — assigned 
work projects, community service work, school; 4:30 — 
clean-up; 5 o'clock — supper; 6 o'clock — quiet time, reflection 
on day's activities; 6:30 — mandatory recreation, group 
meeting, life studies, AA (Alcoholics Anonymous) meetings, 
and sweats; 8:30 — night lunch; 9 o'clock — passive 
recreation, weight lifting, personal laundry, letter writing, phone 
calls, problem resolution, studying, showers; 10:30 — quiet 
time; 11 o'clock — bedtime, lights out. And then the next day, 
up again at 6:30 a.m. That doesn't sound to me like a situation 
where there's a lot of opportunity for idleness. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I wonder why the members didn't refer to what's actually 
going on in youth facilities, instead of saying we needed 
something they have in Manitoba, other than the fact that 
Manitoba happens to have a Progressive Conservative 
government and we, thank God, don't. 
 
I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that an informal review of 
sentenced admissions to the Paul Dojack Youth Centre during 
the period May 1990 and May 1994, which of course is a 
four-year period, revealed that out of 551 admissions involving 
419 youth, 78 per cent served only one secure disposition; 14 
per cent had two dispositions while only 8 per cent of all youth 
had more than two secure dispositions within the four-year 
period. In other words, almost 80 per cent of the young people 
going through this closed facility once did not re-offend. And I 
think that's not a bad record. 
 
The day programs, like the closed custody facilities, are 
structured, and they offer community-based alternatives for 
youth at serious risk of reoffending. Those programs are 
designed to encourage development of healthy self-esteem, a 
feeling of accomplishment, and a sense of personal 
responsibility — things that are important to any young person. 
 
Youth participating in those open custody day programs may be 
involved in vocational or employment training, training on the 
job, community service work, educational upgrading, 
counselling, and/or development of effective interpersonal and 
life skills. Many of these programs are operated on a contract 
basis by non-government organizations, Indian bands, or 
individuals and may take place in an urban setting or on 
reserves. 
 
One of the problems with the Young Offenders Act, which I 
believe was brought in by the federal government in 1984, Mr. 
Speaker, was that when the federal government . . . I don't know 
if that was the Liberals or the Conservatives, but it doesn't seem 
to make much difference, except that the Liberals turn into 
Conservatives when they replace the Conservatives, but I 
digress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in any event, when the federal government brought in the 
Young Offenders Act what they did not do is, they did not 
stress community-based programs to deal with some of the  

family problems that young offenders have. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Major failing. 
 
Mr. Cline: — And that was a major failing, as my colleague 
says, Mr. Speaker. And what we're doing now is trying to pick 
up some of the pieces and pick up the ball dropped by the 
federal government and have some programing for young 
people. That's what we're trying to do. 
 
And we need the support of the opposition to do that because 
this is a matter that goes beyond politics and shouldn't be a 
political football. This is a serious matter that all members of 
society need to address. 
 
One example of what we're trying to do is we're developing 
programs targeted toward selected 12- to 15-year-olds who are 
in custody or at high risk to receive sentencing to custody. The 
programs are being designed to hold youth accountable for their 
unlawful behaviour while allowing them to remain in or close 
to their home communities wherever reasonably possible. 
 
And a major thrust of the program, Mr. Speaker, is to deal with 
the youth and his or her family as a unit. And that approach is 
taken because we believe it's necessary to encourage and 
support the family to address individual and family factors 
which might be contributing to the youth's offending behaviour. 
 
I want to say something about the boot camps in the United 
States. I want to point out that when . . . you know, I heard the 
Leader of the Opposition speaking around the province, and 
he's quoted in the media once in awhile calling for boot camps, 
and now they're referring to Manitoba. 
 
The boot camps in the United States are not the same as what 
goes on in the province of Manitoba. In the United States, they 
have 65 adult boot camps and 19 youth boot camps. And these 
don't fall into one model; there are different models. But in 
March of this year a criminology professor, Doris Layton 
McKenzie of the University of Maryland and head of a research 
team which evaluated the eight adult boot camp programs 
released a study which reached the following conclusions. 
 
One, a boot camp atmosphere will not succeed in either 
reducing recidivism — in other words, repeat of crime — or 
positively changing offenders. Two, in the three states of 27 
states with adult boot camps where the boot camp graduates 
had a lower repeat crime rate, the custodial phase of the camp 
was followed by six months of intensive supervision in the 
community. In other words, they had some programing to work 
with these people, which is what we're trying to do. 
 
Three, the boot camp graduates and young males released on 
parole from traditional custody facilities did equally well in 
terms of positive activities during community supervision. Four, 
the more intensely offenders were supervised in the community, 
the better they adjusted. In other words, you can't just put 
somebody into some boot camp type setting and get tough with 
them and beat them up for awhile and then release  



April 11, 1995 

 
1539 

them in the community and expect that they're not going to 
reoffend. You better have some kind of more intelligent and 
meaningful programing for them to try to integrate them into 
the community. 
 
There's been some research into the prevention of youth crime, 
Mr. Speaker. And the research tells us this, that preventing 
youth crime greatly depends upon family functioning, the 
family's values and beliefs, and appropriateness and consistency 
in parental supervision. This is something the member from 
Moosomin referred to. I think he's correct in that regard. 
 
Secondly, specific personal family and environmental factors 
place youth at increased risk of engaging in unlawful behaviour. 
So we have to look at our communities and some of the things 
going on in our society, Mr. Speaker, unlying causes of crime, 
if we're going to deal with it. 
 
Thirdly, the probability of a youth engaging in crime increases 
as the number of family problems or risk factors increases. And 
I think what that says is we have to address some of the 
underlying factors which precipitate unlawful behaviour and 
not just have a simplistic analysis of the situation. 
 
Research has been done in Canada by some of our leading 
experts on crime, and some of the conclusions support the 
research in the United States that getting tough without proper 
community programing and integration with the community — 
helping people get jobs and counselling where they need it — 
doesn't deter crime. 
 
But interventions are necessary that look at the family, the way 
people think and challenge the way people think and get them 
to examine their own attitudes and beliefs. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, I think we need a holistic approach, not 
just facilities that keep people locked up or that they have to 
report to in the day, but proactive and preventive programs and 
counselling that actually help people. And I reject, as I think 
even the province of Manitoba rejects, the idea that all you need 
to do is put people in boots and march them around, as the 
clarion call to start boot camps would suggest to all those who 
wish to believe that. 
 
So I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that the motion is all that well 
thought out; and what we need to do is to look at what's 
happening in our facilities and evaluate the success of our 
facilities and make appropriate changes. I think that that's what 
we have to do. We've got those facilities in place and I think 
actually Saskatchewan is a leader in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
We're doing a lot of things they're not doing anywhere else in 
the country. Manitoba is trying to catch up. We just need to 
bring the federal Liberals along in terms of having them look at 
the Young Offenders Act and trying to get some kind of 
appropriate community support and community programing 
into place. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I will sit down so 
that other members can participate in the debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I 
understand the official opposition's suggestion of a boot camp 
pilot project in today's motion is their attempt at addressing a 
growing problem of crimes committed by young offenders, and 
I agree that it is critical that young people learn a sense of 
personal responsibility and develop a sense of respect for 
people and their property, Mr. Speaker, that personal 
responsibility and respect are learned at a very young age. 
Recent studies indicate that the violent attitude and lack of 
respect frequently encountered in young offenders has its 
genesis in the early years of a child's life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my work as a play therapist, before I took on 
this hat, I worked with many preschoolers who without 
therapeutic intervention would have ended up as young 
offenders. Indeed the program that I worked in was developed 
by parents of teens who were young offenders and had 
problems. They knew that if they had had help with those 
problems with their children when they were preschoolers, they 
would not have faced the same problems when they were teens. 
 
In that context, I will move on to a series of ideas concerning 
solutions to the problem of young-offender crimes and 
rehabilitation. 
 
Who is responsible? The federal government is responsible for 
the Young Offenders Act through its constitutional jurisdiction 
over criminal law. The provinces however are responsible for 
the youth detention centres. Under the Young Offenders Act, 
sections 4 and 14, the province is solely responsible for 
recommending sentences, types of custody, and alternate 
rehabilitation programs for young offenders. With so many 
repeat offenders, the province needs to start taking 
responsibility for the failings of its justice system. 
 
The federal government is currently amending the Young 
Offenders Act to meet public concerns. Changes will allow 
better sharing of information between authorities, schools, 
police, etc., with more 16- and 17-year-old violent young 
offenders being moved to adult court. Lastly, the Act will 
emphasize protecting society rather than young offenders. 
 
(1645) 
 
Federal amendments and a 10-year Canada-wide review will be 
wasted, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government does not commit 
to reforming its own youth justice programs. Money is not a 
major impediment as federal officials are willing and have 
discussed the issue with the provinces. The federal government 
recognizes that special laws for young offenders also require 
special facilities and programs which the provinces are 
responsible for running and funding. 
 
Regina has a crime problem which the government has done 
nothing about. In car thefts alone, over 160 vehicles have been 
stolen by the so-called Olds gang, while one police officer and 
two civilians received injuries — very serious injuries for one 
of those people. Insurance claims exceed $500,000. 
 



April 11, 1995 

 
1540 

Auto thefts in Regina have risen by 610 per cent since 1993. In 
fact when I visited with the Moose Jaw police, they indicated 
this Olds gang was not — it was my neighbourhood where 
many of these things happened and some of the offenders come 
from — they indicated that the Olds gang was not just in 
Regina. They indicated last year during May, for two weeks 
every night, five Oldsmobiles were stolen in Moose Jaw. So 
this is not something that's just happening in Regina. 
 
Closed custody and longer sentence are not proving themselves 
to work. Research indicates that young offenders finding 
themselves in closed custody for long periods are placed with 
criminal peers. Instead of being rehabilitated, they build strong 
relationships with their peers and often improve their 
law-breaking skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's youth detention centres are 
crowded and understaffed and expensive to operate. I have 
visited both the Dojack Centre and the centre in Saskatoon. 
What I'm told by staff and by those who run the program is that 
they have good programs, as outlined in some of the schedules 
from the Saskatoon member. But what I'm told is they are so 
overcrowded and that young offenders move through the 
program so fast because of sentences, that they don't get the 
benefit of the programs that exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most violent crimes committed by young 
offenders are committed by 16- and 17-year-olds. In the case of 
murder, 60 per cent; manslaughter, 50 per cent; aggravated 
assault, 68 per cent. Under new amendments to the Young 
Offenders Act, these dangerous offenders will be easier to 
move to adult court. And the majority of young offender crimes 
are property crimes. 
 
In Minnesota many young offenders are being given sentences 
which involve victim restitution. These are proving more 
successful in rehabilitating the offender by making the sentence 
or disposition match the crime, by increasing the awareness of 
the effects of his or her crime on the victims. 
 
The government does not provide enough support to crime 
prevention programs. In speaking with the chief of police in 
Regina concerning crime in north-west Regina, he said they had 
instituted a program when the thefts of automobiles first started 
called . . . where police officers stopped at people's homes and 
asked: do you know where your child is? He suggested this 
might be a good, preventative program to reinforce parental 
authority where children are left to run loose. 
 
And these sort of programs have proven very successful in the 
north-west during the time that they were using them. 
Saskatchewan, like many other provinces, is ignoring its youth 
and not doing a good job preventing child poverty that gives 
rise to youth crime. 
 
The Minister of Social Services says child poverty will just 
have to wait until the deficit is brought under control and the 
economy recovers enough to create jobs. Our economy is 
growing, but it a jobless recovery with fewer people working  

than in 1991; 1995 has brought new crime problems to Regina. 
Last year it appears to have been car thefts. This year break-ins 
are above the normal highs. 
 
Part of the problem is that there are often very few programs or 
supports for young people. At a time when guidance 
counsellors are already overstrapped, Fred Herron of the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) has claimed that of the 
700 teachers who lost their jobs in the 8 per cent cuts to K to 12 
education, a significant number were guidance counsellors who 
play a key role in helping young people find jobs and avoid 
socially deviant behaviour. 
 
And I'd like to remind you that I did visit both Saskatoon and 
Regina correctional facilities and did some research on the 
Manitoba proposals as well. And the Filmon government 
introduced those boot camps without doing any of the work to 
fight some of the social ills that gave rise to those problems in 
the first place. 
 
The cycle of child poverty has to be beaten. Seventy per cent of 
young offenders were at some point a part of the child welfare 
cycle. We have 5,000 single mothers on welfare in this 
province, according to the Social Services statistics. If this 
situation is not addressed, the problem of youth crime will 
continue. 
 
The government's youth job programs are not doing a great deal 
to alleviate youth employment. The economy is expected to 
slow, as announced by economists at the Toronto Dominion 
Bank today, from over 4 per cent growth to 2.8 per cent. And 
this is bad news for youth who need hope, because the last 
hired is all too often the first fired. 
 
The recent escapes at the North Battleford facility are indicative 
of the failure of the provincial government's policy on handling 
young offender crime. 
 
Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments from my 
constituents. One person says: 
 
 Our justice system is very unfair and ineffective. Why 

are criminals who commit horrific crimes getting 
parole? For example, the one man serving two to four 
years for a hideous murder, the Dove murders, Legere. 
Our justice system has to see reform — the Young 
Offenders Act and alcohol and drugs are no longer an 
excuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, while I understand the intention of the opposition 
motion is to address the concern of crime of young offenders, I 
cannot support the motion and their method of addressing the 
problem. And so, being nearly 5 o'clock, I would move that we 
adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 
 


