






















































April 26, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 26, 1995 

 

 
1773 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of south-west 
Saskatchewan. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
the people from across south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. They come from the Carlyle, Manor, 
Wawota, and Neudorf part of the province. The petition prayer 
reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights) which will benefit all property owners 
in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the  

 Minister of Health to examine the proposal to close the 
emergency unit and cardiac care unit at the Saskatoon 
City Hospital. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, two special guests in your gallery. I 
would ask them to stand — my son Dean and his girlfriend 
Paula. 
 
Paula has just finished her last exam and Dean's got a day off 
and they're down here to visit. And I know all the members here 
are really happy when their families can make it down because 
we don't see them as often as we would like to and they make 
great sacrifices. And I know all members will join me in 
wishing them a nice day and it's good to see them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My wife is seated in 
your gallery today. She's been introduced here many times and 
asked me not to introduce her today, so I won't. But she's 
accompanied with someone, so I'd like to introduce to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and through you to all members of the Assembly, our 
son Jordan who is in Regina to get some dental work. And I'm 
hopeful that his experience here in the Assembly will be more 
enjoyable than at the dentist's office. So I'd like all members to 
welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Flooding in North-east Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 
know, the last week has seen several reports of drastic flooding 
throughout the north-east of the province. Farmers that were 
drought stricken just a few years ago are now under water. 
Many towns have had to evacuate and sandbag. In the true 
tradition of the Saskatchewan spirit, people have pulled 
together to face the problem. All across Saskatchewan, farmers, 
townspeople, RMs (rural municipalities), and government 
officials, are cooperating to quickly implement this disaster 
relief program. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from the heart of the flood area are showing the 
Premier firsthand the disaster created by the flood waters. 
 
I am proud to say that this afternoon the Premier will announce 
details of such a program. The new financial stability of our 
province enables us to deliver a program that effectively helps 
those affected by floods recover. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though the floods are drastic, I think it's important  



April 26, 1995 

 
1774 

to note that they have not yet been tragic, at least in terms of 
loss of human life. I credit the quick actions of emergency relief 
workers and the ingenuity of farmers and farm families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all the people in 
Saskatchewan communities pulling together — people helping 
people; courage predominant over harsh weather. That's the 
Saskatchewan way, and I'm very proud of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Business in Radville 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Whoever said the 
economy is stagnating in rural Saskatchewan forgot to talk to 
the people in three communities in my riding. Recently the 
grand reopening of TWC Financial Corp. in Calibaba 
Enterprises complex took place in the town of Radville. 
 
This business is Saskatchewan's largest mutual fund dealer, 
licensed to do business right across western Canada. This 
business not only provides important services and jobs to area 
residents, but it is having an impact in the local community 
through donations and grants. 
 
This business, along with Dynamic Mutual Funds, contributed 
$7,500 towards community projects and worthwhile causes, 
including donations to disabled children in the area. 
 
I extend my congratulations to the Calibaba family, and to the 
staff of TWC Financial Corp. and Calibaba Enterprises for their 
commitment to the community. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the grand opening of the new Bengough 
Co-Op service station took place on April 5. Congratulations to 
general manager Dennis Mazenc and president Lorraine Jensen. 
And on April 7, the grand opening ceremony of Ogema 
Agencies was held. I'd like to congratulate Carol Strueby and 
Carol Peterson who are the proprietors of this business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these business people who are investing in their 
local communities are providing proof that the economic 
upswing in Saskatchewan is being felt in many rural 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Broadview Recycling Innovation 
 

Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the build-up of 
waste is not as drastic as flooding, it is an ongoing problem that 
could eventually have severe repercussions. Today I want to 
mention a group of people who have pulled together to 
overcome a problem. 
 
For some time the citizens of Broadview in my constituency 
had wanted to expand their recycling capabilities beyond the 
SARCAN depot. Unfortunately they found the expense of 
shipping recyclable materials to Regina to be prohibitive. 

Through a great deal of networking, the Broadview people 
found a local merchant who travelled to Regina each week with 
an empty 3-ton truck. However, the container used for shipping 
recyclable materials to Regina was too large, meaning the 
merchant could not bring home his own load. The townspeople 
responded by designing a 64 cubic foot box that could collapse 
down to 16 cubic feet, leaving plenty of room for the merchant's 
supplies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this simple yet clever innovation means that 
Broadview is now fully able to collect and ship its recycled 
paper. Thanks to this design, the rising prices of paper, and the 
expansion of the program to include milk cartons, Broadview 
may eventually turn a small profit. 
 
For their ingenuity and for their ongoing efforts to reduce, 
reuse, and recycle, I wish to congratulate the town of 
Broadview and the RM (rural municipality) of Elcapo as theirs 
is another example of Saskatchewan people working together to 
help our environment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Safety Patrol Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
School Safety Patrol Week in Saskatchewan. In the city of 
Regina, there are 56 schools participating in a school safety 
patrol program this year. I want to single out one of those 
schools today for special mention. 
 
At W.S. Hawrylak School, 34 young people monitor three 
traffic sites adjacent to the school. As members can appreciate, 
this job involves many hours of standing in the cold, wet, and 
heat, while other children are off playing and having fun. It is 
truly a mark of dedication by these young people that they learn 
to give of themselves so selflessly at such a young age. These 
children typically become leaders among their peers and 
provide excellent role models to other children. 
 
The principal of Hawrylak School, Don McDougall, is also 
Chair of the school pedestrian traffic safety committee. He says 
that the school patrollers at his school will be rewarded for their 
efforts next week at a submarine sandwich lunch. His school 
also presents monogrammed backpacks to a safety patroller of 
the month every month, to further reward these young 
volunteers. 
 
Today I want to thank all of the province's young school safety 
patrollers, and as well the city police department and the many 
teachers who help to coordinate this program and keep our 
children safe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Green Certificate Program 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In these days of high 
technology and new advances in many sectors of our economy,  



April 26, 1995 

 
1775 

it comes as no surprise that there is a constant need to model 
our training programs to the future, especially in agriculture. 
 
Saskatchewan is forging ahead in this area with the green 
certificate program, which is designed to better prepare young 
people for a future in farming. Work on this program is just in 
the preliminary stages. 
 
The objective of this program is to train prospective farmers 
and provide them with a certificate that shows that they have 
achieved a level of proficiency in agriculture, and at the same 
time offer a well-trained workforce. Experienced farmers will 
be teaming up with new farmers to share the valuable lessons 
they have learned by making a living on the farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot overstate the importance of this program 
because each year in Saskatchewan there's more and more 
evidence of how diversification is playing a major role in 
agriculture. The green certificate program will help ensure that 
our young farmers can keep up with many of the changes they 
face in agriculture. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wynyard Rodeo Week 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster mentioned a rodeo in 
her constituency. In those parts of the province above water, I 
guess the rodeo season is upon us and I want to mention 
another equally exciting event taking place this weekend in 
Wynyard, and even during the week. 
 
The Wynyard Chamber of Commerce is sponsoring Rodeo 
Week with a host of events during the week, with the weekend 
rodeo being the principal attraction. As mentioned yesterday, 
top rodeo stock and top rodeo cowboys will be on hand to thrill 
the audience on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. 
 
The Wynyard co-ops have already had a pancake breakfast and 
tonight for those of us who like good old-time fiddling, there's a 
fiddlers’ jamboree in the civic centre. And, Mr. Speaker, there'll 
be free rides for the kids, a hot dog sale, and on Friday, a 
chance to have your friends thrown in jail for a worthy cause 
and bail collected to free the accused will be donated to a 
worthy cause. On Saturday night, there will be a family dance 
with live entertainment. 
 
As the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster said yesterday, 
these community events are for fun, and they're also 
opportunities for people to raise funds for necessary services. 
All in all, this is a good weekend for those who enjoy rodeos 
and I invite all that are not in Lloydminster to come to Wynyard 
for some good old-time rodeo fun. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With leave, if we're finished with 
members' statements, leave to return to introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we are 
joined today by Mr. Paul Hill. I'm not going to take a long time 
in introducing Mr. Hill. I think he's known to most of the 
members here. 
 
I do think all members will want to join with me in 
acknowledging not only Mr. Hill's presence, but the very 
positive role that Crown Life is playing in the economy of 
Saskatchewan and in this province. And I invite all members to 
welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Permission to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — On behalf of the third party, we'd also like 
to welcome Mr. Hill, Mr. Speaker. So I'd again ask the members 
to join me in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to take the 
opportunity to welcome Mr. Hill here to the legislature, 
particularly as a result of all the work associated with Crown 
Life. 
 
And I want to take this opportunity, being 13 years ago today 
that we formed government in the province of Saskatchewan, to 
congratulate Premier Gary Filmon for his third term, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Treatment for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Health or a 
designate from the government. 
 
Mr. Minister, in February, Justice Horace Krever of the Krever 
blood commission recommended that those infected with 
hepatitis C through blood transfusions should be compensated. 
Your reaction to Mr. Krever's recommendation was to state that 
instead of compensating hepatitis C sufferers in Saskatchewan 
that your government's focus would be, and I quote: it would be 
on treatment and prevention, taken from the Leader-Post, 
February 25, 1995. 
 
Mr. Minister, what specific steps have been taken by your 
government to provide treatment and prevention services to  



April 26, 1995 

 
1776 

those suffering from hepatitis C? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
Minister of Health, what I would like to say to the legislature is 
that this is obviously a very important issue and one that there 
has been ongoing discussion between provinces and the federal 
government. And while the member raises a very interesting 
point and one that we respect, I think the way this should be 
resolved, and will be resolved at the end of the day, is by the 
ministers of Health, both at the provincial level and along with 
their colleagues in the Health department at the federal level. 
 
The Liberal Government of Canada, I believe, has a major 
responsibility in coming forward with options, and a decision 
will surely be made that will deal in a proper fashion with this 
most important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you claim 
your government is committed to treating hepatitis C through 
treatment and prevention. Yet as of April 20, Mr. Minister, 
Vicki Lissel has been cut off of interferon coverage, the only 
drug that is proven to help her condition. The only reason she 
received help in the first place was because we brought her case 
up in the legislature last year. 
 
Now you aren't even helping her cover the cost of her drugs. 
Mr. Minister, it's completely unfair that your government 
refuses to compensate hepatitis C sufferers and their families in 
the first place, but how can you now possibly justify cutting 
them off from drug coverage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would very much 
like if the member opposite would share with me the 
information that he refers to. I actually didn't catch the name of 
the individual, and if you would — he says, Vicki Lissel — if 
you would send me the information, I would get it to the 
Department of Health, and we would deal with it in an 
appropriate manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 
certainly would hope that your government would do something 
on this. And Vicki Lissel is hoping that finally your government 
will listen. 
 
Your government seems to be able to find money for all kinds 
of things. It can find money to cover 100 per cent of all 
government employees' prescription drugs as well as optometric 
care and even hairpieces. 
 
Your government can afford to put on a million dollar birthday 
party. Your government can afford to lay on million dollar 
pensions for members of the front bench right there. But you 
claim you can't afford to compensate hepatitis C victims, and  

worse, that you can't afford to cover the drug costs from 
hepatitis C victims. Where's the fairness in this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member opposite raises an 
issue that the Leader of the Liberal Party raised last week, and 
that is the issue of a union-negotiated contract with the public 
employees of Saskatchewan. And at the time the Liberal leader 
introduced this subject, she said even hairpieces are covered for 
civil servants — not mentioning . . . and untruthfully trying to 
give the image that any civil servant could go in and get a 
hairpiece when in fact this is for patients who have received 
chemotherapy for cancer treatment and have lost their hair and 
under doctor's instruction are allowed hairpieces. 
 
Now it was an embarrassment when the Leader of the Liberal 
Party raised it in this Assembly, and I'm surprised and dismayed 
that the Leader of the Conservative Party, who I thought would 
know better, would stoop to that level in his approach to 
attacking the civil service in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Casino Expansion 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the gambling minister today. Madam Minister, 
more Saskatchewan people are coming out in opposition to 
your massive gambling expansion plans. The Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business surveyed its members, and 
by a 3:1 margin business owners oppose the idea of casinos 
springing up all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, you have tried to spread the myth that casinos 
are going to stimulate the economy and create jobs, but 
small-business owners know better. They know that casinos are 
a net drain on the economy and will take money and jobs out of 
Saskatchewan's economy. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to start listening? When 
will you listen to the people who create the jobs in this province 
and cancel your casino expansion plans now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To set the record straight, what Mr. 
Dale Botting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I happen to 
be the minister in charge of the casino corporation, so it might 
be appropriate if I would answer the question about casinos. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite that you're 
absolutely, first of all, on the wrong track when you say that the 
casino that is being constructed in Regina, the renovations that 
are going on at the Union Station, are not supported by the  



April 26, 1995 

 
1777 

business community. That is absolutely not true. 
 
But I want to say as well, here again I'm surprised that the 
members of the Conservative caucus are following the Liberals 
in Manitoba, who tried to make casinos and VLTs (video lottery 
terminal) an issue in the election that went on yesterday. And 
what happened? Mr. Filmon explained to the public of 
Manitoba that gaming, casinos, and VLTs, were a fact of life. In 
a very matter-of-fact way he went out and explained to the 
people of the province that this was the case. 
 
Here today we have the members opposite, still in their routine 
way like the Liberals from Manitoba, harping about a proposed 
casino for Regina. As Mr. Filmon said — your colleague in 
Winnipeg, who won the election yesterday in Manitoba — said 
casinos and gaming are a fact of life. 
 
There are problems with casinos, with gaming, but obviously 
you deal with that by having the best programs for helping 
people who are addicted to gaming, in the process. And so I say 
to you, you should realize that you are on the wrong track here; 
that there is widespread support for the government's gaming 
policy, and get on to the real issues like jobs, like deficit 
reduction, and like the economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you haven't won the election yet, so don't prejudge the 
people. Don't prejudge what Saskatchewan people are thinking. 
And I would hope that you would stick around in the interim 
supply estimates that will come later, after this, and answer 
some questions about your casino downtown, because your seat 
mate doesn't seem to want to. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Minister, Dale Botting said the government has 
been quite persuasive in arguing about the economic spin-offs, 
but his members are more concerned about gambling addiction 
and poverty. Isn't that something? Business people are 
concerned about poverty and gambling addiction caused by the 
NDP (New Democratic Party). 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if small business says that casinos are a net 
drain on the economy and an independent study in Manitoba 
says that casinos are a net drain on the economy, why do you try 
and perpetuate the myth that somehow casinos are good for our 
economy? 
 
Saskatchewan people want real jobs, Minister, that you have 
not delivered. They don't need the false hope of gambling. 
Where is the study? Why don't you settle the issue once and for 
all? Where is the study that shows casinos will be a net benefit 
to the economy and job creation when your own seat mate says 
the one downtown won't make a profit for four years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the members opposite that when the debate has been going  

on here in the province and in Manitoba and with Mr. Ralph 
Klein in Alberta, who's planning a grand-scale casino for 
Calgary or Edmonton, and when the issue is raised in the 
House, the Liberals there say, why doesn't Mr. Klein follow the 
Saskatchewan formula for doing gaming in Alberta? You're 
way off track when you believe that we don't have a gaming 
policy that is acceptable to the majority of people. 
 
Now that's not to say that there aren't problems with gaming. 
Obviously there are. There are problems with many of the 
issues that you raise in the Assembly. There's problem with 
liquor in the province of Saskatchewan. Some people are 
addicted to the consumption of alcohol. Many accidents are 
caused by alcohol. What do you do about it? Do you bring back 
in those days when you take out the liquor from the province 
and try to control what people do? It doesn't work. 
 
The fact of life, as Mr. Filmon said, is that gaming is here and 
has to be dealt with. You can do one of two things: hide your 
head in the sand the way you are today, with all of the 
repercussions that will come from that; or you can deal with the 
fundamental issue that you can gamble on Internet based on a 
casino in the South somewhere; or you can go to Las Vegas, or 
you can go to Conservative Manitoba and game, or you'll be 
able to go to the big casino in Calgary. And you folks sit here 
and say: ignore all that, hide your head in the sand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
there's a fair solution to the problem. You say that a vast 
majority of Saskatchewan people wish to have gaming. We 
have just raised a number of concerns that people bring to this 
Assembly in a fair and democratic manner. So the choice is 
obvious, Mr. Minister, the choice is obvious. New Democrats 
have always told us that Saskatchewan's unique; we have to do 
things here a little bit differently. 
 
Well why don't we be a little bit different than Manitoba or 
Alberta, and simply put it on the ballot, Mr. Minister. Let's be 
fair. Let's put the issue before the people and say: do you 
approve of gaming or don't you? And let the people decide. Let 
the people be fair. You be fair to the people, Mr. Minister, and 
we'll see if Mr. Botting's right; we'll see if you're right. What are 
you afraid of, Minister? Why is fairness so wrong in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think there was a 
ballot on gaming in Manitoba last night, but more than gaming 
— it dealt with balanced budgets, it dealt with jobs and taxes. 
And what the public said to Mr. Filmon is that he was on the 
right track. And they said to the New Democrats that they were 
on the right track as well. 
 
What they said was, to the Liberals, it was a disaster and they 
are going nowhere. In fact the saying is today: do you know 
what three plus three is? Two Liberal caucuses. That's what  



April 26, 1995 

 
1778 

they're saying around the province today. 
 
But seriously to the member opposite, while he advocates and 
advocates the idea of American-style politics — that is that on 
every issue you go to the people and find out what they think — 
it's not surprising that the Liberals and Tories opposite want 
American-style medicare, American-style politics. 
 
I say to you we will deal with medicare, with gaming, with 
balanced budgets, the Saskatchewan way, and I think the people 
will buy our ideas and our concepts far before they'll go for 
your American-style medicare and American-style politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Poverty Levels 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
must take the responsibility for the state of affairs in our 
province under its management. Today I want to draw the 
attention of members to the recent report released by the 
National Council on Welfare. It states that the number of 
seniors living below the poverty line in Saskatchewan has 
increased substantially since the NDP were elected in 1991. 
Indeed there has been an increase of 50 per cent in the number 
of senior men who have fallen below the poverty line. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Social Services. What has 
your government done to cushion the blow for the elderly poor 
who are victims of the huge increases in costs your government 
has offloaded to people with fixed incomes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this question really 
surprises me, especially from that member. As the Minister 
responsible for Seniors, I have been all over this province, 
including out to Kipling last night, speaking to many seniors. 
You know who seniors are concerned about? Seniors are 
concerned about the federal Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker — that's 
who they're concerned about. 
 
They're concerned about the future of their pensions. Seniors 
are concerned about the future of medicare under that federal 
Liberal government. They're concerned about the future of 
education for their grandchildren. I suggest that you pick up the 
phone — you call Mr. Martin and Mr. Axworthy. Use your 
influence in Ottawa, if you have any, and tell them that seniors 
here want that policy revisited. And the seniors, that report also 
said, which you neglected to mention, that report said that the 
seniors in Saskatchewan have the lowest level of poverty in all 
of Canada. 
 
That isn't good enough. We're going to continue working — but 
the federal Liberals aren't helping us — and be part of the 
solution, not part of the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, it may be hard for some of the 
members opposite, who can look forward to their privileged  

pensions, to understand what poverty is all about. They won't 
have to worry about making choices between food and medical 
prescriptions because they will have million-dollar pensions to 
depend on. 
 
The fact is that under this NDP government more and more 
seniors are falling below the poverty line, at the same time as 
the NDP reduced the Saskatchewan Pension Plan payments and 
virtually eliminated the prescription drug plan. 
 
My question is to the Deputy Premier. If you and your 
colleagues had the foresight to look after yourself in luxury 
after retirement, why have your policies failed to address the 
plight of the elderly poor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member 
isn't aware of this, but it has come to my attention that the 
federal Liberal government has just cut drug benefits to 
veterans. Now I think you need to look in your own back yard. 
They've just cut . . . they've just announced they're reducing 
drug benefits for veterans, war veterans, while they're 
celebrating the big cross-Canada celebration with regard to 
celebrating about veterans  Canada Remembers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did that member two years ago vote against 
an increase to the seniors' income plan? You voted against that 
— your leader voted against that. Okay, you weren't here, but 
your leader voted against that. 
 
Now you're also not being . . . I'm not saying you're misleading 
the public, but seniors recognize that we're cleaning up the Tory 
mess and they appreciate the special drug support program. And 
if you read the last paper from the Sask Seniors Association, 
you'll see there — and I'll send you over the article — they 
compliment the Government of Saskatchewan on their latest 
budget. Look that up; the seniors are happy with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I'd like to remind the minister that I wasn't 
here two years ago. I didn't vote on that Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our welfare rolls are ballooning; taxes have 
skyrocketed. Any increase in the cost of living has been directly 
imposed by this government's policies. There are more hungry 
children today than there were when the NDP promised to 
eliminate the problem in 1991. Not only do the pioneers of this 
province have to line up for long-term care and medical 
treatment, but now as a group they are falling more and more 
below the poverty line. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier: if the unemployed, the 
working poor, the hungry children, and the plight of seniors in 
Saskatchewan are not your responsibility, just what is the 
priority of your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have talked to this 
member personally about a situation. You know that back in 
January of this year, I had a trip planned to Ottawa which I  



April 26, 1995 

 
1779 

cancelled four hours before I left. I was going to sign an 
agreement with Mr. Axworthy on a family poverty strategy. 
Who pulled out? The federal government pulled out. They 
pulled out of that agreement. 
 
The letter of agreement was negotiated and agreed to, and so far 
they have not given any money for their day care strategy, their 
so-called red book, day care strategy which low income, 
single-parent families are still waiting for. 
 
You talk to Mr. Axworthy about putting the money back on the 
table to deal with family poverty if you're really interested in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, on 
Monday you made a flowery announcement that you were 
going to ask the federal government to allow Saskatchewan to 
opt out of the gun registry. Well your federal counterpart 
appears to have shot you down in flames before you even got a 
chance to take off. You'll excuse me from saying, I told you so. 
 
Your resolution isn't going to make a whiff of difference in the 
gun debate, because Sergeant Rock isn't going to listen to talk; 
he isn't going to respond to requests or resolutions or anything 
else but firm action. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us if you have anything else planned 
other than this trip to Ottawa which is already being neutered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It's apparent that Liberals in Ottawa don't listen very well. It 
doesn't seem that they listened very well in Manitoba and it 
doesn't seem that they're much better at it in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me say though, with respect to the committee going to 
Ottawa, this shouldn't be discounted. The committee is going to 
speak . . . the all-party committee is going to speak to the 
federal parliamentary committee. Mr. Rock has said he will pay 
heed to that all-parliamentary committee. 
 
That should be allowed to play itself out and should be given 
every opportunity to work before we go to something else. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 
certainly understand why the Minister of Justice would not rise 
and respond after Allan Rock blew his tail feathers off. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I would hope you will excuse the analogy, 
but you're out of ammunition — even blanks. You fail to take 
into account the fact that the Liberals don't care about 
Saskatchewan and they don't want to listen to our regional 
concerns. 
 
The opting-out strategy has been rejected. This Liberal Justice 
Committee hearing is being set up to be a whitewash, a PR  

(public relations) effort only. 
 
Mr. Minister, why not negotiate from a position of strength? 
Why not entrench property rights and invoke the 
notwithstanding clause and then go to Ottawa and stick that in 
the Liberals' face. Why not put your partisan opposition to 
property rights aside and do the right thing for Saskatchewan? 
Will you do that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This has indeed been a difficult 
relationship with the Liberal Party. We have had discussions 
with them on a variety of issues, none of which have been 
terribly successful. We tried to talk to them about the Crow 
rate; they did it anyway. We have talked to them about health 
care; we have expressed our concern about the Americanization 
of the health care system and they seem to be proceeding in any 
event. 
 
With respect to gun control, we are in the process of attempting 
to talk to Liberals, as difficult as that has proven to be. They do 
have thick skulls on this issue. They have thick skulls on other 
issues. All we can do is do our best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Social Assistance Benefits 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
direct my attention to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday I brought forward to you the case of 
Elmer Sawatzky from Hague and you made a commitment that 
you would look into it and do something if at all possible. I hear 
rumours now that you are inclined to look upon his and the 
community of Hague's situation favourably, and I thought I 
would get up now in question period and give you an 
opportunity to respond to that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And for the hon. member, I want to clarify as clearly as I can, 
Mr. Speaker, that the money that was raised by the community 
of Hague — and I give them a tremendous amount of credit for 
having community spirit — will be used for the purpose of 
which it was intended, that is to supplement medical expenses. 
It will not be used, it will not be used for basic social assistance 
expenditures for this family. 
 
Now that family  to clarify  that family had not been cut 
off from basic social assistance. There was just some question 
around what this money was. That was all. They had not been 
cut off, as a matter of clarification. 
 
My deputy minister met this morning with the family in their 
home and they are very satisfied. And their request is  they 
like the social worker  they would like this to be dealt with 
not in the national news or across Saskatchewan, but between 
the social worker and them, because they're under a lot of stress. 
 



April 26, 1995 

 
1780 

And my blessings and prayers go out to Mr. Sawatzky and I 
wish the family well and I consider the case closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
at first blush here, say to the minister that I take your assurance 
very seriously, and on behalf . . . and we will hold you to that. 
But on behalf of the Sawatzky family and the community of 
Hague, I want to thank you for recognizing that the endeavours 
of the community of Hague have not gone to waste, that they 
will be used for the purposes intended. 
 
And your commitment, Mr. Minister, that that will actually 
come to pass is accepted, and I want to thank you for that. And 
I say to you that if this is the case and continues to be so, I just 
want to say to you, Mr. Minister, good job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well thank you very much. I appreciate 
that. What I would . . . Obviously members can ask any 
questions they want to of the ministers; that's what the question 
period is about. 
 
What I would say though is, in the future, I would really 
appreciate if members would have their community assistants 
— which usually happens — contact the regional directors. And 
certainly most people prefer to have their matters dealt with in 
private. The Sawatzkys were not aware this was coming up, and 
I think that I appreciate your comments, but in future this can be 
sorted out by going through the proper channels, and I would 
really respect that in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Will the members please come to order. 
Order. Order. Will the members please come to order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act respecting the University of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the University of Saskatchewan be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to table 
two reports. One is a report that I believe has been already 
distributed to members, and that is the report of the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, (Saskatchewan 
Branch). I lay that on the Table now. 
 
Also pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I  

would like to table the Report of the Provincial Auditor, of the 
1994 financial statements of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) subsidiary Crown corporations. 
 
(1415) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was waiting for 
you to introduce people, but I guess it's the same folks that were 
around the other day except for the minister so we all know 
who she is so we can proceed. 
 
Madam Minister, we had a fairly lengthy discussion with, I 
guess he's your Associate Minister of Finance, the other night 
and he wasn't informed about a lot of things so I guess it's 
appropriate that you're here today so that we can discuss some 
issues. 
 
We looked over the interim supply and we asked the minister 
about what the . . . the Premier, I understand, is off in Kamsack 
today making a major announcement dealing with funds 
pertaining to the flooding situation on the east side of the 
province. 
 
And we asked the member from Churchill Downs where this 
was coming from and was it in here, and we had some 
suggestions for him. And he didn't know where the money was 
going to come from, that it would simply be found. And I 
understand this money is going to be on the table today at 3 
o'clock in Kamsack. 
 
So I'm wondering if you could tell us where the money is 
coming from that the Premier is going to spread around rural 
Saskatchewan as of 3 o'clock this afternoon? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Could I have the cooperation of the 
members and ask them to take their seats or take their 
conversation out of the room . . . (inaudible) . . . impose on the 
members, but again I ask them to take their seats or take their 
conversation out of the room. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. And I thank you to the member opposite for that 
question. The announcement has not formally been made. It 
will be made later on today. 
 
What I can tell the member opposite is that the money will be 
found internally by repriorizing departmental budgets. But 
beyond that, I think we should wait for the formal 
announcement. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying then, Madam Minister, 
is that these very departments that you've brought before the  



April 26, 1995 

 
1781 

Assembly for funding for the next two months, will have their 
budgets readjusted. And you'll take from various ones of these 
and adjust that over to the announcement being made at 3 
o'clock this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What we basically said to the 
departments is we understand the need and we understand that 
circumstances occur in any government that aren't anticipated, 
and you have to always be in a position to respond to those 
circumstances. 
 
So therefore, we are responding to those circumstances, but 
we've also asked the departments for strategies to repriorize 
other commitments in order to ensure that the financing is 
revenue neutral to the overall budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, if the committee is 
still sitting at that time, would you be prepared to tell this 
Assembly what the Premier is going to give away up in 
Kamsack at 3 o'clock? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, if we're still sitting. I have no 
problem going through what information will be released at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I appreciate that, Madam Minister. I 
think it would be important for members of the Assembly here 
to understand what is happening. It's of importance to the entire 
province. And it's unfortunate the Premier couldn't have made 
the announcement a little bit earlier and then we could have 
talked about it from the very beginning. 
 
See, Madam Minister, there's a great concern out there and this 
goes back to the history of your government the last few years. 
For instance, in agriculture we had a situation where farmers in 
this province had signed a contract and they believed that that 
contract was valid and binding on the parties. And then your 
government came along and you broke that contract. And you 
said, well we're breaking it because of a number of reasons and 
we'll use the Legislative Assembly to validate the breaking of 
the contract. 
 
And then you said, we're going to use this money for such and 
such. We would never use that money to balance the budget. 
And I remember that question being asked in 1992 of your seat 
mate there when he was the minister of Agriculture before he 
destroyed the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), and he 
said no, never would we ever do that. 
 
And along comes 1995, and we're getting really close to an 
election, and in all your wisdom you go and you take that GRIP 
surplus and you balance your budget with it and you give the 
federal Liberals $317 million so they can walk out of this 
province with it, instead of putting it into our economy. And 
farmers and their families and rural communities say whoa, 
what happened here? It disappeared. 
 
And on top of that, there's another $115 million in dunners out 
there. And we've asked the Minister of Agriculture about that,  

and he says, well don't worry about it this year. Don't worry 
about it. There's no interest on it; nobody's going to go after it. 
It's not due and payable until '96, conveniently, after hopefully 
we're re-elected. 
 
Now when we've asked him specifically if any of those dunners 
are going to be collected, he says, well I can't categorically 
assure you that there won't be 50 cents an acre or a dollar an 
acre or some such figure with some of these so-called GRIP 
overpayments. 
 
Now the problem we have, Madam Minister, you're going to go 
looking for money. The budget surplus that you projected is 
already wrong because the Minister of Highways can't do his 
homework, so those numbers are changing. 
 
You're now going to pass out what we assume is a fairly 
significant amount of cash at 3 o'clock this afternoon — it isn't 
mentioned in here anywhere. You're saying departments are 
going to have to come up with the extra. There is a terrible fear 
in rural Saskatchewan that that $115 million is a good place for 
you to go digging for some extra cash. 
 
And maybe it is only a buck an acre or two bucks an acre. But 
you can go out and raise several millions and tens of millions of 
dollars simply by changing the way that you address those 
dunners, and then they end up paying for your Premier's flood 
assistance. Or they could end up paying for the minister of 
casinos to build his downtown casino. 
 
There's that terrible fear, Madam Minister. And we have no 
assurance from the Minister of Agriculture, from the Associate 
Minister of Finance, that that money is not coming out of, for 
instance, the so-called GRIP surplus, which you've already 
plundered a couple of times and would not hesitate, I doubt, 
after the next election if you're returned, to plunder once more. 
 
So I think it's important that we understand where you're going 
to get this money from that the Premier is now handing out in 
Kamsack at 3 o'clock. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would say to the member opposite 
that I think he should wait till the announcement to see the 
sums involved. And also to say to the member opposite as well, 
that the GRIP surplus is a completely separate issue. Without 
rehashing the GRIP debate, I'd be interested to see two years 
from now how many governments in Canada are still 
committed to the initial GRIP program. I think that this 
government, in saying that there was a problem with that 
program, was in the forefront of what is going to happen with 
our Tory neighbours. 
 
And as far as the surplus, we need to clarify for the record that 
the farmers' share of the surplus was returned to farmers. The 
surplus occurred because the circumstances in the province 
were better than expected, and so we had good news relative to 
what we've had in the past. 
 
And so therefore the GRIP surplus — the farmers' portion —  



April 26, 1995 

 
1782 

was returned to them, as it duly should have been. The other 
part of the surplus, which came from the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, was returned to the Saskatchewan taxpayers, and has 
been dealt with. It is part of the surplus for 1994-95 and the 
books in that sense are closed on that. So there's no capacity to 
do any altering of that. 
 
So what I would really suggest to the member is that we wait 
and see what is announced, and then I think we've got a better 
perspective on this debate. And I would also point out to the 
member is, what we're talking about is interim supply, and so 
perhaps we should focus on that as well. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the 
minister has talked quite freely about agriculture and I think I 
will talk quite freely about agriculture, because it's the very 
answer that the minister just gave that makes people so afraid. I 
mean, Madam Minister, that's totally fictitious and you know it 
— you know it. 
 
The program was always designed to have a three-year review 
at the end of the three years. You know, Madam Minister, that 
the surpluses were paid out in the other provinces. The fed 
money was paid out to the individuals — you know that — 
every dime. And at the end of the contract the option was 
always there to renegotiate the contract or terminate the 
program. And you know that. 
 
(1430) 
 
And you try and tell this Assembly a different story. That's why 
they don't trust you — that's why they don't trust you. And that's 
why, Madam Minister, we need some assurance that that $115 
million in dunners that you've got sitting out there will not be 
used to pay for things like the announcement that the Premier is 
making in Kamsack today. And that's why you should tell us 
where in this interim supply Bill that money's coming from. 
You should name the departments, and you should go through 
it, and you should tell us where he's taking the money from to 
put out in Kamsack today. I think that's only fair and credible. I 
think it's only fair and credible when there are people out there 
that fear the actions of your government, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, because of what you've done in the past. 
 
The farmers in Manitoba and Alberta, Madam Minister, got the 
surplus paid out, and that was federal money, provincial money, 
and the insurance contract holders' money. And at the end of 
the program period there was always the option to renegotiate 
the program or terminate it. And you full well know that, and 
yet you told this Assembly something else. 
 
Madam Minister, where is the money coming from that the 
Premier is announcing today? Is it coming out of Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would say to the 
member opposite what I said before. I think we need to wait for 
any announcement, so we know the sums involved — okay? 
We know the sums involved. No, I'm not about to pre-empt the  

Premier in making his announcement. He's decided that he's 
going to go, and he's going to look at the situation, and he's 
going to make his announcement and he will make it when he 
deems appropriate. 
 
We need to look at the sums involved, and then we need to look 
at the fact that the departments have said they have a capacity to 
repriorize. And that's what will occur. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, why don't you then 
give us a range of departments. We'd clearly like to understand, 
in the financing of the province over the next couple of months, 
where we could expect to see monies taken from. 
 
Any time you take money, Madam Minister, from a budget, that 
means that that budget is going to be affected, and somebody 
down the line has to pay the price. And there's a whole lot of 
groups in this province that are tired of paying your price. 
They're tired of having their rates jacked up, their utility rates 
jacked up, their taxes jacked up, their transfer payments cut 
back. And I would suggest to you that somebody will have to 
pay the price. 
 
So why don't you just give us a range of where you perhaps will 
go looking for the money, and then we can have a discussion 
about that vis-a-vis your interim supply Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think the member opposite . . . 
again I'm not prepared to pre-empt what the Premier is going to 
announce. But I think the member opposite would be helped by 
knowing that the two departments involved are Municipal 
Government and Highways. The Department of Agriculture is 
not involved in this issue. They do not do any funding of the 
sort that the municipalities are discussing. 
 
So certainly those departments have said to us that they have a 
capacity to repriorize funding within their departments because 
we're at the beginning of a year. Things change throughout the 
course of the year, so that's certainly is where the process would 
likely begin, most reasonably begin, seeing as those are the 
departments involved. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, that gives 
us some things to talk about then. Those budgets clearly are 
ones that, in recent history, have not had a lot of latitude. 
 
One only has to drive around rural Saskatchewan and take a 
drive on most of our highways to understand the shape that 
they're in and that our highways had deteriorated to the point, I 
believe it was back in 1993, when your seat mate was talking 
about tearing up the asphalt and returning those roads to gravel 
because they couldn't do the maintenance on them. Municipal 
Government, this year . . . I mean they've been cut year after 
year after year. And I know when you went to SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) you got an 
earful. You got an earful about certain issues. 
 
So, Madam Minister, if it is Highways and Municipal 
Government that are going to pony up the cash, can you tell us  



April 26, 1995 

 
1783 

what sectors in those two departments are probably going to 
feel the pinch in order to come through with this flood money 
that the Premier's going to announce here in 25 minutes. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would remind the member 
opposite, what we're talking about is interim supply, the next 
two months. This money will not probably be able to be 
expended until much later on in the year. 
 
Just with respect to his comments about Municipal Government 
and Highways, I would remind the member opposite that in 
1994-95 in fact Municipal Government came in $2 million 
under budget. 
 
And I guess the last comment I make would be a more general 
one. The members opposite have talked about cutting 
government spending by 5 per cent. And yet every time we get 
into a particular department or area, it's clear that that's not 
where they're going to do the cutting. 
 
They're not going to cut Agriculture; they've made that clear. 
Now they're saying they would never cut Highways, or they find 
no savings in Municipal Government or Highways. I don't know 
what the conclusion can be here except that departments like 
Health are going to take huge cuts under their 5 per cent 
reduction scenario. 
 
Seems it looks like every other department that they wander 
into, they find it problematic that we have found any savings in 
these areas. 
 
So I would say to the member opposite, this money will not be 
expended, cannot probably realistically, logistically, be 
expended for another couple of months. And by that time the 
picture should become a lot clearer in terms of some of the 
questions he's asking. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, as I watch the TV, I 
see the water running over the roads and tearing out the culverts 
and wrecking the bridges and inundating the towns, and people 
buying sandbags, and communities all over the place spending 
money like crazy. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, those communities are going to be 
asking for some back-stopping, and that means that somebody's 
going to have to do that. Now maybe there's deductibles 
involved here; there usually is in disaster assistance. And I'm 
hoping you're going to come forward with those details here in 
twenty-two and a half minutes for us. 
 
So there's a whole lot of things surrounding this, Madam 
Minister, that are going to mean that the expenditure of money 
is going to occur, and it's going to occur within the two months 
that we're talking about. And it's certainly going to have 
ramifications on both of those budgets — both of those 
budgets. 
 
And I would hope, if I were a municipal leader in this province, 
or someone who's very concerned about highways . . . and  

goodness knows, we've seen how many thousands of names 
coming into this Assembly on petitions every sitting day that 
this Assembly's been in session. You have had highway 
petitions, petitions laid on the Table. 
 
I don't know if Madam Minister has taken the opportunity to 
look at the stack, but I'll bet you if you went back into the 
Clerk's office, it's about this high right now. And there are 
literally tens of thousands of names suggesting to you, Madam 
Minister, and your government, that there's a serious problem to 
be addressed in highways. And it's not just from one area. It's 
just not Maple Creek, it's all over the place. 
 
And those very highways that people are complaining about 
before are now all ripped to pieces. They need major 
reconstruction in places; they need a lot of work. You're going 
to have to expend money. How in the world could you tell this 
Assembly that nobody's going to spend any money in the next 
two months? Is rural Saskatchewan on the east side of this 
province just going to drop off the edge of the earth and go 
away until you get your election over with, or whatever you've 
got on your mind? No. 
 
The mess has to be cleaned up, the money has to be spent, the 
earth-moving equipment has to be moved in, the culverts have 
to be put back in, the storm sewer systems in the towns and the 
water supplies have to be fixed. And you have to spend money. 
You're going to have to treat with alum in many cases in order 
to clean up the water supply. You're going to have to chlorinate. 
 
There are all sorts of things, Madam Minister, that necessitate 
the spending of money. And if it's Highways and Municipal 
Government that take the hit, then we need to understand what 
they're going to do. And it's ridiculous for you to say that there 
won't be any money expended in the next two months. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would remind the 
member opposite that we're into interim supply. But seeing as 
he's ventured off into this broader territory, I would bring him 
back to the broader picture. This government had a plan to 
balance the books of the province, and we did it because we 
were consistent across the piece; that is, we didn't speak out of 
one side of our mouth one day and another side of our mouth 
the other day. 
 
I would have to remind the member opposite what his party has 
on the books as of now. They have a balanced budget Act, 
which will see the debt of the province eliminated in 25 years. 
Cost of that, about $500 million a year that they're going to find 
somewhere. 
 
They also have on the record outside the legislature, and their 
leader's commitments, about $150 million in tax cuts so far. 
And if you'd like me to itemize that, it's $80 million in a sales 
tax cut and $100 million in a deficit surtax cut. I've actually 
been generous; it's about $180 million in tax cuts. 
 
So they've racked up about $680 million a year that they've got 
to find somewhere. Then they've said they're going to cut  



April 26, 1995 

 
1784 

spending of the government by 5 per cent, which might get 
them about $250 million. They're only $400 million short — 
$400 million short after having cut spending by 5 per cent. 
 
Now when we're onto a specific area, like Highways, they're 
standing up and saying, well we've got to spend more money. I 
mean surely there has to be a measure of reasonableness and 
consistency. 
 
I say to the member opposite, none of this adds up. And it's all 
very nice politics to stand up in the House and say boy, would 
we ever be spending more money on highways. But never mind 
the fact that everything else that we have out there, all the other 
promises that we've made to the electorate, all the goodies that 
we've laid out — get rid of the debt in 25 years; cut your taxes 
— leaves them $400 million short. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, this is about interim supply 
and I'd be quite willing to go back to talk about interim supply. 
But if we're going to get onto the bigger issues, I'm going to 
keep him on some of the other bigger issues as well. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it's very unfortunate that 
the minister has this propensity to mislead, because that isn't 
what I asked, Madam Minister. I said there is going to be 
money expended. You said to the Assembly that no one was 
going to spend any money. And I just say to you quite honestly, 
that isn't correct. 
 
You can't tell me that all of those communities and all those 
RMs on the east side of the province aren't going to have to 
spend money. Otherwise we wouldn't have a disaster, I guess. 
What the heck's the Premier going to Kamsack to make the big 
announcement for? I mean if people didn't need money and 
weren't going to have to expend money, there's no point in him 
trooping off there, is there, spending some of the taxpayers' 
money. I didn't say anything about spending more. 
 
I simply asked you . . . you named two departments. I said I 
wanted to know where in those departments, now that you've 
made the trade-off, you're saying I'm cutting here, here, and 
here. And I'm not going to spend any more of my budget. Fair. I 
want to know where in there somebody is taking the hit. I didn't 
say anything about spending more. 
 
You were the one that told the Assembly that no one was going 
to spend any money. Well they're spending it by the hour up 
there in many cases in order to save their communities. They 
have to spend the money. They're going to have to chlorinate 
the water. They're going to have to replace the culvert. They 
have to buy the sandbag. They have to spend the money. 
 
Now you're saying we're going to take from Peter to pay for the 
program the Premier announces in Kamsack. Fair ball. 
Nobody's talking about spending any more, Madam Minister. 
All I want to understand is . . . you brought some requests here. 
And you say, give me the money; my budget isn't passed yet. 
The money has to flow to pay for those things. That's 
reasonable. 

(1445) 
 
Nobody's talking about spending more, Madam Minister. I want 
to know who, in the current budget, is coming up short because 
you've decided to move the money around. I didn't say anything 
about 3 or $400 million. I can get into that topic and Crown 
corporations and the percentage of money that comes before 
this Assembly, and what doesn't come before this Assembly, 
and where I could achieve some savings. And we could 
probably talk about mutual discussions that you've had about 
selling SaskTel and SaskEnergy, and a few other issues. 
 
We can have that discussion, and we will, a little later on. But 
all I asked you, Madam Minister, is where are you moving the 
current budgets around in order to pay for the announcement 
the Premier's making at 3 o'clock this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I'm saying to the member 
opposite is this. We will have to spend some money because of 
the emergency situation. What I'm saying to the member 
opposite is that we will be saying to the departments involved 
and to other agencies of government, we expect to find that 
money through efficiencies, through repriorizing of spending. 
 
But you've got to — and as I say — wait till we get some more 
precise details. The budget of the province is over $4 billion. If 
you do as we do — and we manage every penny as carefully as 
we possibly can — it means in the course of the year something 
that you had planned to spend money on, or had hoped or had 
thought you may have had to spend money on, may very well 
not occur. And so we will be vigilant in ensuring that that's the 
way we've spent the money. 
 
I can assure the member opposite, he's not going to see us 
saying, oh well, we're taking this particular item out of the 
budget. But what this is, it's what a government that knows how 
to manage the finances of the province does on a regular basis. 
 
We look at every possible penny, every possible thing that 
perhaps we thought we had to spend money on, but when we 
come to think of it, we don't have to spend either the money or 
all of the money. So that's what will occur. But I think what I 
would really urge the member opposite to do is  we can 
discuss these things in interim supply  I think the key thing is 
to ensure that all of the agencies out there which are relying on 
the government to come up with the money they require to 
finance their operations, have their money on a timely basis. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I can appreciate your 
want not to do this — that you'd rather go do something else. 
 
But this is important and it clearly is topical because there are 
going to be expenditures made. You've just broadened it, in 
your words, from Municipal Government and Highways to 
other agencies. Okay? And that's different than what you told 
me 10 or 15 minutes ago — other agencies. Perhaps you could 
give us some indication of what other agencies beyond 
Highways and Municipal Government you're talking about. 
 



April 26, 1995 

 
1785 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I want to clarify first of all is what I'm saying to 
you is this is interim supply. If you want to wait till we get into 
the estimates, we can go on with this. 
 
What I am saying on the other issue is, in the course . . . when 
you do a budget, you assume all sorts of things are going to 
occur. Every single year, certain things that cost money occur 
that you hadn't planned on occurring. Certain things that you 
thought might cost X dollars don't in fact cost that amount of 
money. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like a drought or something like that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — And yes, okay, so sound 
management means that you are constantly scrutinizing the 
areas where we thought we were going to spend X dollars there, 
and that's not going to be required. And then you take that 
money, and you redirect it to the thing that did happen that is 
going to cost money that you hadn't anticipated. 
 
And that's how you manage within a budget — no different 
than in your household budget. You know, you set aside a 
certain amount of money for car repairs, but the car repairs 
didn't cost as much as you thought. You've got two choices. 
You can take the money. Go blow it. Go to a movie, or have a 
holiday or whatever. Or else you can set the money aside and 
say, but maybe my basement is going to flood, and the 
insurance isn't going to cover the whole cost of it, so I'm going 
to use the money that I'd set aside for the car repairs, that isn't as 
great as turned out, for my basement. 
 
What I'm saying to you about this government and why we have 
a record with financial agencies and with the public out there of 
managing the finances soundly is, when the car repair bill isn't 
as high as we thought, we don't say gee, we found money; let's 
find out a place to spend it. We set it aside, and we tell 
departments they have to be prepared to have that repriorized to 
where the problem occurred that we didn't anticipate. That's 
what I'm saying to the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I do clearly understand how a house 
runs, Madam Minister, and I think most of us do. But I can tell 
you that I also understand that what you just referred to is one 
of the — and I have to hand it to you — one of the most 
politically well-crafted shell games that I've ever witnessed in 
my time in politics, which you've pulled over the wool of the 
eyes of people in the last four years, the way you've driven 
deficits up and taken them down and used the Crown 
corporations. I mean, Madam Minister, it's not laughable. It's 
almost pathetic. 
 
Madam Minister, you talk . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Chairman, if the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster would 
like to ask her own minister some questions, I'd be happy to 
release my seat here and see if she could ask anything 
intelligent. And if she doesn't want to, that's fine too. 
 
But, Madam Minister, to say that after I've cancelled . . . I mean  

I cancelled the GRIP program and I cancelled the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan and I took away the drug plan. And I mean I broke 
damn near every contract that I can possibly find. And then I've 
taxed every year and I've raised every utility rate every three 
months to six months. And after I've done all of this, at the end 
of the day there's some kind of magic about me managing my 
household. Madam Minister, please, I don't need the exercise, 
okay? 
 
I mean it isn't difficult to come up with your household solution 
when you can break all of the rules. And if you can tax it at 
liberty and willy-nilly, there isn't a whole lot of magic here. 
You've done it. I hand it to you. It has been one of the best-
crafted pieces of political manipulation that I have ever seen in 
20 years of being involved in politics. 
 
And my hands off to you; I give you a standing ovation for the 
craftiness with which you've done it. I mean you put the 
expectation level of the public at one place and then you took it 
another. And it's incredible, Madam Minister. So let's forget 
about how crafty you are at your political business and get on 
with the business of studying the budget and the Premier's 
announcement and the money that is getting expended. And 
you're coming here and you want another two months of money 
to do various things. 
 
And we've simply come here and asked you some legitimate 
questions about the Premier handing out cash today, and about 
what's going to happen to some departments. And I asked the 
minister some questions surrounding the building of casinos. 
These are not difficult questions, Madam Minister. Why do we 
have to play the hide-and-seek game instead of just laying out 
what's going on? 
 
Nobody's talking about raising any more money here. I just 
want to understand where you're moving the money around and 
what you're going to do with it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I can't resist when I 
have the former premier mentioning the auditor. The annals of 
the history of this province will burn when the record of his 
administration in the management of the finances of this 
province are written, and when the comments that the 
Provincial Auditor made about the accountability or lack 
thereof, are put on the record. 
 
As I say  as a historian — the record will burn. The history 
books will be smoking. 
 
Now getting back to the very reasonable question that the 
member opposite has asked, I think I've given you as much 
information as I can, and I want to clarify that it's 5 o'clock that 
the announcement is going to made. I said 5 o'clock initially. 
What I say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well we'll wait till then. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, no problem. What I said to the 
member opposite is that if there is an unexpected expenditure,  



April 26, 1995 

 
1786 

there are also unexpected savings, and that's where the money is 
coming from. So you're simply not going to see us saying this 
part of the budget is now no longer part of the budget. That 
won't occur. 
 
And I think one of the things that our public service should be 
given more credit for is their incredible success in the last three 
years at managing the finances in this way so that they have 
been able, last year for example, to deal with a $40 million 
increase in interest rates which was unexpected. They have been 
able to deal with offloading from the federal government which 
was unexpected. So there is a capacity in the system to deal 
with these issues. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, when you talked about 
Municipal Government, Highways, and other agencies, is there 
a chance that the $60 million that you projected from CIC and 
then pulled back when you had other revenue, the GRIP money, 
to balance with, is that a possibility that that $60 million in CIC 
could re-enter the budgetary process to pay for the program that 
the Premier's announcing today? Is that a reasonable conclusion 
about “other agencies”? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, I would 
just remind him that that's last year's budget. That budget has 
been closed. There's no capacity to change anything associated 
with last year's budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, until a few weeks ago 
your Highways minister and your Ag minister wanted to move 
money from last year's budget into this year, and they were all 
upset when the Assembly didn't grant them the permission. 
 
I mean on one hand you won't talk about what happened last 
year, and on the other hand you got ministers that are trying to 
move cash from last year to this year. Why is it okay for those 
two ministers to move it around, and you can't? You're the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
And that brings up another topic, Madam Minister. There was 
20 million bucks that your Minister of Highways put on the 
table here, and he said if I don't get her spent by the end of the 
budget year, I got terrible problems, and I can't get money from 
the feds, and I can't do this. But I want to move it from last 
year's budget into this year's budget. 
 
And I asked the associate minister the other day about it, and he 
didn't seem to know a whole lot where that money was or where 
it was going or what the future plans . . . Is the $20 million, 
Madam Minister, that the Highways minister had in '94-95, now 
available for '95-96. Is that possibly what the Premier's going to 
use to make the announcement in Kamsack? And it's very 
unfortunate that he would stage that for 5 o'clock instead of 
allowing this Assembly to discuss what he's doing up in 
Kamsack this afternoon. Is that a possibility? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To give the member opposite a short 
answer, no. The Highways money will not be  

reintroduced in any way — the money that you're talking about. 
 
But I would remind the member opposite that what we're 
talking about here is interim supply and we're talking about 
funding to groups like schools, hospitals, and other agencies 
who need their money. And why they don't have it is important. 
This province introduced its budget earlier than any other 
province in Canada — February 16. The idea behind 
introducing an early budget was to give the legislature lots of 
time to debate the budget and to have it passed by the year end, 
March 31. If in fact the budget was passed by March 31, we 
would not be here doing this process. 
 
But because the legislature has not passed the budget, money 
provided for in that budget, for agencies like schools and 
hospitals and other organizations, has to be expended. We have 
to give them their money. And so therefore we have this 
process of interim supply. And as I say, I think the key thing is 
that we ensure that these people do get their money on time. 
 
These other questions are questions that I think are more 
appropriately discussed in estimates. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry that I have to 
remind Madam Minister, but her colleague, her Associate 
Minister of Finance, was very, very pointed on this topic. And 
I'll quote that minister, from May 10, 1991, that minister — and 
this was dealing, I believe, with the second interim supply Bill 
which was asking for two-twelfths: 
 
 It is the tradition, Mr. Chairman, that this House and all 

houses have grievance before supply. We're entitled to 
ask questions. It may be that the minister does not have 
the information with him, in which case he usually says 
so. But questions on government expenditures have 
traditionally been in order in this forum. 

 
So, Madam Minister, when the Premier of the province is going 
out making a significant off-budgetary announcement involving 
a number — and you're the one that said that — a number of 
departments and agencies who are going to have their budgets 
changed because the Premier is making the announcement, is it 
not in the interest of the forum that we're in, which is the 
House, discussing finance monies, that we not have grievance 
before supply? 
 
And I would think it would be maybe prudent for you to tell us 
more about that. I don't think that I should have to go and read 
it in the newspaper the next day simply to meet the Premier's 
timetable. I was sent here by my constituents to ask questions 
about the business of the province, and I'm asking them today 
on behalf of the constituents of Thunder Creek. And I want to 
understand what you're doing with the money and how you're 
moving it. And that's not unreasonable. And the member from 
Churchill Downs agrees with me. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The problem is the member will not  



April 26, 1995 

 
1787 

accept the answer. It's sort of like, I'm going to keep asking this 
question until I get the answer that I want, not the answer that's 
the truth. 
 
The answer that is the truth . . . and I would understand why the 
former premier is sitting there questioning this because it is 
about sound financial management and how you manage the 
province's finances in order to balance the books . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tax, tax, tax, tax, tax, tax, tax, tax, tax. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, yes. Not running 10 years of 
deficits. 
 
And the way you run the finances of the province so that you 
actually do balance the books is you ensure that if there are 
savings in an area, money that is not required or is not required 
to the same extent, they're directed to areas where there is 
expenses that you hadn't anticipated. 
 
And that is all that I can tell the member, and that is all that I 
will be able to tell the member after the announcement is made. 
That is what will occur. That is, the government is committed, 
as we find areas where, yes, that estimate of expenses was 
higher than was required, that this money will be redirected to 
an area where there was expenses required that we hadn't 
anticipated. 
 
So there is . . . we can go over this again and again, but after 
you see every particular detail about this announcement, that 
answer is going to be the same answer. And it's going to be the 
same answer because what's compelling about it is it's the truth. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you see, that's the 
problem; the minister doesn't want to impart the truth on us. 
We'd just like to know what the truth is. We'd like to know what 
he's doing and who is going to have to readjust their life. And 
Madam Minister doesn't want to tell us that. She says it's none 
of our business. We're only legislators. 
 
I don't know why we're even going through this process, Mr. 
Chairman. Madam Minister says, I should come in, I should get 
interim supply, and you people should just . . . There's a word 
I'd like to use but it's unparliamentary, Mr. Chairman, and I 
can't use it. But she'd like me to just off, you know? Just go 
away. Don't ask questions. Well that's not the way it works in 
here. 
 
And if Madam Minister's a little piqued because I have the 
affront to ask questions from my seat, I remind her that I have 
won three elections, and I have earned the right to have my seat, 
and I've had the right to ask the question. And maybe after 
you've won three elections, you'll also understand why we go 
through this process. 
 
I know lots of members here prior to 1991 understand. They 
used interim supply to its fullest extent, and they asked many 
questions for many days about many topics over and over and 
over again. 

Today, I have an announcement before me. You have come to 
the Assembly without your budget passed. You have asked for 
two more months. If you'd simply come for one month, it would 
have been a much simpler operation, Madam Minister. But you 
have asked for two more months. 
 
That places us way to the end of June. I suspect that places us 
even beyond the next election campaign. And to have the 
freedom to operate in the lead-up to that election, and during 
that election, is something that I suggest you probably want. 
 
And therefore we are going to ask you a lot of questions about 
how you are moving money around, because if we're having an 
election campaign, it is very important that we understand the 
parameters beforehand. Because, Madam Minister, I'm no 
longer the member from Thunder Creek. The day the Premier 
drops the writ, it's all over and done with. I'm no longer a 
member; nobody's a member. 
 
But you're still a cabinet minister. You still will sit in cabinet. 
You will still sign OCs (order in council). You will still spend 
money. And the rest of us are toast. Okay? And that's why we 
clearly have to understand. Now if you can stand up here today 
and tell us we're not going to have an election, then maybe that 
differs my views a little. And I don't have to ask so many 
questions because I'll know that we'll have ample opportunity in 
the future. 
 
But I don't think you're going to tell me that today. You're 
saying give me two-twelfths and get me through to the end of 
June. Well, Madam Minister, I need to understand how you're 
moving the money around. 
 
So once again, perhaps you could inform this Assembly and the 
members in it and the public, about how you're going to move 
the money around. Because you can't tell me you're not going to 
spend money in the next two months. You obviously went to 
cabinet and you said, I believe that there's enough savings 
occurring here. And maybe you picked on Agriculture, maybe 
you picked Executive Council. Goodness knows there's lots of 
folks floating around Executive Council, you could come up 
with a few hundred thousand dollars. I heard you hired my 
friend Rod Laporte from Moose Jaw the other day and gave him 
44 grand a year. 
 
I know the kind of savings, Madam Minister, that you were 
lecturing me about that could . . . and what was your statement? 
You said we manage every penny as carefully as we can. That 
was your statement to the House. Madam Minister, $44,000 
times a hundred is what? Your deputy minister of Finance has 
got a great mathematical head there. What's 44,000 times a 
hundred? That would give us how many pennies that you're 
managing in Rod Laporte's pocket. That's an interesting figure. 
 
And I'm sure, Madam Minister, when we get down to managing 
every penny for you here, that we'll find lots of pennies for you 
to help you . . . you know, the Premier could have loaded a boat 
load up with pennies and taken it up to Kamsack today and 
showed the folks up there how well you're managing. And you  



April 26, 1995 

 
1788 

could do away with people like Rod Laporte and I'm sure they'd 
have cheered him right down Main Street — right down Main 
Street. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the question is: where have you identified 
the savings in the item that you took to cabinet that gives you 
the assurance to tell the Premier to march off to Kamsack and 
make the announcement that he wouldn't make while the House 
was in session? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I will try to keep 
explaining this to the member opposite. And I really don't know 
what to say beyond what is going to occur; that is, we're at the 
beginning, close to the beginning, of the fiscal year. Because if 
you're going to budget well and meet your targets, you're 
cautious in your budgeting. 
 
That is, you do put in your budget — if you compare it to a 
household — a certain allowance for car repairs, because it is 
possible that your car is going to break down. And you do put 
into your budget a certain allowance for some unexpected other 
family costs. But just as in your family budget, not all of those 
things occur. Your car doesn't break down, or if it does break 
down the cost is not as great as anticipated. 
 
And so what I'm saying to the member opposite is, because we 
believe that the budget that we have laid before the people of 
the province is a prudent budget which is cautious, that has put 
in place provisions that will allow us in some areas to not have 
the breakdown in our car or else not to have the cost of the 
breakdown as great, that money will be redirected. And that is 
what will occur. And that's what will occur over the course of a 
year. That's what will occur. 
 
So we can go through this again and again, but that is the 
simple truth of what will occur. And waiting till the Premier 
makes an announcement is not going to change this. 
 
Now with respect to the twelfths, what we're asking for this 
time is two-twelfths, and this is standard practice. When the 
members opposite were in government, we went through 
one-twelfth in the first interim supply and then two-twelfths in 
the second. 
 
So what we're doing here is nothing out of the ordinary, and it's 
a process that is in place to ensure that people who depend on 
the government for their money actually get their money when 
they need it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm going to switch 
gears here a little bit, because there was something came up the 
other day that I found very interesting and your minister, your 
associate minister, had no answers. 
 
Now you've just given us — and Madam Minister obviously 
was a lecturer at some point in her previous career . . . about 
how we manage our budgets and how we count our pennies. So 
I asked the minister there the other day about the casino that's 
downtown and what's going on and was any of this money in  

interim supply going in to that casino. Because obviously 
there's a lot of money being expended. 
 
I even took the opportunity to drive down there to take a look 
and make sure that I wasn't imagining something or somebody 
was telling me fabrications. So I went down and I looked. And 
sure enough, there's a guy down there and he's digging piles in 
the ground. And they had a picture on TV last night of all the 
toilets being ordered that were all lined up down there to be 
installed. So we know there's a bunch of money. 
 
So I said to the minister, I said, how come you don't have 
anything in here. Before, when the government wanted to go 
buy a bunch of gambling machines, you came to the Assembly. 
It was Finance had to buy the stuff, okay. You had to give . . . 
you've got to go out and get the money. And he says, oh no, no, 
not any more. The minister can go inside the Crown corporation 
now and he can finance all of this stuff on his own. He doesn't 
have to come back to Finance at all. 
 
And I thought, wow, things have really changed here because I 
heard you definitively say that you do the borrowing for the 
Crowns. That when the Crowns need money for capital 
expenditures or the Crowns need money for various things, it is 
up to the Department of Finance and the officials to go out and 
negotiate and set the bond rates and have the right mix of short, 
medium, and long, and all that. And you handle that. Well your 
associate minister tells me that's not the truth any more. 
 
The minister there from Elphinstone is off on his own little kick 
and he simply goes and he spends out of the cash flow of the 
Gaming Corporation to do whatever he darn well feels like. 
And I found that rather strange, Madam Minister. 
 
Could you tell me about why this Crown is different than other 
Crowns which have to come to you and you borrow for them 
rather than them being out on their own doing whatever they 
want, operating and building out of cash flow? Because that's 
not the way it's done, Madam Minister. So I need you to explain 
that to me and see how this works. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would say to the 
member opposite, first of all, this is different than a lot of other 
operations of the government in that it is an operation that can 
be self-financing, that it is something that is going to be 
profitable. So what will happen is that the private sector will 
finance the operations, understanding of course that the 
government will be in a position to lease the facilities from the 
private sector. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
that one took a long stretch. You drew the string way back. I 
mean to say that any of the Crowns aren't self-financing is 
bizarre. They're commercial Crowns. They're monopolies. 
Whatever rate they set, I got to pay, and they take it. Most of 
them are showing massive profits over a long period of time. I 
mean you've got it stockpiled up in there, Madam Minister. 
What a bizarre statement to say to this Assembly and to the 
people out there. I mean we're not stupid, please. 



April 26, 1995 

 
1789 

Now you as the Finance minister go out and borrow the money 
for the Crowns. The Crowns have to come through CIC with 
capital budgets which they present and say I got to go build a 
power plant. I got to plough in some telephone line. I got to 
build some natural gas pipeline. I've got to build an irrigation 
project on Lake Diefenbaker. And they come, and they say I 
need X amount of dollars. 
 
Now your minister over here, your campaign manager, seems to 
have his own little personal fiefdom to play in. Okay. Now this 
Crown is different, Madam Minister tells me, and the money 
inside it can be played with without touching the Department of 
Finance. I wonder how that sits with your officials, Madam 
Minister? Do they find . . . is that acceptable? Because that's not 
the way the Finance officials that I knew liked to operate. They 
wanted to have their thumb on the pulse. Is it proper that this 
minister can do this without your Finance officials being 
involved in whatever he's doing over there? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, I think it's 
important to clarify two different things: that is, the casino 
itself, which is being built and developed by a private 
developer, and the Gaming Corporation, which will lease, from 
the developer, the facility. So in that sense, it's quite different 
than any other Crown. 
 
I would point out there's no budgetary expenses here for other 
Crowns either because of the fact they are self-financing. What 
I said is different than many aspects of government operations, 
different than a line department. 
 
But I think it's important to keep that distinction, that the private 
developer will be responsible for developing the casino. The 
Gaming Corporation, as part of its expenses in running, the 
Gaming Corporation will lease the facility. The cost for leasing 
the facility will be offset by the revenue. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad you retracted 
yourself and said that it isn't different than any other Crown. 
You quickly made the determination that yes, between line 
departments and Crowns, there is a difference. I understand the 
difference, Madam Minister. 
 
And naturally the developer will build into the lease enough 
money to get back whatever . . . You think some developer is 
going to build you a building in downtown Regina and not get 
enough money back out of it to pay for the cost of developing 
it? No. He's going to build it into the lease fee. And the 
province of Saskatchewan is going to run the building — right? 
 
The minister, the other day, says, well we don't expect it to 
maybe make any profit for at least four years. So that tells me, 
Madam Minister, if it's in the red, this careful penny 
management stuff that you were lecturing us about a little while 
ago, means that you'll have to draw income from the liquor and 
gaming commission, which in turn pays dividends to the 
taxpayer, to the Consolidated Fund. And the associate minister  

says it's probably not going to make a profit for four years. 
 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he said it, Madam 
Minister; read the Hansard. Read Hansard. 
 
So now we've got the Gaming minister here, or the guy that 
runs the buildings anyway and cuts the deals and works with the 
developers, and he's got his own little operation down there 
where he's obviously going to finance this thing out of cash 
flow of the liquor and gaming commission from the machines 
that the taxpayer paid for. And you came to this House and you 
wanted 20 million one time or 25 million once, and another 20 
million, and you bought all the machines. And that money that's 
being generated, he's got over there to play with. 
 
And the Minister of Finance and the people there, they don't do 
the borrowing for that. He just plays with that and he does 
whatever he wants with it. That's what you're telling me when 
you know full well that Crown corporations should go through 
the Minister of Finance for every thin dime or the pennies that 
you talk about. 
 
You explain to me why that minister should be able to go over 
there and do that and lease that building and do those things, 
and it might not make a profit for years and years and years, but 
that's okay. I don't understand how that works, Madam 
Minister. And there's people all over this city are asking that 
question. 
 
Why in the world can this take place this way and nobody else 
in Crown land does that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Let me go through with the member 
opposite one basic fact. What the associate Finance minister 
said, which is absolutely accurate, is that in our four-year 
budgeting we have not put in place any revenue from casinos. 
And we did it for a very simple reason. Because if you are 
going to manage the province's finances in a sound way, you 
only put in your budget money that you know potentially is 
going to be there. And at the time when we put together this 
budget, it wasn't clear that this casino project was even going to 
be up and running. The final decisions had not been made. 
 
So it would not be prudent to put in your budget money coming 
from documents, flowing from documents that had not been 
properly signed. Because what would happen if in fact the 
documents were not duly signed and the casino corporation did 
not proceed, you would be doing what occurred in the 1980s. 
You would be spending money you didn't have. 
 
Now what I really want to emphasize here  because you're not 
portraying accurately what the associate Finance minister said, 
because he was dead right  he said that we haven't budgeted 
for the money. He did in no way say that we do not expect there 
to be revenue. We do expect there to be revenue. All of the 
studies that we did showed that a casino built in the city of 
Regina will be profitable. When that occurs, that money will 
flow back into the treasury of Saskatchewan through the regular 
channel of a dividend, the same as it does for other  



April 26, 1995 

 
1790 

gaming profits. 
 
So I really want to emphasize that he said we didn't budget for 
the money because we weren't certain that the agreement was 
going to be proceeded with because it hadn't been signed. But 
we do anticipate that there will be profits and we do anticipate 
that those profits will come to the General Revenue Fund 
through the channels approved by the auditor and everybody 
else involved in overseeing the way that the government 
accounts for its money. And I can assure the member opposite 
that that will occur. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, you raised so many 
questions I don't know where to lead off and where to end. I 
mean you just laid out a ton of them here. 
 
You're saying that that minister, the NDP campaign manager, 
can go and join up with a developer in downtown Regina and 
he can pay for the lease and the operation of and the decorating 
of and the . . . the whole shebang out of the cash flow, out of 
the cash flow of the Gaming Corporation . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes you did. You said he's going to operate out 
of cash flow. The associate minister said he's going to operate 
out of cash flow. Okay? And he can do that over the next four 
years because you haven't projected any profit; you expect it to 
be profitable but you haven't projected any. So you can operate 
this nice little enterprise there in downtown Regina out of the 
cash flow of the liquor and gaming corporation ad infinitum — 
ad infinitum — and get away with it, because he doesn't have to 
go back through the regular channels. 
 
Madam Minister, why in the world would you build a casino in 
downtown Regina if it wasn't going to be profitable? Did you 
do it because you wanted to save a heritage building? Did you 
do it because your five or six previous Gaming ministers were 
all so stubborn about it that they were backed into a corner? Or 
what? I mean, Madam Minister, why did you build a casino 
then if you didn't think it was going to be profitable? 
 
Tell us that story then, why we're going through this exercise if 
it isn't to be profitable. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I really have to say 
to the member opposite again, you're twisting what I'm saying. 
What I'm saying is . . . I'll try to be as clear as possible. 
Obviously we expected the casino corporation to be profitable. 
Studies were done that said a casino built in the city of Regina 
will be profitable. That's one of the reasons why other partners 
are involved and interested in the project, and why the business 
community in the city is enthusiastic about the project. This is 
going to be a profitable venture. 
 
But what I have to say to the member is, when the budget was 
being prepared — and we're putting in the budget all the money 
that we expect to come in in the course of this year — the 
documents to set up this corporation had not been signed. That 
is, it was not clear that this agreement was going to go forward. 
So it's not responsible to put in our budget money that maybe, if 
the deal did go through, would be there, but if for some reason  

or other the documents were not signed, the deal didn't go 
through, the money wouldn't be there. That's how you get into 
trouble; you start spending money you don't have. 
 
So it was a very simple matter of the timing of the transaction 
and the timing of the budget. That there is simply nobody on 
this side of the House that has ever said that we do not expect 
the casino to be profitable. Every piece of evidence and every 
word uttered in this legislature from this side of the House has 
said quite the contrary — it will be profitable. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, I can't help what your 
member said in discussion. But he said in fact, and I believe it 
was this way: it's set up so it doesn't have to make a profit for 
the next four years  so to that effect  I mean that's what he 
told the Assembly. 
 
But you still haven't answered, Madam Minister, my other 
question: how is it, how is it in this particular entity that the 
minister in control can go out and get a hold of the cash flow of 
the corporation to do his little project down there and not have 
it come through Finance and report to this Assembly? 
 
Now your associate minister gave me some weak-kneed excuse 
about Crown Corporations Committee. Well, Madam Minister, 
Crown Corporations, right now, Committee, is at '93-94 — 
'93-94. That's already two years behind. Before we ever get 
down to the minister's own private little play-pen down here on 
Saskatchewan Drive, those things are going to be old, old, old 
news. 
 
And I don't think it's appropriate, Madam Minister, that you can 
have that minister building this thing out of cash flow and 
operating it out of cash flow when the other Crowns don't 
operate that way. And I'd like you to explain to me why that 
minister should be allowed to do that. Why in the world can the 
Gaming . . . or the casino corporation be different that 
everybody else? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I'd like to clarify with the 
member opposite is that the minister responsible for the 
Gaming Corporation is being given no special latitude at all. 
This is a Treasury Board Crown. Its spending, its activities, will 
be scrutinized by the Treasury Board in the same way that other 
Treasury Board agencies are scrutinized. So it will be very 
carefully scrutinized. 
 
What surprises me a little bit about the member's line of 
questioning is, I would have thought with his free enterprise 
bias he would have liked the idea of a private developer actually 
doing the building of the casino and being responsible for all of 
that, and the government being in the situation of being the 
lessee. Surely he's not saying to me that he wishes that we 
would go out and establish a Crown corporation which would 
do everything, including the building of the casino. I would 
have thought that the involvement of the private sector was 
something that he would welcome. 
 
But that aside, what really needs to be emphasized is it's a  



April 26, 1995 

 
1791 

Treasury Board Crown that will be scrutinized by the Treasury 
Board. Its expenditures will be scrutinized very carefully. So 
there will be no latitude here that you're talking about. It will be 
treated exactly the same as other agencies. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister brought it 
up so I expect I can give my views on how the thing should be 
run because she said she expected me to do it one way. And I 
tell her no, categorically the opposite. Madam Minister, I have 
believed from the very beginning that this is wrong. 
 
And yes, I believe in free enterprise. And I believe that it should 
be run by free enterprise with the government as the regulator. 
And the government can tax it and the government can set the 
fees and the government can determine the labour conditions or 
the employees working in it, and the government can do all 
sorts of things. 
 
But, Madam Minister, I do not believe the government should 
be building a casino in downtown Regina, nor do I believe that 
I as a taxpayer should have to dig into hip national to pay for all 
of the one-armed bandits that you're going to put in it, nor 
should I pay for the extravagances of the minister responsible. 
 
No, I don't believe in that, Madam Minister. I wish the 
government were the regulator, the policeman, the guy that 
protected the interests of everyone, instead of being the guy that 
now encourages the poor in our community to go gamble away 
their welfare cheque. 
 
I wish the government weren't doing that. I wish the 
government weren't the person that was promoting gambling 
because the government needed money to balance their budget, 
so they would take it out of the pockets and on the backs of 
poor people. I wish the government weren't doing that. 
 
(1530) 
 
It would be much easier, Madam Minister, if the government 
taxed somebody else and taxed them prohibitively if they were 
abusing society. Yes, that would make sense to me — that the 
government was the impartial one, the government was the 
person that could take an objective view instead of the 
government being the one that's so deep in the muck that they 
have no objectivity left. They have no objectivity left and they 
simply want to rush pell-mell into the building of a casino so 
Madam Minister can make her budget numbers balance out at 
the end of the day. 
 
Yes, Madam Minister, I wish it were different. I wish it were 
different. And I think your experience after a few years of this, 
after you have contributed directly to poor people losing their 
welfare cheques and people becoming addicted to your 
one-armed bandits, that you will wish you had done something 
otherwise too. 
 
But the simple fact is what we're discussing here is the fact that 
this minister and this Crown will be using those proceeds of 
poor people out of cash flow to manage and pay for the  

downtown casino rather than going through the Department of 
Finance. And I don't understand that. I do not understand why 
there are not borrowings which are tracked and followed and 
that Crown and that member and that minister subjected to the 
same rules as other Crowns. And I've been led to believe that 
it's different. And you haven't done anything to say otherwise. 
 
And that reason, Madam Minister, I believe that it should be 
brought to heel and governed like everyone else. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well what I can say to the member 
opposite is to go through the structure again. 
 
Say the casino itself is going to built by a private developer. We 
will then have the relationship of being a lessee. The affairs of 
the Gaming Corporation are the affairs that are scrutinized by 
the Treasury Board. So that particular corporation — the lease it 
pays, the lease costs it pays — all their aspects of its operations, 
will be scrutinized because it is a Treasury Board Crown, and it 
will be carefully scrutinized. So there is no particular latitude 
being allowed here. 
 
What is different or unusual is the fact that it is a private 
developer actually building the facility and us leasing it. But I 
think the member opposite doesn't have a problem with that 
concept. 
 
The one that he does seem to have a problem with, I can't do 
more except continue to assure him. As a Treasury Board 
Crown . . . a Treasury Board Crown is scrutinized by the 
Treasury Board and very carefully scrutinized. And that will 
occur. And if there is a problem, the Treasury Board will pick it 
up and that the revenue flow will go through the channels 
outlined by our accounting practices and approved by the 
auditor. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, is the minister responsible 
for the Gaming Corporation on the Treasury Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No. To the member opposite, no, 
and I'm not sure that I understand why that matters. But no, he 
is not a Treasury Board minister. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, Treasury Board isn't 
some mythical entity out there. Treasury Board's made up of 
cabinet ministers who have Finance and other bureaucrats come 
to talk to them at Treasury Board, and they go over the various 
departments and agencies and line departments. And they 
review the budgets and their spending. That's what it is. It's 
cabinet ministers like you, New Democrats like you — okay? 
— politicians like you, people with a vested political interest in 
their own hides, especially in the spring of 1995. 
 
I mean is Madam Minister going to stand up here and tell us 
that she doesn't want to be re-elected, that she isn't the best 
thing that ever happened to the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan? Of course not. Madam Minister is a politician. 
She's the current Finance minister. The Treasury Board is made 
up of other politicians like her. 



April 26, 1995 

 
1792 

Now, Madam Minister, it is unusual to say the least. I mean if 
this were the case, Madam Minister, then you would just let our 
friend Jack Messer over at SaskPower who's got a 
self-financing Crown go off and do his own borrowing to build 
a power plant, wouldn't you? But no, you don't do that. You say 
to Jack Messer, you got to come through Finance. You can't go 
borrow money in New York or Toronto or London or Zürich or 
Tokyo and go do what you want to do because we don't do it 
that way. Right? 
 
But now the NDP campaign manager, the member from 
Elphinstone, he can run off and spend out of cash flow on a 
capital project. I don't understand why he is different. I don't 
know why this casino in downtown Regina is different. 
 
Madam Minister, it is a profit-making capital expenditure of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the same as a power plant is, as 
a gas line is, as all sorts of things are. Why is it different? It is a 
capital expenditure by a Crown Corporation. Why is this one so 
different? 
 
Or are you simply going to turn the whole herd loose and let 
them do what they want — you, the Finance minister, that 
manages the pennies. That's what you told this House and the 
people. You're the one that watches the pennies. Well I want to 
know who's watching the minister responsible for building the 
casino besides a bunch of NDP politicians. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that is a reasonably 
cynical view of Treasury Board because the Treasury Board 
ministers make decisions, but they don't just sit there, and say, 
well I wonder what we should do. They get information and 
analysis in written form from people like the deputy minister of 
Finance, Bill Jones, who has been in this government since the 
'70s and is a career civil servant and who gives us independent, 
sound financial advice. 
 
So what I'm saying is that there is no special treatment being 
accorded the Gaming Corporation because they will be forced 
to come before the Treasury Board, say here's where we're 
spending our money, and this is the rationale behind it. Civil 
servants like Bill Jones and people in the Department of 
Finance will analyse this in a totally professional way and say, 
these look like legitimate expenses or — for whatever reason — 
these don't. And that will form the basis of the Treasury Board 
ministers’ decisions. And it's a very important check in the 
process, and this particular Crown has been treated just like 
other Treasury Board agencies and will be subject to that very 
significant and serious process. 
 
I think one step you're missing when you talk about the six 
Treasury Board ministers is you're forgetting about the 
professional civil service we have and about how they put on 
paper their advice, and then we have to, on paper, respond that 
we, yes, are following their professional advice for these 
reasons, or we're not. And I can tell you that this government 
believes in a professional civil service, and almost all of the 
time, if the advice is as sound as it has been to date, they follow 
the professional advice. 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, there was certainly 
no affront to the people in the Department of Finance. I know 
many of your officials. They're fine people. They do an 
admirable job. They're probably some of the best money 
managers that this country has to offer. I mean they faced 
incredibly difficult times in the 1980s when we were in the 
middle of droughts and other things and they had to come up 
with cash, and they had to do it in a hurry. And they had to 
balance it out with the needs of a lot of things. They're excellent 
people, okay. 
 
But, Madam Minister, you and I are both politicians — both 
politicians — and you're in an election year. And I've been 
under that pressure three times, three times — once in cabinet. I 
mean, Madam Minister, you've got people working for you in 
the bureaucracy now that at one time were political hacks. 
They've made the transition. That's fair. I don't question that, 
but don't, don't lecture me. And you have wont to do that. Don't 
lecture me, Madam Minister. I spent my time in the classroom 
and I don't need to spend it here with you. We're having a 
political discussion about political issues, and I understand that. 
 
The associate minister, on April 24, talked about . . . and he got 
right down to . . . I was going to give you the page number here 
about . . . he was talking about the fixtures, Madam Minister. I 
mean he was right down to the tables and the light fixtures and 
the whole bit. I think it's on page 1735, Mr. Chairman, on April 
24, '95. And he talked about the things that the minister 
responsible was going to be buying out of cash flow, okay? 
 
Now I'm wondering, can you in all honesty tell me that that 
kind of stuff has come before your Treasury Board. Have you 
discussed the kind of things that the minister was talking about 
there? I mean he wasn't quite down to the toilet seat, but he was 
close. Can you tell me if that's gone through Treasury Board 
yet? Would that proposal and your Finance officials have put 
the old check mark on it? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I can't find what the member 
opposite is talking about in terms of the transcript. But what I 
would go back to is that we will not be responsible for building 
the facility. What we will be responsible for is leasing the 
facility. And so that of course will be an expense of the 
corporation which will be reviewed by the Treasury Board 
process, the same as other government expenses of other 
Treasury Board agencies are reviewed. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Are you telling me, Madam Minister, that 
that facility will not be paid for? I mean you've hooked up with 
a developer to build it, but I mean he's going to want to get 
paid, right? Are you not paying for the facility, or is the 
developer in on the cash flow too? Can you tell me who's 
paying for it, Madam Minister? The building isn't going to 
appear out of thin air. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would say to the member opposite, 
what we're talking about here is a standard practice; that is, the 
developer builds and develops the building but does so on the 
understanding that we will lease the building from the  



April 26, 1995 

 
1793 

developer. And that's how the developer will repay the cost of 
building the building. And it's not unusual, it's not as if this is 
an unusual practice; this is a standard practice. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — No, I understand the practice, Madam 
Minister. You condemned it roundly while in opposition. 
There's a couple of buildings in downtown Regina which you 
thought were just horrific because the private sector had built 
them and then they'd leased part of it to government. I 
understand, Madam Minister. 
 
And the correct page number, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, it is 
1737 on April 24, 1995, where the associate minister talks 
about the outlay of tax dollars, the tables and equipment, the 
furniture, the fixtures, the building, all of that being purchased 
through the Gaming Corporation and the cash flow of the 
Gaming Corporation, okay — so that we clearly understand 
what the minister said. 
 
And I find that difficult, Madam Minister, and you haven't 
answered my question. I'm saying, did all of that stuff come 
through Treasury Board and did your Treasury Board officials 
put the . . . did they review that stuff, to allow that minister to 
do that through the cash flow of the liquor and gaming 
commission? 
 
Because it's important, Madam Minister. You have projected 
income coming back into the Consolidated Fund from the 
liquor and gaming commission, and I didn't see anything with 
an asterisk beside it saying, subject to the expenditures of the 
minister responsible for the downtown casino and whether he 
wants silver bathroom fixtures or gold bathroom fixtures. There 
was no asterisk there, Madam Minister, that said that the 
minister responsible is putting in the fixtures and the furniture 
and everything else out of the cash flow of the Gaming 
Corporation. Now did your Treasury Board people tell you that 
it's done and it's okay? I don't understand that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, you're right. Because initially 
you said 1735. Okay, that's good. You corrected it — 1737. 
He's answering there two different questions. Because you're 
talking about . . . in your question to him you make reference to 
the purchase of VLTs, right? So he's saying the VLTs were 
bought at an earlier time; they were purchased at an earlier 
period in a different fashion. They were bought by the 
government and owned by the government, that's true. That's 
past. That's history. 
 
What he's saying, though, is that under this agreement, or this 
relationship, the casino, the whole casino and everything in it, 
will be put in place by the developer and then we will pay a 
lease fee to the developer. 
 
So this is why, in the second part of his answer he's able to say 
all of those things will occur without any cost to the 
government, because it's true they will occur without any cost to 
the government. Because unlike in the past, the government is 
not involved in purchasing these things. That was the past. 
 

Under this agreement, the developer will do all of those 
purchases. So therefore there's no budgetary items here; there's 
no expenses. The relationship will be one of lease. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay. What was wrong, Madam Minister, 
previously when you bought gaming machines and you came in 
this Assembly and we clearly understood that you were 
spending 40 million bucks plus on VLTs and slot machines. 
 
And now you're telling me that that's past, that that isn't going 
to work any more. You don't want to come to the Assembly and 
spend that kind of money on gambling any more; that it's 
problematic for you to come to the Assembly and ask for that 
kind of money. 
 
Madam Minister, what is wrong with the Department of 
Finance tracking the expenditures vis-a-vis gaming like we've 
had in the past? I don't find it repulsive at all. Because I was 
able to watch what you were doing. What you're saying now is 
we're going to cover it all off with the lease. Madam Minister, 
do the people in Finance go in and see what the developer is 
doing vis-a-vis whether he's got brand A or brand B or quality 
A or quality B? I suggest not. You know what? That minister 
and whoever he's working with are going to determine that. 
 
And if you're telling me that that's all coming to Treasury 
Board, I'd love to hear it. I would love to hear you tell me, 
Madam Minister, and then maybe you could table with us some 
of that information. That would be a really interesting process. 
 
So is that what you're telling me? You don't like coming to the 
Assembly any more to buy stuff involved with gaming because 
it raises the public's ire; therefore you've shifted it over to this 
Gaming Corporation and to this casino corporation and they've 
taken all of that stuff to Treasury Board. Is that what you're 
trying to tell us? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I would say to the member 
opposite is again we're getting some way from interim supply. 
Interim supply, we're asking for money for the next two months. 
I can assure the member that there's no money going to the 
Gaming Corporation from this interim supply. 
 
I can also assure the member opposite that whence this money 
is in the system and being expended, you will have an 
opportunity to review it when . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, what the deputy minister tells me is when we come in 
here with our revenue estimates we will have to . . . 
 
Once we are aware . . . you know, from this year on we will 
know the Gaming Corporation is going to have a casino, that 
those agreements have been signed, they are in place, and by 
next year there definitely will be revenue. So you will have the 
opportunity to go through that in this legislature. And we will 
do that in the Treasury Board. So you will have the opportunity 
to go through this information. 
 



April 26, 1995 

 
1794 

Plus, I should point out, there will be a report, an annual report 
provided by the Gaming Corporation which again, they will 
give to you and to the other people in the province of 
Saskatchewan the information. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, you have already told us, 
your Associate Minister of Finance has told us you haven't built 
any revenue into this thing for up to four years. And then you 
gave us all sorts of excuses. But you've said it; you said it 
publicly  there may not be any revenue for four years. We 
didn't put any expectation on it. 
 
Madam Minister, by the time you see a revenue statement, all of 
that that takes place down there is going to be done. You're 
saying the thing is going to be up and running and way down 
the road till it hits a positive revenue stream before you're going 
to ask . . . you can ask me all the questions you want about my 
revenue. 
 
Do you know how far away that is? The issue before the folks 
today and what's going on is why this minister can do these 
things different than any other Crown and he can spend that 
kind of money. Because, you say, well it's different; he's hooked 
up with a private developer. Therefore you shouldn't ask those 
questions; we'll simply pay the lease. 
 
Nonsense. The lease and all of the stuff that goes along with it, 
right down to the bathroom fixtures, Madam Minister, are going 
to have to be paid out of the cash flow of the liquor and gaming 
corporation. They will be. So that cash flow and its ability to 
create a dividend or its ability to finance the machines or 
finance lots of things is determined on how these expenditures 
go. 
 
You tell me that it's going before Treasury Board. You yet have 
answered me of whether that process has taken place or not. 
Have these plans and all the things that the Associate Minister 
of Finance outlined the other day, have they gone before 
Treasury Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — With respect to what has gone 
through Treasury Board, is approval to lease the building. Now 
as you can imagine, there aren't other details because the 
building isn't even built yet. 
 
But I want to really emphasize and go back and clarify what the 
situation is with respect to revenue because what the member 
said was not an accurate reflection of what I said. 
 
What I said about revenue is this. When we put together the 
budget for 1995-96, it was not at that time clear that this 
agreement was necessarily going to proceed. So therefore we 
didn't put it in our four-year plan, because we wouldn't put it in 
our four-year plan until we know that the agreement is going to 
proceed and we're going to have the money. 
 
Each and every year, including the budget for 1996-97, when 
the budget comes in, the four-year plan is revised as 
circumstances change. And they always will. Every year  

something is going to have changed. Beginning in '96-97, we 
will revise the four-year plan and put in that plan now the 
anticipated revenue from the casino. 
 
So you will have an opportunity; you will have a revenue 
estimate which you can ask questions about. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, the way I understand 
it, because they can finance this stuff all internally, they don't 
have to go to your officials like every other Crown does for 
capital stuff, that they can fool around internally in there, how 
are you ever going to really determine what the revenue stream 
is? 
 
And I knew I wasn't hearing things, Madam Minister, and I'll 
refer you to page 1738. This is what the member from Regina 
Churchill Downs said: 
 
 There are no revenue . . . no revenue is . . . no revenue 

from casinos has been assumed as part of this budget or 
as part of the next cycle — the next four years. There is 
no revenue assumed to be obtained from casinos; it's not 
part of this budget. 

 
Okay? So we're off building a casino. And your colleague says 
there is no revenue, but that the minister is going to finance the 
project from internal revenue. Okay? The minister says no 
revenue, but he's financing from internal revenue. That means 
that the revenue has to come from some place else, Madam 
Minister. These aren't my words, these are the minister's words. 
 
So the revenue has to come from somewhere else in the liquor 
and gaming corporation to finance the no-revenue scenario 
outlined by your colleague. And as yet you have not told me if 
those expenditures have gone through Treasury Board yet — 
the expenditures that the minister talked about that were right 
down to the fixtures. 
 
You haven't told me that yet. So I think you should tell the 
taxpayers of this province if that has taken place, and you 
should explain why that member, a long-serving member, the 
Associate Minister of Finance, holder of many portfolios, says: 
 
 There are no revenue . . . no revenue is . . . no revenue 

from casinos has been assumed as part of this budget or 
as part of the next cycle — (for) the next four years. 
There is no revenue assumed to be obtained from 
casinos. 

 
Period. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know how 
many times I have to go over this. What the Associate Minister 
of Finance said is absolutely right. When the budget was being 
put together, we put in the budget a four-year cycle, budget 
numbers for four years out. When that budget was being 
prepared, the final documents for the casino had not been 
signed and it wasn't clear that the casino would proceed. So 
therefore, when this budget was being prepared, the minister  



April 26, 1995 

 
1795 

. . . what he says is absolutely right. There was no revenue 
estimates for the casino put into this budget and this budget 
covers a four-year period. 
 
What it does mean is that next year, when the next budget 
comes out and we revise our four-year plan, the casino 
agreement is in place, it is proceeding, the revenue will be there 
and the revenue will be put in the budget. 
 
But what you're saying, you're taking what the associate 
minister said and twisting it. He said, because of the logistical 
issue of timing — that is, the documents weren't signed, the 
legal entity of the casino did not exist when this budget was 
prepared — we didn't put the estimates in. But they will be in 
there next year. 
 
The casino will have revenue; it will make money. We know 
that. And they're separate issues. And I don't know how many 
times I have to go over the fact that it's just a matter of timing. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, I guess we'll have to leave 
it up to the public watching today to see who's twisting what. 
But I've got a casino going up in downtown Regina; I went 
down and I looked. The piles are being dug. The expectation is 
it'll be done for Grey Cup. And the revenue to do all of that has 
got to come from somewhere, okay. 
 
The minister said clearly it's financed out of cash flow. Cash 
flow of what? Cash flow of the casino? Cash flow of the VLTs? 
Cash flow of the Liquor Board? Cash flow of what is he 
financing this thing out of? Cash flow of what? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I'm saying to the member 
opposite is that once we . . . the developer is building the casino 
so you see all of this activity occurring. This is being financed 
by the developer; the developer is doing this because he knows 
that the minute it is up and running, he will have us paying him 
a lease payment. Then we will have the expense of paying the 
lease, but as soon as we have the expense of paying the lease, 
we'll have a cash flow. That is, we'll be getting money from the 
casino. So that's what he means when he talks about cash flow. 
But our expenses will begin when the casino is up and running. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, then tell us what the revenue 
projection is for the casino. You've made some assumptions 
already. You've said, based on X, there will be a revenue flow 
that you can internally cash flow the operations and the ongoing 
capital expenditures of the casino from X. Tell us what that is, 
Madam Minister, and maybe we can have an enlightened 
discussion here. What is the revenue stream that you predict for 
this particular entity so that we understand which revenue, 
which cash flow, the minister is spending? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well what I say to the member 
opposite is that when the casino is up and running, we will 
certainly provide that information. What the cash flow is going 
to be this year depends on when the casino is completed. And 
what I can say to the member opposite is if you go through the 
timing — you mentioned Grey Cup — we have a mid-year  

financial statement in early November. I'm sure all of the 
information will be readily available then. 
 
But to know what the cash flow is going to be this year depends 
on factors such as when it is up and running. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, you've got it all figured out 
already. You wouldn't have signed the agreement, you wouldn't 
have gone with a developer, you wouldn't have got down to the 
fixtures, as the minister says, unless you had some idea of what 
your revenue stream is. Either that or you're saying it doesn't 
matter what the revenue stream is; I'll just pluck money out of 
the liquor and gaming commission to prop the darn thing up 
because it could be a dog. 
 
Give me a break. You've made some predictions about your 
revenue stream. Either that or you're subsidizing it from some 
place else. It won't work any other way. You got a lease 
payment to pay. You got the ongoing upkeep of the capital plan, 
and you're expecting certain things. What is that revenue 
stream? And then maybe we can have an intelligent discussion 
about what's going on here. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I would say to the member 
opposite is, when the casino is up and running, when we have 
the revenue coming in, you will get all of the information. And 
you don't have to wait for a new budget because we have one of 
the reforms that we put in place in this government, is a 
mid-year financial statement, so that halfway through the year 
you can go through these sorts of issues. 
 
But I would bring us back to the fact that this is interim supply 
requesting two-twelfths of the budget, and none of this is going 
to the casino corporation or to the Gaming Corporation. So that 
this is not really a pertinent issue to be discussing at this time. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, just to follow up 
with the minister and follow with my colleague's questions 
from Thunder Creek. To summarize, Madam Minister, are you 
saying that in interim supply you are unable or will not tell the 
people of Saskatchewan where you're going to be getting your 
money for the announcement on flood protection and 
rehabilitation and/or the development of casinos? 
 
You're essentially saying, and I believe that this is accurate, that 
you'll find it some place from some departments or from 
gambling or from Liquor Board or from various departments, 
but you're not quite sure where. And you can't really tell the 
public any more than that. That if you . . . the announcement 
today is $10 million or $20 million or $30 million or more, trust 
you. That this money will come from various departments. You 
won't tell us which ones. 
 
And similarly with respect to gambling and the development of 
casinos, you financed the VLTs and you financed the 
equipment and they're on their own. And you won't necessarily 
tell us how much and you won't tell us what the cash flow is  



April 26, 1995 

 
1796 

and you won't give us financial projections. Is that an accurate 
statement? 
 
You just can't tell us any of that but you want us to give you the 
go-ahead in interim supply, with two significant economic and 
political projects under way — one to be announced today, one 
under way — and you can't tell us anything about where the 
money's going to come from other than, well it'll come from 
departments. Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — With respect to the Gaming 
Corporation, what I have said to the legislature is I have said I 
have talked about the structure whereby the casino will be built, 
what the relationship will be with the Gaming Corporation. I 
have told the members opposite that it will be scrutinized by the 
Treasury Board. The legislature will have an opportunity to 
look at the revenue and look at the expenses associated with it, 
and that we will in the mid-year financial statement, assuming 
the casino is up and running by that time, be giving an interim 
report to the people of Saskatchewan. So all of the 
accountability will be in place. 
 
With respect to the money that the Premier will be announcing 
today, what I have said is that the government's departments 
manage within their budgets, and that they will continue to do 
that. And that because there is an unexpected situation which 
has occurred, there will be money directed toward that, but that 
the money will come from anticipated expenses throughout the 
year that do not occur. 
 
And as I would say to the member opposite, what you have to 
look at is the scale of the budget. When you've got a budget of 
over $4 billion, the capacity to have in there things, estimates, 
that are not required, monies that you thought, well we have to 
spend, which you don't have to spend, occur. And so we have 
every confidence that the departments will be able to live up to 
their mandates, and they have every confidence that that will 
occur as well. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, that's part of 
the problem. We know, and those of us that have been 
experienced on the treasury benches and in cabinet positions 
know, that you have the capacity to transfer money from 
department to department and from Crowns to department. 
What we're trying to get at is which department you're going to 
transfer from and to whom, as you're putting together your 
interim supply. 
 
Madam Minister, what you have just said is the reason that the 
auditor is concerned with the way that you're operating. He says 
about 40 per cent of the budget of the province of 
Saskatchewan is unaccounted for in your financial statements. 
The summary statements do it, but, he says, watch the transfers. 
 
What we're asking for is the kind of information the auditor has 
pointed out to the general public that we should ask questions 
about  the transfers between Crown corporations and 
departments, general revenue between departments. And we've 
been asking for over an hour and a half what kind of transfers  

would you expect. Not, oh well, there'll be some surpluses some 
place and there'll be some deficits in others and we'll work it all 
out. We know that. 
 
That's what's frightening and that's what bothers the auditor. He 
says there are some very large transfers; watch the transfers. 
And up to 40 per cent of your budget is unaccounted for. That's 
what he says. And if he's saying that, then grievance before 
supply says, Madam Finance Minister, is your government 
hiding something? I think that's the headlines that we saw in the 
paper as a result of the auditor's statement. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has been lobbying the government to 
use summary financial statements, which provide a complete 
picture of government operations, including Crown 
corporations, as a basis for budget making. And the headline is: 
Is the government hiding something? 
 
The public wants to know and MLAs, duly elected by the 
people, want to know: where are you getting the money, at this 
time of interim supply, for your flood assistance — department 
by department? 
 
And you say, well there'll be some surprises here; there'll be 
some surpluses here and we'll . . . We want to know, where do 
you plan to get the surpluses? Out of the Agriculture budget? 
Out of the Liquor Board? Where do you see the excesses? Out 
of Crop Insurance? 
 
See, we've watched you do this too many times, Madam 
Minister, not to know that there is a great deal of capacity — 
discretionary capacity — in the departments. And particularly 
as my colleague here, the member from Thunder Creek, points 
out, the NDP campaign manager has even more discretion 
because he doesn't have to report back until about half a year 
from now. 
 
So in the event that the NDP campaign manager has at his 
discretion several millions of dollars which he can spend . . . 
You funded the gaming, you funded the VLTs, you funded the 
casinos and he doesn't have to come in with a budget. You've 
forecasted financing — it's supposed to pay for itself out of 
cash flow. He'll have access to that cash flow in the next few 
weeks, in the next few months, and you won't tell us about it. 
You won't give us financial projections on what he's going to 
do, and you won't give us the departments where you believe 
there will be enough money to pay for the flood program. 
 
And the auditor comes back and says, the kind of information 
we've been receiving in the province of Saskatchewan, which 
has the largest group of Crown corporations, and your officials 
know that, the largest group that are self-financing . . . and as 
the auditor's financial statements, summary statements, point 
out, I think it's fair to say, $600 million net profit to the 
province of Saskatchewan in 1994 — this is the report of the 
Provincial Auditor — $600 million. 
 
And the auditor points out and he says well, that isn't even part 
of your budget. And watch the transfers. Madam Minister, if the  



April 26, 1995 

 
1797 

auditor says watch the transfers, and the general public are 
saying, and agree with the auditor, that they're concerned about 
transfers, whether it's between Crown corporations or 
departments, don't you think that you sound a little bit weak 
when you say, I can't tell you where we're going to fund a flood 
program? 
 
We're just going to find the money, we're going to collect it in 
various departments. It'll be transferred from A to B to C to D. 
And you can't tell us, you can't tell the public, even the 
departments that you're going to select from. Is it Agriculture? 
Can you tell us that? Is it Highways? Is it Rural Development? 
Is it health care? Is it Social Services? Or is it the Liquor 
Board? Can't the minister tell the public which departments she 
thinks will have capacity to fund these two programs? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I'm sure people 
reading this or watching it on television or in the galleries 
would be some amused to have the former premier of this 
province giving this government financial advice. The premier 
that took this province through the worst period in its history, a 
self-inflicted wound, added a billion dollars a year, on average, 
to the debt of this province, and left my children and your 
children and our grandchildren saddled forever with his legacy. 
For him to be up here giving us financial advice is incredible. 
 
Now to get down to some of the facts. He still doesn't 
understand finances because he has quite misunderstood what 
the auditor has said. What the auditor has said about the way we 
account for our money is this: he has said that we went in this 
province from having the weakest and least useful financial 
statements — this was when the members opposite were in 
government — the weakest and least useful financial statements 
to right now where we have among the very best financial 
statements in the country. So what the auditor is saying is that 
he would like to see us budgeting on a different basis even 
though we budget the same way as the vast majority of 
provinces do. 
 
But in terms of our accountability to the public, our putting 
before the public the complete finances of the province, how 
we spend our money, where we get it from, we have gone from 
the weakest financial statements, when the member opposite 
was the premier, to amongst the very finest. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Chairman, we adopted Blakeney's 
financial records and reporting mechanism, and it's the auditor, 
Madam Minister, it's the auditor that says 40 per cent of your 
budget is unaccounted for — 40 per cent of your budget. And 
that's what the public is concerned about, and the public 
believes the auditor. 
 
Madam Minister, if in fact the Crown corporations . . . from the 
auditor . . . the financial statements of the Crown corporations 
say that all of those Crowns and those projects that you're 
concerned about, something like $6 billion worth of 
investments that you called debt, returns $600 million in 1994  

net to your financial statements. And you stand there and 
criticize me for asking questions, grievance before supply, 
when you come for interim supply. 
 
You've raised taxes. You've raised utilities. You broke every 
promise that you made in 1991 that you would never raise 
taxes. But you did. And as a result of the utilities and the 
projects that we put together, you now have $600 million net 
coming to your pockets that the auditor wants you to describe 
and be careful with, because he says 40 per cent of the financial 
picture is not put forward by you in front of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And you're quick to criticize that side of the ledger, the Crown 
corporations and the projects, those that are privatized, those 
utilities that you've cranked up the rates. You won't 
acknowledge that they're making $600 million net, according to 
the financial statements, the summary financial statements, 
which is a fairly big help, which pays for the debt, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Those investments in power projects and water projects, 
economic development projects, and those very same projects 
that you talk about when you go to New York. How's the paper 
mill doing, Madam Minister? How's Wascana Energy doing? 
How is the fertilizer plant doing, Madam Minister? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not all that well. 
 
Mr. Devine: — The member from Swift Current says, not that 
well. Record profits for the fertilizer plant — record profits. 
And the Madam Minister says, oh well, it wasn't a terrible 
legacy that we invest in fertilizer in a province like 
Saskatchewan that's got surplus of natural gas. We have 43 per 
cent of all the farm land in Canada, and NDP government never 
did have the capacity to help build a fertilizer plant or indeed a 
paper mill or upgraders, or invite the Japanese here, or many 
others. 
 
And now they're contributing in the neighbourhood of $600 
million net to the province of Saskatchewan. And the minister 
stands on her feet and she says, but I shouldn't talk about that. 
 
Well this is interim supply, and I'm asking questions. Where do 
you think you're going to get the money? Are you going to raise 
taxes? Are you taking it from departments? Are you going to 
take it from the Crowns? Are you taking it from gambling? My 
colleague here from Thunder Creek, he asked question after 
question, and you just wouldn't respond. You said, well we'll 
just get a little bit here and a little bit there. What kind of an 
answer is that? 
 
Can't you give the public the departments that the money is 
going to come from? If it's going to come from Crown 
corporations, tell us. If it's going to come from Agriculture or 
Highways, tell us. Can't you give the financial projections for 
the casinos? Tell us. You must have projections. Where are we 
getting the money to deal with interim supply that you're asking 
for? It's only a fair question. My colleague here has asked them  



April 26, 1995 

 
1798 

nicely, politely, which departments you're getting for, how are 
you going to finance the casinos, and how are you going to 
finance this flood protection program? And you're saying well, 
it's just kind of out of the . . . magic. We have — what did you 
say? — 4 or $5 billion budget, and there'll be enough there to 
kind of do it. 
 
Well the auditor said that isn't enough. The public . . . Do you 
think that's all interim supply is? You just come here and say, 
well it'll be there, thank you very much; you can all take your 
seats. I don't know of any legislatures that operate like that. 
 
Where do you think you can get off not answering questions? 
Why bother having interim supply, Mr. Chairman, if you can't 
have grievance before supply? Where are you getting the 
money? And you say it'll come from departments. Which 
departments? It's only fair we ask you which departments.  
 
You took from Crop Insurance when you said you never would. 
You campaigned as if you would just protect the farmer; for 
Heaven's sakes, you've gutted the program. People don't trust 
you out there as a result of what you did: taking money from 
farmers, taking money from pensioners, taking money from 
single parents, taking money from seniors. You taxed and took 
and taxed and took, and you said, oh, it'll be okay; interim 
supply is no big deal. I won't tell you where I'm going to get the 
money. You took from your utilities. You took from their 
farms. You took from their hospitals. You took and took and 
took and took, and you sit there and brag about the fact that you 
broke all these promises and say look, I have enough money 
now to balance the budget and look at how good the people 
were. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, there's balanced budgets on either side 
of you, in Manitoba and Alberta, with Conservatives, and they 
did it by cutting taxes and cutting spending. You taxed like 
nobody . . . we haven't seen anybody tax like this in Canada, 
unless it's the NDP in Ontario. And Bob Rae's running a poor 
third. 
 
Madam Minister, if you've taxed like you have with a record of 
taxing . . . And you've raised utility rates, and you've cut 
pension plans, and you've cut agriculture plans, and you've 
taken the GRIP program, and you have hurt individuals, low 
income people. You've got record folks on welfare. Where are 
you getting the money on this interim supply Bill that you have 
before us? Where are you going to get the money, from which 
department? 
 
You've got to be able to tell us  department by department or 
some idea of your projections  in which department it's going 
to come from, or else there's no point for interim supply. What 
do we do here? Just say, well it will come from $5 billion fuzzy 
somewhere? That's not good enough, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I have answered 
those questions and the record will reflect my answers. 
 
I would make one final appeal to the member opposite. This is  

about interim supply. I'm quite prepared to address the issues 
associated with the interim supply. However if the member 
opposite prefers to do as he has done and wander into other 
areas, I welcome that opportunity as well. 
 
And don't you ever ask why we hurt the people of 
Saskatchewan. You hurt the people of Saskatchewan when you 
added a billion dollars  each and every year  to this 
province's debt. Somebody had to pay the bills some day, and 
they're paying the bills that you racked up, and you should be 
ashamed of yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I have some tolerance for the other 
members of the Tory caucus because, considering the way the 
books of the province were kept in the 1980s, it's quite feasible 
that many of those people sincerely did not understand the 
magnitude of the problem. I believe that. But the person who 
was the premier of the province of Saskatchewan, in a decade in 
which each and every year he spent money wildly that he knew 
he didn't have, must bear the ultimate responsibility for what 
happened in this province. And you do. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, it's shameful. It's 
shameful the way you won't answer questions after you've taxed 
the living daylights out of Saskatchewan people. You promised 
you wouldn't raise taxes. You said enough was enough. Madam 
Minister, you told the people falsehoods when you said we 
won't raise taxes. 
 
Let me just go through the tax increases and why we're worried 
in interim supply where you're going to get your money. Just 
look at this: SaskPower, February 5, 1992 — you raised the 
rates 4 per cent. December 29, 1992 — same year — you raised 
it 4.9 per cent. March 30, 1994 — you raised it 3.8 per cent . . . 
and over a hundred million dollars in monopoly profits in 
SaskPower to help pay for your programs. 
 
And this one is even worse, Mr. Chairman. February 20, 1992 
the NDP raised the rates for energy — that is natural gas — 4 
per cent. On December 29, 1992 they raised it another 2 per 
cent. December 21, 1993, you raised it 9.5 per cent. And 
February 8, 1995 — this last February — you raised it another 
6.5 per cent. That's 20 per cent increases in natural gas rates, 
Madam Minister, and utilities and an other $100 million in 
profits. 
 
SaskTel, March 1, 1992 — the increase in rates was 3 to 5 per 
cent. Some service and rental rates up 60 per cent. July 5, 1993 
— line rental went up 15 per cent. SaskTel unlisted numbers' 
rates up 33 per cent in July '93. And on January 1, 1994, 
operator-handled calls increased by 33 per cent — another $100 
million in profits in Crown corporations. And SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) went up 10 per cent, 
4.75 per cent. And in '93 registration fees went up another 7.6 
per cent. Madam Minister, you promised not to raise taxes, and 
you've raised taxes and you raised . . . 
 



April 26, 1995 

 
1799 

An Hon. Member: — Those aren't taxes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — The member from Swift Current hollers from 
his seat and says, those aren't taxes. No, these are monopolies, 
and you have no choice. If you don't pay your power bill, they 
cut you off. That's why the NDP always like monopolies. That's 
why they were against the privatization of these utilities and 
Crown corporations because you have the people, the poorest 
poor . . . the poorest poor pay high power rates. And you got 
them because they have no place to go except to move to 
Alberta. That's the lowest kind of taxation . . . is take a public 
utility, a natural monopoly, and squeeze the people, squeeze 
them and squeeze them and squeeze them. 
 
Only an NDPer will do it. We've seen other Crown corporations 
and other governments across Canada, and they'll put it out to 
the people. They'll offer shares. Even the Wheat Pool has 
figured it out. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool said, let's let the 
people participate. But not the NDP, not the NDP. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now you're really stretching it. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I'm not stretching it. Those monopoly rates are 
a fact of life. And the NDP like to hang on to monopolies, and 
the NDP don't like it when they're called taxes. Utility rates on 
monopolies are taxes; make no mistake about it. If you raise the 
rates on SaskPower, that's taxes. When you raise the rates on 
SaskTel . . . what are you going to do? Pull your telephone out? 
That's taxes. 
 
Madam Minister, you promised you wouldn't tax the people. 
And people are worried about the fact that in the last four years 
you have raised utility rates over and over again. You have 
raised income tax, the sales tax. 
 
You have raised fees and hikes of every description. You've 
taken the prescription drug program, and you've gutted it — 
which is a tax. You've developed a two-tiered system for health. 
If you've got money, you go to the United States or Alberta. If 
you don't have any money, you stay in Saskatchewan, and you 
wait, and you wait, and you wait. And you finally just pay. So, 
Madam Minister, if you want to get into talking about your 
record and treating the people of Saskatchewan, you just got in 
on taxes. 
 
And I can say, Madam Minister, if you would've promised 
during your campaigns before and said, look it, here are all the 
tax increases we're going to impose on you to balance the 
budget . . . because the people passed a plebiscite to have 
balanced budget legislation, and you still don't have the courage 
to pass it. Here you are, weeks before an election, and you 
haven't passed it. Because you know why? Because we initiated 
it . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, come on. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Exactly. The members say, oh, come on. We 
initiated it and it passed; 80 per cent of the public passed that . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . Listen to them holler, eh? Listen to  

them cackle. Mr. Chairman, isn't it interesting? You can tell 
when you get the NDP's attention because when you hit 
something that's right on the button, they start to squeal and 
holler and giggle. 
 
Well you didn't have the courage to pass balanced budget 
legislation when the people voted for it overwhelmingly. Like, 
80 per cent of the population voted for balanced budget 
legislation, but you wouldn't pass it. 
 
You raised taxes over and over and over and over again, and the 
public knows that that isn't what you promised. So rural people, 
senior citizens, those that pay utilities, those that had their 
pensions taken away, those that lost their drug program, those 
that believe that the NDP would actually cut taxes and look 
after them — whether they're in rural or they're in low income 
— found out the truth, Madam Minister. You just got in by 
taxing, taxing, taxing, taxing. And that's why in interim supply 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . tax, tax, tax, right. That's why in 
interim supply they want to know where are you going to get 
your money. Are you going to raise utility rates? Are you going 
to raise taxes? Are you going to take from departments? 
 
So, Madam Minister, if you don't want to tell us, if you're not 
going to raise taxes, at least you could tell us, department by 
department, where you're going to get the money. Well, Madam 
Minister, we can't just let you say that interim supply is just 
standing in the legislature and saying, oh well, it'll come from 
some place. We'll ask the minister one more time. We'll keep 
asking the minister, can you tell us which departments you're 
going to get the money for, or are you going to raise taxes, or 
are you going to get the money from Crown corporations? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I've already told the 
member opposite what the answer is to that question. 
 
I have to . . . to be quite honest, what I'm concerned about here 
is, in a sense, the dignity of this legislature. We have a process 
in place whereby we come in and we discuss the budget. We 
discuss interim supply, and we discuss estimates. What the 
member opposite has turned this legislature into is a rant. And 
what concerns me is there are people out there watching this on 
television or reading it in Hansard or in this room who would 
like to see the business of the government done here, instead of 
a rant about the 1991 election and this and this and this. 
 
I have answered your question. I have answered it at least three 
times. And so the answer is on the record. But you know, the 
member opposite really leaves us no choice but to respond. As 
my colleague here said, the most taxing thing has been to listen 
to the member opposite go on. But he has raised the issue of 
taxes. And if he wants to get into history, I love it, used to teach 
it. 
 
And I will remind him of the history of taxation in his own 
particular regime, regime that was elected in 1982 on a promise 
of cutting taxes — cutting taxes. And they did initially cut the  



April 26, 1995 

 
1800 

gas tax, adding $600 million to the deficit and being forced to 
raise the gas tax again. But they weren't finished raising taxes. 
They also managed to put two points on the sales tax, raise the 
sales tax from five to seven. They managed to introduce into 
this province the flat tax. And by the time they were finished, 
they were taxing kids' clothes, books, and all services. I think 
the idea that a deficit was a deferred tax was something they 
should have taken to heart. 
 
So if you want to talk about taxes, I'll be quite willing to stand 
here and talk about taxes because at least when we brought in 
tax increases, we had a goal in mind: to balance the books of 
the province. What is absolutely astonishing about the former 
premier's record, all he managed to do was increase taxes and 
still have deficits, a billion dollars a year in deficits, and huge 
tax increases at the same time. 
 
Now what mystifies me is why the Tory caucus would like to 
stand here and debate financial management with us. This is a 
part of the history we're quite willing to set aside. You've got a 
new leader. You're trying to rebuild. Great, wonderful. But 
please, sir, of all the members opposite, the one that we're not 
prepared to have stand up in this legislature and give us lectures 
about financial management is the former premier because he 
will go down in the history of this province as the worst 
financial manager this province has seen. 
 
And he can stand here and he can re-fight the '91 election again 
and again and again, and I'll tell you, the bottom line won't 
change. He lost that election, and if there was ever an election 
that was deserved to be lost, it was the 1991 election. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, you see your attitude is 
similar to the attitude of the Blakeney administration in '82, late 
'70s and the early '80s. It was the arrogance of raising taxes, 
hurting the poor by raising utility rates, hurting rural people, not 
coming to their defence when there was interest rates of 20 per 
cent. And you know what? The Blakeney administration said — 
just like you — we have balanced budgets. That's what it said. 
 
And you know what happened, Madam Minister? The public 
defeated the NDP. The public kicked all of you out of office but 
eight, including the member from Riversdale and most of you 
here, most of your ridings. And you know what, Madam 
Minister? You had a so-called balanced budget at that time. But 
it was your arrogance and your taxation and your selfishness 
and your attitude that you present today that caused your 
downfall. And that's what's causing it in Ontario. That's what 
caused it in Manitoba and in British Columbia. It was that 
arrogant attitude of that you know best. We don't have to tell 
you any answers. We don't have to explain it. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the NDP lost miserably in 1982, so we 
can recall that. Let's relive 13 years ago today — today. The 
NDP lost every seat but eight. And here we are on the 
anniversary of the 1982 election, April 26, the NDP lost 
miserably, and do you know what? They said they had a 
balanced budget. They had high taxation, and they had high  

monopoly profits, and they were nationalizing Crown 
corporations, and they had land bank — and they lost. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Chairman? They lost again in '86 
because they wouldn't stick up for farmers. They wouldn't stick 
up for farmers. They still hadn't learned the lesson. And do you 
know what happened finally by 1991? Do you know what they 
said? We'll cut taxes. They promised to cut taxes to get elected. 
 
Mr. Chairman, isn't it interesting that the member from Moose 
Jaw doesn't like to recall all of the history, not just '91 but '86 
and '82 and before that and before that. The NDP record is 
pretty spotty when you look at the 1980s and the 1990s. The 
only way that you've been able to come close to financing the 
things that you want to do is to tax and tax and tax. That's my 
only point. 
 
And, Madam Minister, if you won't tell us where you're going 
to get the money, if you won't tell my colleague from Thunder 
Creek where you're going to get the money, from which 
departments, we assume you're going to continue to tax. 
 
If the Premier today announced a $10 million project or a 40 or 
a 50 or $60 million project, where is he going to get the money? 
 
You have a record of taxing people too much. That's why you 
lost in '82. That's why you lost in '86. That's why people are 
upset with the NDP across Canada today . . . is because of taxes 
and taxes and taxes. 
 
And it's not fair. You have very high pensions for yourselves — 
very high pensions for yourself, and yet you take away the 
pensions of senior women. You have very high pensions for 
yourself, and then you take away the farm crop insurance 
program. You close 50-some hospitals, yet you keep the 
pensions for yourself. Is that fair? It's unfair. 
 
So, Madam Minister, we're just asking you, which departments 
are you getting the money for to fund something . . . like it's 
going to be announced today, 30 or 40 or 10 or 15 or $20 
million . . . not just a general answer, but specifically which 
departments do you expect to get the money? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I will try one more 
time to give the member opposite his answer; otherwise we can 
continue the debate on financial management and history 
because, I think, that's a debate. Fine with me; I don't 
understand why the Tory Party of Saskatchewan would want to 
get into a debate right now on financial management, but if we 
want to do that, that's fine. 
 
What I said to the members opposite was this. I said, first of all, 
let's wait for the announcement to see the dollars involved. I 
said, secondly, that we would be asking the departments 
themselves to manage the extra expenditure, that we would go 
first of all to the two departments involved — Municipal 
Government, Highways — and that beyond that we will ask 
other departments to redirect savings that they have from 
expenditures that were not anticipated. 



April 26, 1995 

 
1801 

Now I will see where we head here, and it's really the member's 
choice. If he would like to add some dignity back into this 
process and talk about the affairs of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and where we're heading, I would be most 
pleased to answer any reasonable questions. 
 
If we're into a history lesson and a discussion about financial 
management, I of course will participate in that as well. But I 
really do prefer to try to preserve some dignity in this institution 
and to try to conduct the business of the institution in a 
reasonable and civilized way. I would like to try that. I don't 
know if the members opposite are up to that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well you know, Mr. Chairman, it's really sad. 
I step out of the Assembly for a few minutes, and Madam 
Minister's back in her lecture seat at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), and she's busy admonishing us for all our past 
sins. 
 
And you know it's unbelievable. She starts using the word 
arrogance and that talking-down little tone that she loves to use 
in this Assembly about what Tories should and should not talk 
about. 
 
Well I'll tell you what, Mr. Chairman. For an hour and a half I 
asked Madam Minister about something that is very, very 
topical, you know. And all she did was dive and dance and not 
give us one answer at all. I asked, simply give us the projected 
revenue stream on your downtown casino. And you know what 
she says? Ask me that question about a year and a half to two 
years from now when I might have a revenue stream. 
 
Now talk about . . . and she used the A-word, Mr. Chairman, 
the arrogance. This is the Finance minister who comes before 
this Assembly with an interim supply Bill for two-twelfths. 
 
Madam Minister, answer this question. If this Assembly doesn't 
rise before your Premier calls an election, does that mean that 
this is the funds that will carry this province past, because your 
budget won't be passed? Maybe you'd like to start real simple 
and then maybe we can get back. Is that what would be the 
case? If this budget of yours is not passed, is this the money that 
would take this province through the election? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the 
member opposite that I try not to engage in personal remarks 
with the one exception of the Premier who has a record — a 
record, a record. And we're talking about his record as the 
Premier of the province. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite is, of course I don't 
know when there's going to be an election in this province. 
What's happening here is no different than what happens every 
year in this legislature. The government comes forward and 
asks for one-twelfth and then asks for two-twelfths. 
 
It's especially troubling to me this year though, because the 
members opposite do seem to be dragging down this process in 
this House. I was talking to business groups today and I was  

pointing out, you know, we brought our budget in February 16 
with the hope that this Assembly can operate in an effective 
way — and if you want extra hours, by the way, fine with us; 
we'll sit here as long as you want, 3 o'clock tonight — so that 
they would be able to pass the budget in a timely way. So that 
by March 31, the year end, the budget would be passed and 
would be in place and people could get their money through the 
regular channels. 
 
And we did everything we could to ensure that this budget 
would be passed in a timely way. We brought out the first 
budget in Canada — early  so that you'd have lots of time to 
talk about it and lots of time to pass it. 
 
So if we're here for interim supply, it's not because we haven't 
done everything that we can to try to get this budget through. 
We have worked very hard to get this budget through on a 
timely basis. 
 
What we're asking for is something absolutely standard. 
Because the members opposite have not seen fit to debate and 
pass the budget, we're asking for interim supply. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, there's no limitation on this 
process in here, there never has been. Members are paid for 70 
days, per diems. That's the only limitation I've ever seen that 
seems to spur on anything around here. 
 
I've worked in this Assembly through at least two or three 
sessions prior to you ever being elected, where I didn't get any 
per diems. They were long sessions; they went 114 days. And 
you know why they went that long? Because New Democrats 
wanted to ask lots of questions. 
 
Now isn't that strange, Mr. Chairman. When Tories want to ask 
questions about what the government's doing, Madam Minister 
says it's a bad thing, we shouldn't stay here, we're getting in her 
road. But if New Democrats want to stay in here past the 70 
days and ask all kinds of questions, it's quite legitimate. That is 
a really strange process, Madam Minister. I don't really 
understand that, why it's good for New Democrats to ask lots of 
questions and not good for anybody else. 
 
It really is strange . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the 
member from Rosemont standing up for 10 hours on end, 
reading out of some book that nobody ever heard of. That was a 
real productive use of the Assembly. 
 
Madam Minister, I'll give you another piece of information. We 
have brought an unprecedented number of Bills before this 
Assembly, one of which is balanced budget legislation — 
something I would have thought you would have taken a great 
deal of interest in. You're the Finance minister. There's a Bill 
before the House. 
 
Under the rules — that you control, by the way — that Bill can 
only be debated on Tuesdays. And the natural progression 
would be, if you people had any honesty about this, is that on 
Tuesdays we would debate private members' Bills. And we  



April 26, 1995 

 
1802 

would debate that balanced budget legislation. And Madam 
Minister would get all kinds of opportunity to tell us why that 
particular piece of legislation is no good, or she could amend it, 
or she could bring in her own which she promised. 
 
But do we sit Tuesday night on private members’ day so that we 
can debate the Bills of the House? No. You know why we don't 
sit Tuesday night and debate the Bills of the House? Because 
they're Tory Bills. That's the problem, isn't it, Madam Minister? 
It's got nothing to do whether they're good Bills or bad Bills or 
Bills that need amendments. The reason the House doesn't sit 
and work is because they're Tory Bills. They're private 
members' Bills. They're brought to this House because our 
constituents tell us to bring legislation forward. Don't just stand 
here and criticize. Bring positive legislation forward to the 
House and debate it. But you know why we don't work, Madam 
Minister? Because your House Leader, the campaign manager, 
doesn't want us to work because you'd have to talk about Tory 
Bills. 
 
(1645) 
 
So then you stand in here, and you lecture us because we 
haven't worked hard enough, that we're not willing to sit in the 
legislature, that we're messing up your timetable. It's balderdash 
— absolute balderdash, Madam Minister, nothing else. 
 
And if you would like to adjourn because you don't like this 
process and go on to that balanced budget Bill, I'd be more than 
happy — more than happy. Why don't we debate balanced 
budget legislation if you're not happy with interim supply? 
 
You have not answered one question. You will not tell this 
Assembly what the Premier is spending up in Kamsack today or 
where he's getting the money from. You won't tell us about the 
revenue stream from the casino downtown that the minister is 
spending from internal funds on. You don't want to talk about 
taxation and how this money is going to be raised. You keep 
telling us it's none of our business, that this House should 
simply shut down so that you can get on with whatever your 
political agenda dictates. That isn't good enough. 
 
Now I asked you a simple question. All I require is a simple 
answer. If the Premier calls an election — say about May 12 — 
does it mean that this interim supply Bill carries us through to 
the end of June? Simple, nothing hypothetical. That's the 
question. Any time in that time period, is this what carries the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the Bill carries us 
through to the end of June. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Why didn't you 
just say it  the answer  before? All the sidestepping. 
 
Now legitimately, if this could be the finances of the province 
through an election period, the questions I've asked you about 
the casino corporation and the way that it will spend that money 
and the revenue streams that will support it and why your  

Finance officials treat it differently than other Crown 
corporations, are all valid questions. 
 
You tell me there is a revenue stream otherwise you wouldn't 
have built the casino. You expect profits. You've based those 
profits and the legitimacy of the casino on certain figures. 
 
All I'm asking you — and I will take it at your word that it is 
only an estimate, that it is not hard and fast . . . you base the 
rental, the construction costs, the leasing costs, the furnishings, 
and the staffing of that facility based on a revenue stream. And 
it will be funded internally from the liquor and gaming 
commission. 
 
What is the revenue projection, the revenue stream, that you 
will internally finance from to build that facility which is under 
construction in downtown Regina today? Was it taken before 
Treasury Board? 
 
I want to clearly understand what you have based the 
projections on when the associate minister said that you have 
not, and he repeated it over and over again . . . necessarily have 
a positive revenue stream from the casino itself. You obviously 
disagree with that. What is that positive revenue stream that you 
project in order to meet your lease payments and all of the 
construction costs and everything else? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well what I would say to the 
member opposite, Mr. Chairman, is that . . . repeat what I said 
before in the sense that, as the revenue becomes available, we 
will report it to the legislature. 
 
What the member opposite would find if he looked back at the 
studies that were done on casinos, that there are projections in 
there in the neighbourhood of $10 million-plus for revenue. So 
that when you start a project like a casino, you assume that it is 
going to make money, and the best place that I would direct him 
is to the various studies that exist. Beyond that, when the 
revenue starts to flow, we will be reporting it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, was that study that you just 
referred to in the House, was that done by the Department of 
Finance, who normally would review the spending plans of 
Crown corporations and the borrowing of Crown corporations? 
Was that done by them or was it done by some other entity? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It was a privately done study 
commissioned by the Gaming Commission and it was done by 
Candace Fox and she assessed the capacity of the province of 
Saskatchewan to manage casinos and she looked at the 
profitability of casinos. And if you looked at her estimates in 
there, she estimates that there is capacity for one significantly 
profitable casino in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that would be the most reliable place to look right now. 
Beyond that, when we have a revenue flow we will certainly 
report it to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, we don't have just  



April 26, 1995 

 
1803 

one any more; you've got lots of them. I mean you have another 
agreement which is on the go besides, which means that there 
will be whole lot of other people in the business. 
 
Madam Minister — and I'm intrigued by this — is it normal that 
an outside person like that would do the projections for the rest 
of your Crowns and their borrowings? Would that be a normal 
practice, that they would bring in an outsider for your Finance 
officials to base their opinions on when they go into the 
borrowing market in New York or London or Zürich or some 
place? Is that the process that you're using now for the 
borrowing of monies for capital expenditures? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
is not listening to what I'm saying. This is not . . . I said it's not 
commissioned by the Department of Finance. The purpose of 
the study was not to decide loan guarantees, loans, revenue. The 
purpose of the study was to look at the capacity of the province 
of Saskatchewan to handle casinos, and it was done by the 
Gaming Corporation. So it's separate. 
 
And it's very common for something like a gaming corporation, 
looking at building a casino, to hire somebody who's an expert 
in the area to look at the area and to assess how that particular 
issue is playing out in your province. Quite common. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Was that individual's report the basis of then 
Treasury Board's decision? And I'm presuming that Treasury 
Board reviewed the decision to go ahead with the process. You 
still haven't told me that Treasury Board has looked at and 
approved the leasing arrangements and the expenditures around 
it and what that particular facility will look like. Because you're 
asking  what?  a 20-plus million dollar capital construction 
project, the leasing fees to be handled by the casino corporation 
based on the studies of this woman who came in from the 
outside. 
 
Did that . . . did you use her as the vetting process through 
Treasury Board then to come up with the assumptions you've 
made vis-a-vis profitability and what the minister could spend 
on this casino? Because ultimately the government must have 
had some say on how elaborate or not elaborate the facility was 
going to be, you know. Was it going to have crystal chandeliers 
in it or was it going to have ordinary chandeliers? Was it going 
to have plush carpet in it or was it going to have standard carpet 
in it? I mean those decisions, which amount to millions of 
dollars in many cases, had to be vetted by somebody. 
 
Was her report the . . . is that what you took to Treasury Board 
to get the okay to sign the lease to have those things put into the 
casino? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's been fun. It's been grand but I 
move we rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


