






















































May 1, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 1, 1995 

 

 
1895 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The 
Teachers' Federation Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy 
Chairman. Madam Minister, before we recessed for supper, we 
were discussing Bill 52. Part of this Bill deals with sexual 
assaults and related charges and complaints against teachers; 
how will this now be handled under this particular piece of 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The legislation makes it absolutely 
clear that sexual misconduct or a sexual offence is a 
professional misconduct. So it allows us to clarify that issue 
with some precision. Even if a teacher is accused of sexual 
misconduct there still will be processes that one will go through 
in order to conclude a decision regarding the professional 
misconduct. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the 
changes, will a sexual misconduct charge or a conviction be 
dealt with in a similar manner to what the alcohol and drug 
abuse professional misconduct was dealt with previously. I 
know that one has been changed to a medical situation, but will 
the disciplinary board handle that in a similar manner? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This offence would be dealt with as 
any other professional misconduct offence. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, I believe the Bill deals 
with two years retroactively, if a charge was brought forward. 
This would give the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) 
the power to provide disciplinary actions against the teacher's 
certificate even if they were no longer serving as a teacher, if 
they had lost their job or resigned or whatever the case may be, 
in the province of Saskatchewan. The STF would have the 
power to discipline them by removing their certificate for any 
offence occurring within the last two-year period. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation can commence disciplinary action within a two-year 
period after a teacher ceases to be a teacher or a member of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What of a 
teacher who may have a charge or a complaint brought against 
them in another province who then comes to Saskatchewan 
with the desire to enter the teaching profession here? How are 
those events going to be dealt with? What if a teacher has a 
problem in Saskatchewan, leaves Saskatchewan to go to another 
jurisdiction with the desire to enter the teaching profession 
there? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If a teacher is coming from outside of 
Saskatchewan, and if that teacher does not hold a Saskatchewan 
teaching certificate, they are asked to sign a confidential 
disclosure form which asks a number of questions. As well, we 
would consult with the other jurisdiction, the jurisdiction that 
they were coming from, to determine whether or not there were 
any professional misconduct issues. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would 
part of the discussion with the other jurisdiction that they were 
coming from involve determination of a length of time that they 
may have been involved in that jurisdiction? What I'm thinking 
of is a person is in British Columbia, has a problem, moves to 
Alberta, teaches for a year, moves to Saskatchewan. Would you 
trace them back then to British Columbia or beyond, or would 
you limit yourself to the one provincial jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we would limit it to the last 
jurisdiction, obviously. But I think the other thing you need to 
know is that, because this is emerging as a major issue, 
provinces do talk to each other about misconduct issues, 
particularly if you know that someone is moving from one 
jurisdiction to another. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well what I can see happening, Madam 
Minister, is the person leaves British Columbia because they 
have a problem. It's been discussed with them. No charges are 
perhaps laid or perhaps charges are laid and a conviction 
results. They move to Alberta before the conviction takes place 
and get a teaching job. It's found out that there's a problem and 
so they resign and move on. So I think you need to, within the 
disclosure period which you've said is two years . . . that there 
needs to be some back-checking for the entire duration of those 
two years, as a minimum, to determine whether or not there are 
any problems. 
 
Another issue that could be a problem is to check to determine 
whether or not the individual has changed their name. Reading 
through the papers today, there is some discussion there about 
people who change their names and their criminal records do 
not necessarily follow them. And I'm not sure if the same 
situation would apply in the teaching profession that a name 
change . . . would a name change follow if an individual was to 
have a problem in one jurisdiction, change their name, and 
move to another? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We do ask them for a statement of their 
name and date of birth so we're aware of that. So we have 
provisions to deal with the issue you've just addressed in the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Would you also though be dealing with 
the problem of the movements within two years if they've 
moved to Alberta a year ago, moved here — would you go and 
do the two-year check rather than just simply the last 
jurisdiction if it's been shorter than the two-year period? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In terms of the two-year time frame  



May 1, 1995 

 
1896 

that you're talking about, the two-year time frame is for 
Saskatchewan teachers with Saskatchewan certificates. And if 
they cease being a member of the Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation and some professional misconduct information 
comes to the attention of the profession, then they have a 
two-year period to launch professional misconduct 
investigations and remove a teaching certificate if there's found 
to be a problem. 
 
In terms of your other issue of people coming from outside of 
Saskatchewan, one of the things that we do not do is we do not 
offer or issue a Saskatchewan teacher's certificate to a person 
unless they have a job in the province. And secondly, we do not 
give them a permanent teaching certificate. We only issue a 
provisional teaching certificate until that school division is 
prepared to recommend that they become a permanent . . . or 
they receive a permanent licence to practice in the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, it's a concern 
though across the province and indeed across Canada, of 
teachers who have had problems who move from jurisdiction to 
jurisdiction and how does the school board monitor that. I mean 
if the teacher is not prepared to disclose the entire truth on their 
application forms, I'm not sure that the school boards have a lot 
of access to . . . In the case of the example I used, British 
Columbia, they may indeed check with Alberta where the 
person was working before and not find a problem. So how do 
they go back beyond that is the problem, is how do the school 
boards check into it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all, if you had a teacher 
that had only taught a year in Alberta and had other teaching 
time in other provinces, you do check. As an employer you 
check. So you would know, based on their résumé, where they 
had practised, where they had taught. So I don't think that that is 
as much of an issue. 
 
What I can tell you is that we have a disclosure form that they 
have to sign and we have a statement of name and date of birth 
form that they have to sign in order to have a Saskatchewan 
teacher's certificate issued. And in order to have a 
Saskatchewan teacher's certificate issued, we have to have 
confirmation from the board that they're employed, with that 
they're prepared to recommend that this teacher be issued a 
Saskatchewan teaching certificate. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One other 
question on the Act. When it deals with the changing of some 
of the names and titles in it from The Teachers' Superannuation 
Act to The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 
Act, what impact is this having on the teachers' federation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There's no substantive change. The old 
Teachers' Superannuation Act was replaced with a new title, 
The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act. So 
there's no impact. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to 
thank the minister and her officials for coming in this evening 
and answering our questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would like to thank the officials for 
being here this evening and I would also like to thank the critic 
for thoughtful questions. 
 
(1915) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 

Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The 
Teachers' Federation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — The last time that this department estimates was 
before the committee was February 27, and so I will ask that the 
minister reintroduce her officials to the members of the  



May 1, 1995 

 
1897 

committee before we proceed. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairperson. To my right is Dan Perrins, deputy minister. 
Behind Mr. Perrins is Ken Horsman, assistant deputy minister. 
To Mr. Horsman's left is Mae Boa, executive director of finance 
and operations branch. To my left is Lily Stonehouse, assistant 
deputy minister. 
 
At the back, behind the rail, is Gerry Sing Chin, our manager of 
school grants; Irv Brunas, director of facilities planning; Paul 
Fudge, executive director of operations division of 
Saskatchewan Communications Network; John McLaughlin, 
executive director of the Teachers' Superannuation 
Commission; Brady Salloum, director of student financial 
assistance branch; and John Janzen, assistant director of student 
financial assistance branch. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, welcome again this evening and to your officials. I 
have a couple of questions that come in from the public that I 
would like to deal with first, Madam Minister. And the first one 
comes from Mary Jean . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Spell it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Maybe that's a good idea, I'll spell it: 
B-l-a-q-u-i-e-r-e, Blaquiere from Edam; and Mrs. Blaquiere is a 
licensed practical nurse and she'd like to know if the 
Department of Education requires all education professionals in 
schools to take CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) and first 
aid courses, and if not, why. She's concerned there may be an 
emergency at the school in her area and that the first responders 
may get there too late to provide assistance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that this is 
certainly not compulsory in the province of Saskatchewan, 
where people would have to take CPR, but I'm also advised by 
the officials that there are many people in school divisions that 
have that kind of training. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Chairman, a question 
leading from this, from the public. A number of teachers are 
now being requested and perhaps even required to provide 
medical assistance to students within the classroom, providing 
them with their medications or monitoring their conditions in 
the sense of asthmas, etc. What types of requirements are 
needed for the teachers to provide that assistance for the 
students? And what kinds of protections are provided to them 
by the department, or by the school boards, in cases where they 
are providing that assistance and something goes wrong, or 
because of classroom duties they are not there to provide, say, 
necessary medical prescription attention at the time that it's 
supposed to be administered? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that, first of all, in order for 
any school personnel to administer prescriptions or medications  

to students that they must first of all have . . . the school must 
first of all have the consent of the parents or the legal guardian. 
As well, anyone involved in the administration of medication or 
prescriptions has to have adequate training in order to do that. 
 
Finally I'd just like to say this. That because this has become a 
concern of teachers, and they certainly have raised it with me on 
at least two or three occasions when I've been visiting with 
teachers, the department is in the process of striking a 
committee to review school procedures in the province, 
particularly around the administration of medication. 
 
We have sent invitations to our educational partners to appoint 
someone to this committee and the committee will be looking at 
our present policy to see whether or not that policy requires 
some amendments. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It's not 
only a concern of teachers, because teachers could be held 
responsible, but it's also a concern of parents who may send a 
child to school with Aspirin or something along that line just 
for a toothache or a headache of the day. And what happens is 
that the teachers find out about it — through either the student 
mentions it or they see the tablets, whatever — and then the 
teachers will not allow the student to have those medications 
without a note from home. 
 
So it goes both ways. Parents are concerned that their children 
aren't being given the medication, not prescription medication 
but over-the-counter drugs that they may be in need of. So that's 
one concern. 
 
On the other side, they have a concern that their children 
receive their medications if they are needed, prescription drugs, 
at the proper times, which may mean every three or four hours 
or whatever the pharmacist and doctor have prescribed for 
them. 
 
And so there's a concern there that their students receive those 
at the appropriate time. The teachers need some protection that 
if they do indeed administer medications, that they're protected 
because obviously they're not trained as nurses, doctors, or 
pharmacologists; they're teachers. 
 
And so there needs to be some protections provided in the 
system for them if they are to administer those. When you're 
looking at circumstances, say, with allergic reactions to certain 
things, when the student needs to have their medicines in place 
for allergies — in particular bee stings or something like that — 
where they can sit on the shelf for a considerable period of time 
without being used, I think that's another area where teachers 
need to be protected if they're going to administer those. If the 
date that says it's run out is a month ago and the teacher allows 
the student to take these drugs or administers those drugs, what 
kind of responsibility is being placed on the teacher for 
allowing or for administering those drugs at that particular point 
in time? 
 
 I think it's a very serious question for everyone concerned —  



May 1, 1995 

 
1898 

the teachers, the school boards, and the students, and the 
parents, and there needs to be some discussion on that and some 
resolution, Madam Minister. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think that the member has raised a 
number of important issues and we certainly want to deal with 
the health and safety issues surrounding student population and 
it's our expectation that the committee that we've invited our 
educational partners to appoint people to will address many of 
the issues that the member refers to in his discussion. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — In this committee, Madam Minister, will 
you also be bringing in some medical professionals for 
consultations or at least as resource people to find . . . for them 
to give their professional opinions of lay people administering 
drugs to which they might not be totally familiar, in the case of 
these things. 
 
The parents of that student have sat down with the doctor and 
have gained some knowledge of what is involved, how you do 
it, when you do it, etc., how much of the drug is administered. 
But the teacher, unless they have taken a very special effort to 
go and learn about that particular drug . . . and in a small school 
such as I would have in my community, it's possible for the 
teacher perhaps to learn the frailties of all the students and the 
medical needs, but in a large school that you would have in a 
major city, it would be very difficult to gain that information, 
Madam Minister, on all the students that may require it. 
 
So will the medical profession be involved in this committee to 
provide some advice and some criteria, some protocols to 
follow, when teachers may be required to administer these types 
of drugs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all, I just want to reiterate 
that teachers aren't administering these drugs without parental 
and legal guardian permission. So they don't administer the 
drugs without the appropriate permission. That's part of our 
policy. 
 
The second thing is, I don't want to predetermine what the 
committee is going to decide, but I certainly will ensure that the 
issues that you've addressed, and I have some of my own, that 
those issues are dealt with by the committee so that we have a 
policy that people are comfortable with. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you Madam Minister. The idea of 
drugs being out of date is one of the recommendations that I 
would ask that you give your committee. Because I think it puts 
some onus on those that are in possession of those drugs, which 
would be the school at that particular time, to ensure that they 
are current. 
 
If the parents want to take them home and use them, I guess 
that's their responsibility. But I would hate the idea that 
somebody came back onto the schools and the school boards 
and the teachers because of an out-of-date drug. 

Madam Minister, another case from the public that I would like 
to deal with, and you may be familiar with this, is the Tokarzs’ 
situation down at Weyburn. I'm sure you've probably heard 
about it anyways, where the family has moved out of Weyburn 
to the rural areas, would like their child, Gillian, to remain in 
the Weyburn School Division or in the Weyburn school, but 
they live just outside the Weyburn School Division. I believe in 
fact that their homestead, their acreage, is a little jog in the 
boundary that takes them out into the rural division. 
 
Madam Minister, what is happening in that particular case and 
what can be done to provide some assistance? Because what's 
happening is the school bus for the Weyburn school goes past 
their door, but their daughter is not allowed or has not been 
allowed to ride that bus to school and the Tokarzs have to find 
some other means to get their daughter to the school in 
Weyburn. 
 
I wonder if you could bring the Assembly up to date on what's 
happening in that particular case. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand it, there are 
discussions that have taken place with the regional director, the 
Tokarzs, and the two school divisions. And the other thing that 
I understand the Tokarzs are trying to do is get their land . . . 
because they're right on the boundary and I understand that 
they're not encircled by other people's land, they could ask the 
two school divisions to agree that their land would go into the 
Weyburn School Division. 
 
And I guess the final thing that I would suggest that they do is 
we have just appointed an independent boundaries commission 
to deal with disputes where school boards can't resolve 
boundary issues. And that commission will deal with the issues 
that the department feels, or others feel, could be dealt with 
when there are differences of opinions when it comes to 
boundaries and where land should or shouldn't go. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe 
in this particular case that the Tokarzs have considered or are — 
I'm not sure which one it is — taking their daughter over to 
their grandmother's place where she would get on another bus 
and be transported to the Weyburn school. But I believe the 
additional costs involved in that are about $1,200 on the 
taxpayer to do this. And it just seems to be somewhat of a waste 
of money for the bus to be going past the door and the child not 
being able to get onto it simply because of bureaucracy. And, 
Madam Minister, I think that's one of the areas that needs to be 
looked at with your boundary commission that you are dealing 
with. 
 
Just what particular regulation though, Madam Minister, is 
involved in this denial of allowing the Tokarzs’ child to simply 
get onto that bus and move to the Weyburn school rather than 
going to the rural school division? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well here's the issue. You have the 
Weyburn School Division which they want their child to attend 
in the city of Weyburn and their land is not located in the  



May 1, 1995 

 
1899 

Weyburn School Division, it's located in a rural school division. 
And this often is a problem around larger urban centres where 
people who live outside of the division want their children to go 
into the urban centre from the rural community. 
 
In order for that to occur there has to be agreement between the 
rural school division and, in this case, the Weyburn School 
Division. There has been no such agreement and it's impossible. 
The Minister of Education does not get involved in these kinds 
of concerns. There's nothing I can do to force that rural school 
division and the Weyburn School Division to enter into an 
agreement. This is a situation that has to be resolved at the local 
level. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
wasn't asking you to bend the rules or anything on it. I was just 
wondering which regulations were the ones that prevented 
Gillian from going to the Weyburn school? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You see school divisions receive grants 
for students residing in that school division, and if a rural 
school division agrees to let a student go to an urban school 
division, then there is a tuition fee agreement where the grant 
and perhaps some of the local taxes go with that student into the 
Weyburn School Division. 
 
And in this case — and there are other cases like it — the rural 
school division and the Weyburn School Division have not 
been able to arrive at a decision where that young child could 
go into the Weyburn School Division and have the 
accompanying grant go with her. There's been no mutual 
agreement there. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you 
know if there has been any . . . what the discussions have 
involved in this particular case? Has the rural school division 
— I don't know which one that is that would be involved — 
have they commented on whether or not they would allow 
Gillian to go to the Weyburn school if the grant was not 
transferred? Would they be allowed . . . or has Weyburn been 
asking that the grant plus the land taxes be transferred? Do you 
know what is happening in that particular case and where the 
dispute is at? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand from the officials, that 
there has been no agreement between the rural school division 
and the Weyburn School Division; that the Tokarzs are now 
thinking about moving . . . trying to get their land moved into 
the Weyburn School Division boundaries. In order for that to 
take place . . . it can take place through mutual agreement or it's 
one of those items that could be referred to the independent 
boundaries commission when there is a boundary dispute. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — But to your knowledge then, there's been 
no discussion of letting Gillian go to Weyburn without a 
transfer of the grant or the tax base? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer is no. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well I'll move on to another subject, 
Madam Minister. I have here a copy of the Trustee News from 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) in April 
of '95, and they mention here that Mr. Horsman from your 
department met with the SSTA executive to outline an Equity in 
Education Working Committee proposed by your department. I 
wonder if you could give us an outline of what you foresee for 
this committee, who would be on it, etc., what was their time 
frame, what's their reference. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is a six-member committee that 
represents the various educational partners. It's looking at a 
number of issues including increasing the numbers of females 
in administrative roles, increasing the numbers of aboriginal 
teachers or teachers with disabilities, addressing the issue of 
girls in the classroom, particularly student girls who should be 
encouraged to take mathematics and science. As I understand it, 
the committee is halfway through its work and will soon be 
reporting its recommendations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you 
give us the time reference of when this committee was 
implemented and when you expect them to complete their 
duties and who the members of the committee are? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The process began shortly after 
Christmas and I'm advised that we hope to complete it this fall. 
So that would be the answer to your question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That's the 
answer to one of my questions. The other question is: who is 
sitting there? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are going from memory; we don't 
have the exact information here. But I'm advised that Ed Bath 
from LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors 
and Superintendents); Tim Yee from the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation; Barry Bashutski from the SSTA; Donalda 
Ford from the Human Rights Commission; Gillian McCreary 
from the Department of Education, Training and Employment; 
and Ken Horsman from the Department of Education, Training 
and Employment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How is 
this committee being funded? Is it being funded out of the 
Department of Education? And the members that are on the 
committee, are they being paid per diems or are they receiving 
any compensation? How is that working? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that there are no costs. 
When the educational partners put people on these kinds of 
committees they pick up their own expenses. And in this case, 
there are three people who represent either a government 
department or an independent commission, and the department 
or the commission would look after the expenses. But they're, 
from the government's point of view, very little expense 
because they're located in Regina; the meetings occur here. 



May 1, 1995 

 
1900 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
perhaps for the government's purposes, there are no costs; but 
for the taxpayers concerned, there is a cost to each and every 
one of them because they are being paid either through the 
Department of Education, through taxes collected to pay the 
STF funds, or through property taxes for the SSTA — it all 
comes from the taxpayers' pocket at the end of the day, Madam 
Minister. So there is indeed a cost there. 
 
How many meetings are being planned, or how many meetings 
are being dealt with on this particular item, or what kind of 
special equipment would be needed, if any, to deal with this, 
and what kind of travel is being contemplated? Are all of these 
people situated in Regina, therefore no travel is necessary? Or 
are they going around the province seeking advice? What kind 
of consultation is involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that there've been three 
meetings held to date; there will be another three to four 
meetings between now and the fall; that Ed Bath from LEADS 
and Tim Yee from the STF reside outside of Regina. 
 
And when I say there is no cost, what I'm saying is that there is 
no cost to the Department of Education, Training and 
Employment, which I assumed we're doing the estimates for. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, we are indeed 
doing the estimates for Education, Training and Employment. 
And the entire budget of Education, Training and Employment 
comes from the taxpayer. Every single penny of it comes from 
the taxpayer. And that's what we're here to ask you questions 
about, is how you disburse those pennies from the taxpayer, 
Madam Minister. So indeed, while it may not be a direct cost to 
your department, it is a direct cost to the taxpayer. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the two people who live outside of 
Regina, their costs are being covered by their associations or the 
teachers' federation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The areas 
that this committee is to review, I believe you said the numbers 
of females in the administrative positions within education, the 
number of native teachers within the education system, and 
getting girls into mathematics and perhaps the sciences. 
 
Madam Minister, along that line, this committee, will they be 
making recommendations as to whether or not affirmative 
actions are desirable or necessary, or are they going to be 
making some form of recommendation as to how to increase 
those numbers without having a formalized plan in place to 
mandate that these changes be made? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that the committee will 
hopefully complete its work by the end of September; that the 
committee will make recommendations to the department, or 
the committee may make some recommendations to myself or 
whomever the minister is; that there is no predetermined agenda  

as to whether or not we're moving in an affirmative action 
direction. 
 
I know this, that we had the provincial Indicators Report last 
year that showed we did not have nearly enough women in 
administrative positions. And I did ask the department to see 
what we could do to improve this particular indicator of our 
education system so that it was more reflective of society. 
 
This year we're planning on putting in the Indicators Report the 
numbers of first nations or aboriginal teachers, Metis teachers, 
in our schools. And obviously there has been a great deal of 
interest lately as to how we assist first nations and Metis 
students complete their high school education. So this 
committee is looking at a number of equity issues and they will 
be making some recommendations to the department, and 
maybe some recommendations to the minister. But those 
recommendations have not been predetermined and that this is 
not necessarily leading to an affirmative action program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You stated 
that when you looked at the numbers within the education 
system that you felt there was not enough women in 
administration. I wonder if you could clarify for me what you 
mean by enough. What levels are you talking about? What 
makes enough and what makes it not enough? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we know that there are gender 
distributions in elementary school and that predominantly in 
elementary schools, for instance, we have a large percentage of 
women teaching in elementary schools. They are not necessarily 
. . . those numbers are not necessarily reflected in the numbers 
of principals or vice-principals. We know that we're having 
increasing numbers of women teaching in high school, and if 
you look at the percentage we do not see that type of 
distribution throughout the administrative structure. 
 
We also know that, while we have large numbers, a large 
percentage, of women in the teaching profession, that large 
percentage is not necessarily represented at the division board 
level. We do have more women going into administration at the 
board level, where they're becoming directors of education or 
assistant directors of education, or curriculum specialists, or 
consultants, but it's still not reflective of the general distribution 
of women throughout our K to 12 system. And so I think it's 
important that we take a look at some of the systemic barriers to 
why that's occurring and what can we do to begin to remedy 
that issue. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
wonder if maybe you could give us a breakdown, then, of those 
percentages in the various levels — elementary school, high 
school, administration — all of those various areas that you 
would be measuring. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We know that approximately 60 per 
cent of the teaching force are female and we know that 
approximately 22 per cent of the people in administration are 
female. So obviously there is a difference in the teaching force  



May 1, 1995 

 
1901 

versus women in administration, so we want to take a look at 
some of the systemic areas that may lead to that fact. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. How 
about in high school? What would the levels be at . . . 60 per 
cent would cover everyone I'm assuming, so what would it be in 
high school, percentages men, percentage of women, that are 
teaching in high school? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have the exact detail here, but 
we'll get it for you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you 
state that there are 22 per cent of the administrative level 
positions are female I would agree you that that's 
disproportionate to the number of women within our society. 
On the other hand, you could also say that 60 per cent females 
in teaching is disproportionate to the numbers of women in 
society also. So when you're talking about an equity program 
will you also be dealing with that 60 per cent number or 40 per 
cent men that are involved in teaching to somehow bring a 
balance into that also? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think that for those of us who 
are teachers, it certainly is a profession and was a profession 
that women were encouraged to go into. And it's my impression 
that we are encouraging men to go into elementary school 
education. 
 
Historically what's happened is, men have gone into high school 
education; women went into elementary school education. And 
we're now seeing a reversal of that where more and more men 
are going into elementary education and more women are going 
into high school education and teaching the maths and the 
sciences. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — But will you be providing, Madam 
Minister, an equity program though to encourage that. You have 
a study in place now to encourage more women to enter into 
administration or to promote that in some manner. You're 
talking about an equity program to promote more natives into 
the teaching profession. You're talking of an equity program to 
provide for more girls to enter into the maths and sciences. But, 
Madam Minister, are you also going to have a program in place 
to promote more men to enter the teaching profession? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'd just like to say this to the member, 
that the Saskatchewan school trustees or trustees across the 
province have done a good job; and so have our other 
educational partners, have done a good job, in beginning to 
change a predominantly male administration to more of a little 
bit of a mix. 
 
So we've come a long way in the last 20 years. That doesn't 
mean we don't have some ways to go. But I just want to assure 
the member — who obviously is asking the questions on behalf 
of a constituency of people — that this is not about enforced 
anything. This is about having a discussion around equity 
issues, particularly when you see the number of people who are  

interested — particularly women — into getting into 
administration. 
 
And it's ensuring that there are no systemic barriers to women 
moving into administrative positions as there are no systemic 
barriers to first nations and Metis people who might be 
interested in teaching and have the credentials to, in fact, teach 
in Saskatchewan classrooms and have those credentials in 
spades. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
I'm glad you brought up the idea of the constituency of people 
out there, because further on in that same article, the SSTA 
says: however the association has been less supportive of 
mandatory equity programs. And indeed that is the case, 
Madam Minister. While in certain jurisdictions and amongst 
certain members of society the idea of mandatory equity 
programs is very popular, amongst another equally probably 
large percentage of the population it's unpopular. 
 
So, Madam Minister, while I look at my own school board, 
currently we have three women on the board and two men. 
Prior to the last changes that were made, we had four women on 
the board and one man. Our school division has a male director 
of education and a female secretary-treasurer. I look around my 
local RMs (rural municipality) at the administration in places 
there and we have a significant number of women who now 
hold those positions and do a very good job of it, and do a very 
good job of it. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think the changes are coming. Maybe 
they're not fast enough, but they are coming, and I would not 
want to see a mandatory quota system put in place. I think that 
is probably more disruptive and more negative than it is 
beneficial because whenever it seems to happen there's always 
some resistance. 
 
I saw a demonstration one time of while people don't mean to 
resist, it does take place. And the demonstration was: two 
people put their hand up and put their hands against each other, 
and without even consciously trying, they always resist that 
pressure. And that happens in these cases where you provide a 
mandatory equity program in place, that there is always some 
natural, built-in resistance, Madam Minister, which is to the 
detriment of the program. 
 
So I believe that an equity program could be put in place, could 
be encouraged without it necessarily being mandatory. And I 
would certainly encourage all the girls to go into maths and 
sciences, because it is an area that is going to be very important, 
and it is currently important and will be even more important in 
the future. And the females of our society certainly have the 
capabilities to excel in all of those areas. They need take a back 
place to no one on that area, Madam Minister. 
 
So I believe that when you're looking at these recommendations 
that may come down from the committee, I think it's very  



May 1, 1995 

 
1902 

important that you keep in mind that mandatory will generate 
some resistance to it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I would say this to you, that the 
way to avoid mandatory anything is to respond. And one of the 
reasons behind the equity committee is to have the major 
partners in education respond to some indicators of the success 
of our education system. 
 
We are encouraging, through this committee, a full and open 
discussion about some of the reasons — systemic barriers 
perhaps, or some of the other reasons — why it is that women, 
while they're applying to go into administrative positions, aren't 
necessarily getting those positions when we know many of 
those women have good credentials. 
 
We're asking the question, why is it that there may be 20 or 30 
per cent population of first nations or Metis students at a 
particular school, but we do not see a first nations or Metis 
teacher? We know that our educational institutions are 
graduating students from Gabriel Dumont Institute, SUNTEP 
(Saskatchewan urban native teacher education program), 
NORTEP (northern teacher education program), and other 
programs. We are graduating many first nations and Metis 
teachers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we have to ensure that school boards consider the hiring 
of first nations and Metis people, particularly when we know 
that there is a 90 per cent high school drop-out rate amongst 
that particular group of people. 
 
And so how do you begin to change that fact? And one of the 
ways you begin to change that fact is to have Indian and Metis 
role models in our schools. 
 
So I think that this is a discussion that everybody in 
Saskatchewan should welcome, particularly our educational 
partners, because we have some issues that need addressing. 
 
We have an issue of a disparity: the numbers of women in 
administrative positions — that's a fact — relative to their 
numbers. And we also have a disparity of Indian and Metis 
teachers in our classrooms relative to the numbers of Indian and 
Metis students in the classroom. 
 
And we do know that we are graduating good Indian and Metis 
teachers that have the same credentials as everybody else that's 
graduating from our College of Education programs. And we 
want to ensure that we begin to see more and more Indian and 
Metis people in our classrooms because that reflects the 
classroom of the 1995s. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
let's take a look at the number of teachers who have graduated 
from our universities in Saskatchewan, let's say the last three 
years. Can you give me the numbers of the students who have 
graduated from the teaching schools in the province in the last 
three years; give me a number for each year if you would, 
please. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that we graduate about 800 
teachers a year from the College of Education, U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan); U of R (University of Regina), 
and Gabriel Dumont Institute and SUNTEP. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How many 
native teachers have we graduated in those years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are estimating, and we think it 
could be between 50 and 60 Indian and Metis teachers. And 
they would come from SUNTEP Regina, SUNTEP P.A. (Prince 
Albert), SUNTEP Saskatoon, NORTEP, and ITEP (Indian 
teacher education program). So we have three programs, and we 
think that we're graduating between 50 and 60 students, but 
we're not precise and we'll get you that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay of 
the 800 teachers that graduate from the university, would that 
include 50 to 60 Indian Metis or are they separate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — They graduate from the College of 
Education, Saskatoon, and Regina. I think I know where you're 
taking this. I think what you're going to say is that we have 
unemployed teachers and we have unemployed Indian and 
Metis teachers. Here's the thing that troubles me and I'll put my 
bias on the line. What troubles me is this: that we are educating 
Indian and Metis people in the province of Saskatchewan and 
we have done so for a number of years, particularly in the 
teaching programs, and these are highly successful teaching 
programs. 
 
And what we're finding is that while there are teachers being 
hired in certain parts of Saskatchewan throughout the last 
several years, often Indian and Metis people were going to 
Alberta or British Columbia, and they were being hired there. 
 
It is troublesome when you have Bates prize winners who . . . 
those are people who are the most outstanding teachers who 
graduate from the College of Education in Saskatoon and they 
don't get a permanent job. That is troublesome and I think that 
that's an issue that we need to begin to address. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I'll 
talk to you a bit about Alberta and British Columbia. I'm 
wondering how many of the 800 teachers that graduate every 
year get a job in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have that information. We'd 
have to get that from the University of Saskatchewan and the 
University of Regina. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, 
because that's going to be very important information dealing 
with the equity program; because the next question is, how 
many of the 50 to 60 native, Metis teachers that graduated got 
jobs in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the associate minister 
that in NORTEP about 80 per cent of the teachers are hired; in  



May 1, 1995 

 
1903 

SUNTEP, about 60 per cent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Your 
officials would have no idea what the percentages would be in 
the 800 that graduate every year? If you listen to the media, or 
you listen to the complaints from teachers, they would give the 
impression that a very small percentage of teachers get hired 
every year. So if the people coming out of SUNTEP and the 
other programs for the native and Metis are getting 60 to 80 per 
cent, they may very well be getting a very high percentage in 
comparison to those coming out of the other programs. Sure it's 
small numbers, but that's all you've got in the program, Madam 
Minister, is 60 to 80. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think it's . . . when you're looking at 
those numbers, it's important to say yes, we have a very small 
number of native teachers in the system. But if you're only 
graduating 60 a year, it's going to be very difficult over the . . . 
to get a large number in a short period of time into the system. 
 
You talked about Alberta. Well, Madam Minister, maybe the 
question needs to be asked, what's the starting salary for a 
teacher in Saskatchewan compared to B.C. (British Columbia)? 
Maybe that has an impact on why the teachers who graduate 
from the native studies program go to Alberta or British 
Columbia to teach. It may have nothing . . . with Saskatchewan 
being prejudiced against natives; it may very well have 
something to do with the economy and the economics of going 
to Alberta or British Columbia to teach. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand it, Alberta has been 
hiring Indian and Metis teachers and so has British Columbia. 
And there are, quote, head-hunters that come here, or have over 
the last several years come here, to hire teachers because we 
have specific programs for Indian and Metis students, which I 
understand is different than Alberta or British Columbia. I 
believe Manitoba has a similar training program to ours. 
 
As well, just for your edification, our teacher training programs 
— particularly SUNTEP — is a program that is a good 
program. And I think that if you ask people who have hired 
teachers who have SUNTEP, particularly the Regina Catholic 
School Division, they would tell you that they have received 
excellent teachers and they regularly take a trip to SUNTEP to 
hire people. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, the fact that we 
have a good program is excellent, but that doesn't explain why 
the people have gone to Alberta or British Columbia to work. 
The fact that head-hunters are prepared to come here and 
approach our students and our graduating teachers to work 
some place else, and they go, doesn't say anything about the 
school system in Saskatchewan. It says something about the 
incentives that were used to move them away. And that 
incentive, in most cases, is going to be dollar bills. 
 
And that is what causes us perhaps to have a lower percentage 
hired into Saskatchewan out of these programs than the 100 per 
cent that you seem to be wanting to aim at. So, Madam  

Minister, it's dollar bills that are moving people. It's not the fact 
that there is a roadblock in Saskatchewan that doesn't allow 
them to enter the system. 
 
So again I ask you the question: what's the difference in the 
starting teacher's salary in Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 
Columbia, since those are the two provinces you used as an 
example? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, I just want to be very clear 
with the member. What we're trying to do here is to promote the 
notion that Indian and Metis people who graduate from our 
institutions of higher learning such as the colleges of education 
— U of R and U of S — find themselves into a Saskatchewan 
classroom. Particularly when we know that the numbers of 
Indian and Metis children in our classrooms are increasing. 
Particularly when we know that we have a 90 per cent high 
school drop-out rate. 
 
Now you can get on your high horse about the fact that we are 
trying to have a discussion around equity issues in the 
classroom. That is not leading to anything other than a number 
of recommendations to the department or to the minister. I think 
that this is a logical thing for the province to be engaged in. 
 
(2015) 
 
And it's logical because we need to have a well-educated and 
well-trained population going into the next century and beyond. 
And if we don't begin to address the whole issue of a high 
Indian and Metis high school drop-out rate, I think that the 
province will bear the consequences of that. 
 
So if I were you, Member, I wouldn't be getting on my high 
horse about the government thinking about equity issues, given 
some of the issues that we're facing. And it might be helpful, 
Member, if you, instead of getting on your horse, came and 
discussed this with the department if you have some problems 
with the notion of equity. 
 
I don't know if you have a problem with sexism; I don't know if 
you think women shouldn't be in classrooms, shouldn't be in 
administration. I don't know if you don't think Indian and Metis 
people should be in the classroom and in administration, or 
disabled people in the classroom, in administration. What is 
your point? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I asked you 
earlier what was enough, and you didn't respond to what was 
enough. You were the one who said there is not enough women 
in administration. I asked you what was enough, and you said, 
something closer to society's level. But you wouldn't qualify it, 
Madam Minister. I asked you about mandatory, and you 
wouldn't say that it would not be mandatory. The fact is, you 
left that door very wide open, Madam Minister. 
 
So, Madam Minister, what are you going to do to increase the 
percentage of native teachers in Saskatchewan? Are you going 
to force every native who graduates from the teaching program  



May 1, 1995 

 
1904 

to remain in Saskatchewan? Because you yourself said that a 
significant number were going to Alberta or British Columbia. 
 
Madam Minister, what are you going to do? Are you going to 
set quotas for the school boards, that they have to hire a certain 
number of native teachers, so that they in turn will have to send 
head-hunters out across Canada to find native teachers? Or are 
you going to provide special monetary incentives to native 
teachers to remain in Saskatchewan? What's it going to be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Do you know what I want? I want a 
discussion. And that's what we're having. No one can solve the 
problems of not enough women in administration. I can't, you 
can't, the trustees can't, the teachers can't, LEADS can't. We can 
begin to address that together; we can have a discussion. 
 
No one can solve the problem of not enough Indian and Metis 
teachers in the classroom, but I think that the partners of 
LEADS, the FSIN, the Metis Society, the SSTA, the teachers' 
federation, the Department of Education, parents, we can begin 
to have this discussion. It's a discussion. It's about making some 
recommendations to the department to deal with equity issues. 
It is not about enforced, mandatory affirmative action. I said 
that earlier. I said it's about a discussion that will lead to some 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, there is indeed a 
very big difference between a discussion on how we improve 
the circumstances to allow girls to go into mathematics . . . 
They're not disallowed today but very few are . . . and a growing 
number are doing it, but traditionally fewer have done so, and 
it's my belief that it is changing and perhaps it's not changing 
fast enough. While we need to encourage it, I don't believe we 
can force it, Madam Minister. 
 
The same as the health boards. The health board changes were 
coming, but to force them is very difficult to make it work. And 
the same deals with equity both within the administration level, 
with natives in the system, in the teaching profession, and girls 
in the hard science classes, mathematics. That is certainly 
changing and the women and the girls that are involved in this, 
and the natives, are certainly showing that there is absolutely no 
reason why they shouldn't be there. 
 
And for the member from Elphinstone . . . I wanted to say 
Shaunavon because that's where he took off from. But, Mr. 
Member, it is very important that everyone in society have an 
equal opportunity to participate and that roadblocks not be put 
in anybody's way, and I mean anybody and everybody, be they 
male, female, native, or some other ancestry. It shouldn't be 
there. But to force changes, to mandate that they have to be 
there, I believe will be counter-productive. And that's why, 
Madam Minister, I wanted to emphasize that even the SSTA is 
not supportive of mandatory programing. And again for the 
member from Elphinstone who wants to participate in this, and 
I believe he had a lot . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Elphinstone. Okay. Some place in Regina. Actually, I'm not 
sure why he runs in that constituency; he doesn't live there. 
 

But, Madam Minister, I believe it's very important that these 
programs be an encouragement, but not to the detriment of 
anyone else in the system. 
 
But, Madam Minister, I'd like to go on to another area, another 
program within the Department of Education, and that's the 
literacy program. And I would like to know what the 
department's involvement is with the literacy program. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We spend approximately $764,000 on 
literacy programs, and this is based on a volunteer tutor literacy 
initiative and we send grants to the various regional colleges. 
Read Saskatoon, the Regina Public Library, Wascana Institute, 
Kelsey, Palliser, Woodland, the Service Fransaskois 
D'Education, the Circle Project and the WEST (workers’ 
education for skills training) program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Are you 
involved in any literacy programs in other provinces or overseas 
any place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Not that we're aware of. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The reason 
I was asking, because I thought I heard a report on the radio 
about some involvement by the Department of Education in a 
literacy program in Tanzania. And I was just wondering what 
our involvement was in that and what this was all about. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In Outer Mongolia. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — The minister from Elphinstone believes 
it should have been in Outer Mongolia but I think that's where 
he's heading and that's why they need a literacy program there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department isn't involved in any 
kind of literacy program in Tanzania. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Any other African country, Madam 
Minister? Anything offshore at all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department's not involved in any 
offshore literacy program, any program outside of the 
boundaries of the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well the minister from Elphinstone, 
who wants to really get involved in this, is suggesting we get 
out the atlas and ask a question about every country, which is 
somewheres in the 180 names or so. 
 
Madam Minister, another issue that I'd like to deal with is 
section 93 of the BNA Act (British North America Act), where 
it's provincial responsibility to deal with education. Madam 
Minister, how does this section of the Canadian constitution 
affect education and who has the authority and the jurisdictions 
to deal with education in Canada? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Education in the country of Canada is 
within the purview of the provinces and the territories. 



May 1, 1995 

 
1905 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is that an 
exclusive jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Post-secondary education historically 
has been cost-shared with the federal government. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Does 
the federal government have jurisdiction over post-secondary 
education or are they a willing partner in funding 
post-secondary education under provincial jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think it's fair to say that the 
Government of Canada, under various administrations, has been 
a willing partner in the funding of EPF (established programs 
financing) post-secondary education. They have done this from 
a philosophical basis where they felt it . . . given that there were 
provinces in Canada that were have-not provinces, that there 
should be some equity and fairness in the delivery of 
post-secondary education, not only for central Canada but for 
provinces and territories outside of central Canada. 
 
So they have been willing partners and they have funded 
post-secondary institutions such as universities and technical 
schools, regional colleges, to ensure that regardless of where 
you live in this country, that you can have access to a 
post-secondary education, and that access does not depend on 
what's in your pocketbook but it depends on what's in your 
head. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, does the Canadian government have jurisdiction in 
which to mandate certain criteria within education or do they 
participate with the province as a partner but not as in 
jurisdiction over what is being taught? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer is no. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The “O” part because it always costs 
me something. Madam Minister, if the province . . . if the 
federal government doesn't have any jurisdiction in which to 
mandate the necessary education, how is it that under Bill C-68, 
the Firearms Act, the federal government can mandate 
education though  requirements dealing with firearms in this 
province  when they don't have jurisdiction, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just have to say that I know that 
you're into the gun control legislation and I think that this is a 
question that could be best asked in Justice estimates when you 
have the minister, who is a lawyer, knows something about 
constitutional law, and knows something about guns. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I have to 
disagree with you in your comments that the minister knows 
something about constitutional law. 
 
Madam Minister, we're talking about the education here, we're 
talking about jurisdiction over education. Under Bill C-68, the  

federal government is mandating certain educational 
requirements for firearms use and ownership, which I believe 
falls under the jurisdiction of the provinces, Madam Minister, 
because it's up to the province . . . they have specific 
jurisdiction under section 93 of the Canadian constitution to 
provide education and the courses and the mandate for that. 
 
So, Madam Minister, how do you as the Minister of Education 
in Saskatchewan propose to allow the federal government to 
infringe on your jurisdiction? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think what you're talking about is 
firearm safety. This is not within the purview of post-secondary 
institutions in the province of Saskatchewan nor, I suspect, 
anywhere. 
 
Firearm safety is not something that we teach at our 
post-secondary institutions. We teach law, medicine, pharmacy, 
engineering, technology, nursing, health sciences, those kinds 
of things. We do not particular . . . we do not teach a particular 
safety aspect of gun handling. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, if the department was 
to have the desire to enter into that field, would you then have 
jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm afraid we're going to have to get 
you the answer to this question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I realize it's not 
a simple question, even though the question was very short. 
 
I think it's important that consideration be given to all the 
educational opportunities within Saskatchewan, dealing with 
firearms in this particular case, but in other areas that can 
impact on our citizens and have an impact on our education 
system. When it comes to the provisions of education in various 
areas involving government legislation, I think that the province 
needs to be aware and be a participatory partner in that 
education. 
 
If you look at some of the private industry situations, of say 
somebody within IPL (Interprovincial Pipe Line Co.) providing 
a course that doesn't involve the government, I don't know that 
the province needs to be involved. But when the federal 
government is involved in an education circumstance, both in 
providing the education courses and providing the testing, I 
believe that in those circumstances the provincial government 
should also be involved because that is an area of provincial 
jurisdiction, when governments are providing educational 
opportunities. And I would look forward to your answer in this 
particular area, Madam Minister. 
 
I'd like to switch to another topic now and you can respond to 
that if you would like to, Madam Minister. I know that the 
former minister of Justice was getting a little nervous about the 
constitutional issues because the last time we got into the  



May 1, 1995 

 
1906 

constitution, he shut the House down. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I'd like to talk to you a bit about school 
closures that are occurring in Saskatchewan. And I wonder if 
you could give me a list of the schools that closed within the 
past year and those which are slated for closure in the upcoming 
year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You want the names of the schools that 
have closed in the last couple of years . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, the last year — Denare Beach, Livelong, 
Speers, Prairie River, St. Gregor, St. Mary, Herschel 
Elementary, Fort Pelly, Arran, Quinton, Abernethy, Killaly, 
Fenwood, Dickson, Lafleche, and Wood Mountain. 
 
Schools that are proposed for closure this year, we understand 
that there are perhaps four schools, four or five schools that are 
proposed, but they aren't necessarily going to be closed. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Have any of the school boards made 
proposals to you or applications to you to proceed with school 
closures? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — They do not apply to the department to 
close a school. What they do is notify the community that it's 
their intention to close the school. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. To the 
best of your knowledge, have all of the proper notifications in 
the schools that you mentioned closing, have all of those steps 
been followed in the proper manner? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To the best of our knowledge, for the 
five schools where there is potential for a school closure, they 
have followed the proper procedure, as we changed The 
Education Act to ensure that we wouldn't get into some of the 
difficulties and we would follow a proper process in the 
province. And we understand that that process is being 
followed. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Does your 
department have any involvement whatsoever with the 
determination of the closure of a school? Do you, say, take into 
consideration where the students will be moved to when a 
school closure takes place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Under The Education Act this is a local 
decision, and so the local board makes the decision and the 
Department of Education in no way influences that decision. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What I 
was leading up to was the concern about the time that a student 
is on a school bus. And in the determination of which schools 
are closed and which ones aren't, I believe your statement at the 
SSTA convention, I believe it was, or perhaps it was LEADS, 
that you said that an hour and a half one way was the maximum 
that any student should be on the bus. 
 
So I'm wondering if these schools that closed or the ones that  

are proposed or possible closures, whether or not any 
determination has been made on the time factor that a student 
would be on the bus from their home to the school which they 
may have been moved to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To the best of our knowledge, the hour 
and a half is being adhered to, that no student will be on the bus 
for more than an hour and a half one way. And we're not aware 
of any incidents in the province where that is not the case, that 
students are getting on the bus prior to 7:30 a.m. in the morning 
or getting home after 5:30 — or 5 I guess it would be. So we're 
not aware of any school division that is keeping children on the 
bus for longer than an hour and a half one way. And if you're 
aware of that situation, we'd like to hear about it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, I'm not aware of any 
circumstances like that and that's why I was asking. But when 
you look at an hour and a half on the bus, in most cases an hour 
and a half, if it was exactly an hour and a half would not be 
getting on the bus at 7:30. The bus doesn't pull up at the door at 
9 o'clock to allow the students in. You're generally looking at 
10 to 15 minutes. So if it was an hour and a half, you're 
potentially looking at 7:15 that they could be getting on the bus. 
 
Madam Minister, a number of the smaller rural schools are 
having difficulty both retaining teachers and students. And I'm 
not sure which one comes first, the teacher or the egg here. But 
how many school divisions, or how many schools within the 
divisions, are running double, triple, or four classes to a . . . 
four grades to a classroom? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That is not a statistic that the 
department keeps records on. But we do know that there have 
always been multi-grade classrooms, not only in rural 
Saskatchewan, but there are many, many, many, many 
multi-grade classrooms in the cities. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm just 
wondering if there is an increase though in the multi-grade 
classrooms over the last few years? If it's a trend that's 
expanding or if it's contracting or remaining the same? I would 
suspect, especially in the rural areas, that it's probably a 
circumstance where it's growing  that there are more 
multi-grade classrooms as the smaller schools remain open and 
lose pupils. 
 
And also because of funding cut-backs, there's fewer teachers 
available to teach within those classrooms so that the classes are 
expanded to accommodate the number of teachers available 
within the division rather than just the number of pupils that are 
available. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Right. I think you need to look at the 
time frame. When I was a kid growing up in rural 
Saskatchewan, for my first six grades I was in a classroom with 
four grades — grades 1 to 4. And then when I hit grade 5, it 
was grade 5, 6, 7, and 8. And then of course, that school closed 
and the population went to a larger centre and we reduced the 
numbers of grades in a particular classroom. 



May 1, 1995 

 
1907 

This has always been an issue for people living in rural 
Saskatchewan, unless you lived in a large centre. And it 
certainly is an issue for people living in urban Saskatchewan 
because we have lots of split grades, where you may have too 
many grade 1's for two classrooms and too many grade 2's for 
two classrooms, and so you have a grade 1/2 split, or whatever. 
 
So we don't keep statistics on that information. But we have not 
. . . we're not aware of any evidence that the numbers of 
multi-grade classrooms are increasing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
didn't go to the same school you did, but I went to a 1 to 8 
school that had two rooms, so we had basically the same types 
of circumstances. But my younger brothers and sisters, their 
school had one class, one grade to a classroom. Now my 
children, who are going to that very same school, are now back 
into the multi-grade circumstances. 
 
So over the period of a few years — not necessarily how many 
years since I went to school but over a period of a few years — 
that change has gone from the multi-grade classroom to the 
single grade and now back to the multi-grade because of the 
decrease in the number of students in the area. And I believe 
that circumstance is happening not just in my home community, 
but across the province, especially in the rural areas. 
 
Indeed in the urban centres you will get some classes that are 
multi-grade because you have one and a half classrooms of 
grade 1's and one and a half classrooms of grade 2. But the 
majority of grade 1's and grade 2's in the school are in 
single-grade classrooms and it's only a much smaller number 
that are in the multi-grade. 
 
So I'd like to ask you, in the urban areas, when you have a 
multi-grade classroom, which students— grade 1 and grade 2 
— which students would go into the multi-grade classroom? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just as I understand it, this is up to the, 
you know, the principals and the school to determine which 
children go into which classroom, which multi-graded room. 
 
But I just want to make a point, that there's no streaming here. 
We're not putting the smart grade 1's with smart grade 2's, so if 
that's the point you're trying to get at, that's not occurring, from 
what I understand. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I had no idea 
how the determinations were going to be made, and that's why I 
inquired, because I'm curious. 
 
Madam Minister, I'm not opposed to multi-grade classrooms. I 
believe that there are some strong points and some benefits 
from multi-grade classrooms. There's also some negatives there. 
If you have a student who is somewhat weaker than his peers, 
the multi-grade classroom can work against that student. They 
fall behind and have a great deal of difficulty catching up 
because the teacher has to deal not just with that individual  

grade and that individual course at that present time, but with 
the other grade and whatever course that they are also hoping to 
study. 
 
(2045) 
 
So I think if we can, we should try and diminish the number of 
multi-grade classrooms. But unfortunately because of the 
cut-backs in education funding over the years, that is becoming 
more and more difficult to do so. Not only has it meant though 
cut-backs within the teaching profession, and the STF says that 
there's been a thousand less teachers available . . . not available, 
a thousand less teaching positions in Saskatchewan over the last 
number of years. 
 
I'd like to know what has happened with the student population 
over that same time period that the drop of 1,000 teaching 
positions has occurred. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Since '91-92 school year  so we're 
going back  the numbers of students have dropped by about 
1,300 in the province of Saskatchewan, so the numbers of 
students enrolled in our public education system. Now what I 
want to say is that many first nations have developed their own 
schools and we've seen a transfer of students from a public 
education system to band-controlled schools. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would this 
also include the people in the separate school system and in the 
third French school board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The 
movement from the public system, or the separate system, into a 
native school system is occurring indeed across the province. 
And some of those are being successful and some of those are 
being less successful. And sometimes those students move back 
and forth, Madam Minister, so I can understand where it may be 
difficult to keep track of the total numbers in and out. 
 
But would you have any indication whatsoever how many 
students might be in the native-run school programs through the 
different band councils? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't keep track of the numbers of 
students in their system, but we do know in the last three years 
that there have been students that have gone from a public 
education system to a band-controlled school. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You're 
correct in that, that there has been a number have moved, but 
some of them have come back also in that time period. I can 
think of one school within my area that a number of students 
moved from the public system into the band school and then a 
number of them have also moved back again. So there's some 
movement back and forth there. 
 
Madam Minister, in that same time, can you confirm the STF  



May 1, 1995 

 
1908 

numbers that there's a thousand less teaching positions, or is 
some other number relevant? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Since '91-92, it's dropped 
approximately 600 full-time equivalents. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Almost two pupils per teacher is the ratio there; decrease of 
1,300 pupils and 600 teachers. It seems to be somewhat 
dramatic. I mean for 1,300 pupils you should have maybe . . . 
well, not even a hundred, 80, 80 teachers or something. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They're all in the same place. They're all 
in the same place . . . 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — All the teachers and pupils were lost in 
the same place, Madam Minister? I think that's stretching it a 
little bit. 
 
Madam Minister, what is the reason, your interpretation of the 
reason, for such a dramatic decrease in the number of teachers 
in comparison to the 1,300 student decrease that we've had in 
the province. And what impact has that decrease had on the 
pupil/teacher ratio in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What are the reasons? I think we know 
the reasons, and the reasons are between 1982 and 1991, there 
was a group of people that ran this province into the ground and 
developed a $15 billion debt. And when our government came 
to office in November of 1991, we were stuck with a fiscal 
basket case that we had to make right if this province wasn't — 
with all due respect — turned over to the federal government to 
administer because we were basically bankrupt. 
 
And so what do you do? You have a huge Health budget and 
you have a Department of Education budget, the two big 
spending items. And the province very methodically told our 
educational partners that there would be a reduction in funding 
to the K-12 system and our post-secondary partners. And we 
reduced educational spending by minus two, minus two, and 
minus four, or we took 8 per cent out of the system. 
 
Obviously that has an impact upon the numbers of people 
employed as teachers and support staff. It has an impact on 
programs. It has an impact upon student/teacher ratio. 
 
But had we not done that, sir, we would be spending more than 
$850 million a year in interest payments, we would not have 
seen a credit rating increase, and we would not have been able 
to announce for the first time since you people . . . well since 
we left office, since we left office in 1981-82, a balanced 
budget. 
 
And we did that with the help of our educational partners, our 
health partners, the taxpayers, the population of Saskatchewan. 
And I think because of the fiscal situation now in the province, 
where we have a balanced budget, we can say to our partners, 
next year you can expect to receive a 2 per cent increase barring 
some unforeseen circumstance. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, for 
your history of the province. But you've missed out one or two 
small pieces in there, Madam Minister, that perhaps you need to 
be refreshed on. 
 
In 1982 there was approximately $5 billion in debt in the 
province. So when you talk about the $15 billion that you took 
over, there was a significant piece there in place when the 
previous administration took over. If you talk to the Provincial 
Auditor today, he'll tell you that there is about $22 billion in 
debt for the province's jurisdiction. 
 
So, Madam Minister, using your own numbers . . . and I believe 
it was the Provincial Secretary the other day who used the 
figures of approximately a billion dollars a year in debt put in 
place by the previous administration. If that is the case, Madam 
Minister, and using your own numbers of $15 billion in debt in 
1991, using the information from the Provincial Secretary that 
the previous administration put in $1 billion a year in their term 
of office, you end up with 5 to $6 billion already in place from 
your previous administration, Madam Minister. 
 
So when the previous administration came into power in 1982, 
they were not debt free; it had been left there by you. If in the 
upcoming election some other administration takes over, they 
will inherit about $22 billion in debt from your administration, 
Madam Minister, of which about 12 to 13 billion of that will 
have been put in place by the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
governments over the years, Madam Minister, which also 
includes a significant amount of debt that was brought over in 
1991 from the Crown corporations to the consolidated 
accounts, Madam Minister. 
 
And if I look back, Madam Minister, to that period of time, 
from 1986 to 1991, and look through Education estimates, I 
don't remember seeing in there, Madam Minister, any place 
where you said, as the critic for Education, that there should be 
a decrease in funding in that time frame. Not one quote — not 
one. 
 
But I find a significant number of quotes, Madam Minister, 
during the 1986 to the 1991 period, in which you said there was 
not enough spending in this province on education — not 
enough spending. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when you stand in your place and you say 
that the previous administration wasted the money, well, 
Madam Minister, if they wasted the money, you were 
demanding that more be wasted. So, Madam Minister, you are 
as guilty of the debt of this province as any and every other 
citizen is, because of your demands to spend, spend, and spend 
more. 
 
Never once, never once did you say, stop, you're spending too 
much. It was always the demand by you and every one of your 
colleagues that the spending should increase, that the spending 
should continue. Whatever it was, was not enough. A 3 per cent 
increase in the Education budget in 1990 was not enough. We 
have to have more. How can the students of this province  



May 1, 1995 

 
1909 

possibly go out and get a job unless you're prepared to put 
money into education? Well what happened when your 
colleagues and yourself became the Minister of Education — a 
2 per cent decrease, a 2 per cent decrease, a 4 per cent decrease 
across the board. 
 
Madam Minister, for all your brave words in opposition, you 
didn't deliver. For all your demands of more and more 
spending, when you had the opportunity you cut it. So, Madam 
Minister, if you're going to point fingers, I think they better be 
pointing back at you as well as everybody else in this province 
because you are equally responsible. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh well now, she wasn't on the Treasury 
Board then. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I'm not even sure if she's on the Treasury 
Board now. 
 
So, Madam Minister, when you look at 1,300 decrease in 
students across this province, when you look at 600 less 
teachers in this province, it has to have an impact on the quality 
of education being provided to students. What impact is that 
having on those students, Madam Minister? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I'd just love to respond to this 
critic of ours for a couple of reasons, for a couple of reasons. 
First of all, if you've read Hansard carefully — and obviously 
you've got selective memory or selective quotes or your 
research staff is only selecting certain quotes — you will also 
find many, many, many examples of how I indicated, along 
with my colleagues, to the Devine government, how they could 
save money . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now I think the minister knows 
that she's violated one of the rules of debate here and I ask you 
not to use the proper name. I ask you not to use the proper 
names of members who are still serving in the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Right. My apologies. I slipped. But we 
gave dozens and dozens, hundreds of examples of how the 
government could have saved money. And I think that what we 
found so appalling at the time is that your administration put 
millions and millions and tens of millions and hundreds of 
millions of dollars into things that were irresponsible, illogical, 
and not in the best interests of the province. You wasted money. 
 
And when you saw this terrific waste of taxpayers' money at a 
time when we needed to educate people, of course, member, I 
pointed out the contradictions and said, why aren't you spending 
money here? You can spend money there. Of course I pointed 
out the contradictions. 
 
Now in terms of your question, you know, cutting spending in 
education. We cut spending everywhere. And why did we cut 
spending everywhere? Because your previous administration,  

under the leadership of the member from Estevan, spent money 
incredulously, stupidly, illogically. 
 
And people realized that and what did they do? They threw you 
out of office in 1991. And we were given a mandate to open the 
books and get the financial house . . . this province in fiscal 
order, to take us out of a state of bankruptcy to sound fiscal 
stability. 
 
And it doesn't matter where you go in this country, it is 
recognized that we went from being a financial basket case in 
all of Canada to getting our house in order. And we did it first, 
and we did it in three years. In fact we did it ahead of three 
years. We did it in two years. 
 
So how did we do that? Does this government take credit for 
that? Obviously we did that in concert with the people of this 
province and we got our financial house in order and we can 
say with some certainty that barring some unforeseen 
circumstance, next year you can expect a 2 per cent increase. 
 
And the final point I want to make is that Saskatchewan has a 
proud history of sacrifice — sacrifice. And people know that 
you can't continue spending your way out of a mess. And 
finally, you have to get your financial house in order. 
 
Ask any grandparent, any business person, any farmer in this 
province  we are a province of savers, we are frugal, and we 
don't spend money we don't have. And that has been the history 
of this province whether you've been a Tory, a Liberal, or an 
NDP, up until the time you people came to power — up until 
the time you came to power. 
 
So what you did was you ignored the collective history and the 
collective wisdom of this province; and what we have done is 
go back to the historical and traditional roots of the people here 
and we've become penny-pinchers, and if that's meant people 
have to sacrifice, people sacrifice for the future of their children 
and their grandchildren. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I find it 
interesting that you would say that the people of Saskatchewan 
are savers and that they're thrifty people and use their funds 
wisely. And I would agree with that, excepting when it comes 
to the previous governments — not just the previous 
government, but the previous governments, Madam Minister. 
 
When I look at the debt that was in place in 1982, that money 
was spent without it being there. You yourself said, Madam 
Minister, that we don't spend the money we haven't got. Well 
the previous government spent money that they didn't have. 
 
The teachers' pension plan is the perfect example. There's about 
$3 billion sitting there of debt, Madam Minister, and that was 
started a long time before 1982. And the debt since 1991, 
Madam Minister, has increased, increased under your 
administration. 
 
You talk about wasting money, Madam Minister. Well it seems  



May 1, 1995 

 
1910 

that those projects, those hundreds of millions of dollars that 
you claim was wasted, are now those very same examples that 
the minister of Elphinstone, the Economic Development 
minister, is touting as the saviours of Saskatchewan; that the 
Minister of Finance goes to New York and says, this is why you 
can afford to invest in Saskatchewan, because these companies 
are making money. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, you can't have it both ways. The 
Minister of Finance can't go bragging about the Weyerhaeusers 
of Saskatchewan and have you turn around saying that they 
were bad investments, that they were wasting money. 
 
When we look at it, Madam Minister, all those projects — 
Weyerhaeuser, Millar Western, Saferco — are the things that 
the Minister of Economic Development . . . Hitachi. He was up 
in the House here not that long ago bragging about Hitachi — 
how great it was doing, how great it was that they were 
expanding in Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 
 
So what does he turn around and do now? You were criticizing 
those projects, but you've gone into business with CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce); you've gone into 
business with Sears; you've given grants to Cargill; you've gone 
into business now — an announcement today — with 
MacMillan Bloedel; you're giving money, more loans, to Crown 
Life. 
 
So, Madam Minister, those very same things that in your speech 
you criticized are the very same projects that the Minister of 
Economic Development and the Minister of Finance are 
praising as those strong points in Saskatchewan that allows you 
to provide investment in Saskatchewan. So, Madam Minister, 
you're wrong. Those items are part of Saskatchewan's heritage, 
indeed. 
 
And if you're talking about spending money, it has happened 
prior to 1982; it happened from 1982 to 1991; and it carries on 
today, that there is money being spent that we don't have. I look 
at the budget — $24 million surplus projected for the next year. 
But, Madam Minister, we find out today that there's a 15 . . . 
well actually it's more than that, 17 to $18 million deficit in the 
health boards, the Crown corporation health boards that report 
back to the government. 
 
That's not recorded in the budget because they're in Crown 
corporation. But it sure diminishes the amount of surplus that 
this government will have in place when you add it all together. 
So, Madam Minister, yes you have balanced the budget, or so 
you can claim, but it's been done on the back of each and every 
taxpayer in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Except the front bench there. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — As my colleague says, excepting for the 
front bench with the million, $2 million pensions. So, Madam 
Minister, when you're cutting back on all these things that you 
were demanding as the critic, when you were the critic for 
Education, something has to happen in education in this  

province. 
 
And that decrease means that there's less teachers available to 
do the teaching. It means that classrooms are increasing the 
number of multi-grade classrooms, not decreasing. I'd like to 
read to you a little bit of what the SSTA has to say in their April 
issue . . . February issue, excuse me, of their Trustee News. 
They're talking about expenditures. And I quote: 
 
 The survey found also that the reduction of expenditures 

was achieved in most budget categories. The number of 
personnel was reduced, not by replacing employees who 
left or retired, decreasing the number of work hours or 
days of hourly employees, reassigning duties to other 
employees, sharing employees, eliminating positions in 
administration. 

 
Maybe that's why it's difficult for women to get into the 
administration area. There's fewer jobs there.  
 
 Removing the designation of vice-principal, reducing 

non-home-room professional staff, cutting the library 
clerk, discontinuing the school social worker position, 
reducing the consultant positions, reducing the numbers 
of teacher's aides, eliminating the computer system 
person, and reducing the number of teaching staff. 
Some schools and classrooms were closed. Grades were 
removed or added to specific schools. Divisions 
reported that they now have double, triple, and 
quadruple classrooms. 

 
It goes on further to say: 
 
 Programing for students was affected. Some divisions 

eliminated the alternate education school program, 
reduced the swimming program, reduced the skating and 
skiing program, conveyed more high cost students to 
other divisions and delayed implementation of core 
curriculum, eliminated the home arts program, cut 
guidance in the high schools, eliminated the band 
program, and terminated core French. 

 
It sounds, Madam Minister, from their evaluation of it that the 
entire education of Saskatchewan is disintegrating under your 
administration, under the person who in the critic position stood 
here and demanded better, more, higher, faster, and more 
money for it all, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, under your administration the schools are 
facing a tough time. Madam Minister, our children are suffering 
lack of educational opportunities because of your 
administration. And what do we see as an alternative program? 
You put forward a committee to determine equity within the 
system. 
 
But, Madam Minister, if the jobs are gone it's going to be very 
difficult to keep equity in the system because a significant 
number of those jobs are determined under union agreements in 
which seniority plays a very large part, Madam Minister. So  



May 1, 1995 

 
1911 

you're going to have to take that into account when you're doing 
your equity positions. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think that when it comes time to 
consider how the money is being spent and where it's being 
spent, it's going to be very, very important that the money be 
spent in an equitable position, not just the distribution of jobs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the member would make it appear 
as though the education system is collapsing around our knees. 
And I think it doesn't matter where we go in the province of 
Saskatchewan, everybody will tell you that our education 
system is second to none. 
 
And if you look at some of the testing for instance that's been 
done in our province, our students do extremely well in 
comparison to their national counterparts. 
 
If you look at the kinds of kids that we're graduating from our 
high schools in the province, they're going on to post-secondary 
institutions and they're doing exceedingly well and going on to 
master's programs, Ph.D’s., and so on. 
 
So the way . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the . . . what's 
his name, the Leader of the Opposition says, and jobs in 
Alberta. Well that's not true. People are working here in 
Saskatchewan, business is locating here in Saskatchewan, 
business is expanding in the province of Saskatchewan, and our 
people are getting jobs here now. 
 
Now the member talks about this debt. Just for your edification, 
our government was able to reduce the debt by over half a 
billion dollars . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order, order. Order, order. I recognize 
that members on both sides of the House are very enthusiastic 
about the review of the spending for the Department of 
Education, Training and Employment; and I'll remind all 
members that you will have opportunities to put your concerns 
and make your comments on the record. And I'll ask you to 
allow the minister to make hers now. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member talks about all of these 
wise deals. Well Don Ching, who is the head of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), will tell you that a 
lot of those wise deals were renegotiated and they became more 
fiscally sustainable because of the renegotiations. 
 
The other point that I'd like to make is that the member talks 
about some of these other great deals that they entered into. I 
remember some of those great deals. GigaText was one of 
them; that was a famous deal. High R Door. There were so 
many of them that you almost forget them all, because it went 
on and on and on and on. 
 
The other famous deal that I remember is when they got rid of 
the gas tax. I think the gas tax cost the people of Saskatchewan 
about $800 million a year in lost revenue. And they got rid of 
the gas tax, the gas tax, the gas tax. And then what did they do?  

They put it back on but we had to apply for a rebate, and then 
they took the rebate away and they put it back on. So in the end 
we were paying the gas tax anyway, but the province of 
Saskatchewan lost over $3 billion, according to the former 
minister of Finance, Wes Robbins. That contributed to the 
overall debt of the province. 
 
(2115) 
 
Finally, the deal that I really love is the deal for the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, where they transferred the debt 
from the Potash Corporation into Crown Investments 
Corporation, away from the Crown . . . Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan so it could be privatized. And those shares are 
doing very well now. Why? Because the debt of the company 
was transferred onto the backs of the taxpayers and we're 
paying it. That was a really wonderful deal. 
 
And all we have to do is go back into Crown Corporations’ 
records, member. Let's go back into Hansard. And we can 
reiterate deal after deal after deal after deal where we thought 
you people didn't know how to run a popcorn stand. 
 
And it's obvious. It's obvious because when we left office in 
1981-82, was there an item in the budget called interest on the 
public debt? Not one nickel was spent on interest on the public 
debt. In fact there was interest because of surpluses. And now 
there is an item; it's the third-biggest spending item, ahead . . . 
only two items ahead of it, Health and Education. Interest on 
the public debt — $850 million, compliments of the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) Party of Saskatchewan, which will 
go down in history as the party that practically bankrupted the 
people of this province. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:19 p.m. 
 
 


