













































February 7, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

February 7, 1995 

 

 

7 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

number of motions that I'd like to introduce with respect to 

readings of first Bills. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move the first reading 

of An Act respecting the Protection of Saskatchewan 

Taxpayers. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move the reading of 

An Act to repeal The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 1994 

and The Trade Union Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move the first reading 

of An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act (Four Year Term). 

 

I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move the reading of a 

Bill, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act. 

 

I give notice that on Thursday next I shall move the first reading 

of An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act. 

I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move the first reading 

of An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Thursday next move a reading of 

first . . . Pardon me. I give notice that on Thursday next I will 

move first reading of An Act to amend The Government 

Organization Act. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce three guests from Manitoba this 

morning. They are in your gallery. I would ask them to stand 

when I introduce them. They are Dr. Gerry McKinney, who is 

president of the Manitobans Against Assiniboine Diversion; 

Mr. Fred Tait, regional coordinator for the National Farmers 

Union; and Mrs. Sandra Tait, observer and vice-president for 

the Manitoba Wildlife Federation. 

 

I'd like to ask the members of the Assembly to join me in 

welcoming our guests this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: — If members permit me, I have a couple of 

guests that I notice are in the galleries that I would like to 

introduce. First of all, I notice a member from my constituency, 

Mr. Mike Shutiak. Welcome, Mike, and I ask members to 

welcome Mike to the Assembly this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: — Secondly, I would like to introduce my 

brother-in-law, Mr. John Kraus from Muenster, Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I've just 

noticed there's someone from my constituency in the gallery, 

and I'd like you to welcome Allie Irvine to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to also 

welcome Dr. McKinney and the delegation from Manitoba. The 

delegation will be meeting with various MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) this afternoon regarding the very 

important and controversial Langenburg east drainage project, 

and we look forward to meeting with you later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

West Central Regional Economic Development Authority 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday His 

Honour announced that so far nine regional economic 

development authorities have been created in Saskatchewan 

with several more soon to be up and running. 

 

In my part of the province, close to the constituency of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster, the West Central REDA (regional 

economic development authority) is off to a great start. Under 

the chairmanship of Mr. Wayne Nargang of the town of Alsask, 

the west central authority founding members are the towns of 

Eatonia, Eston, Kindersley, and Kerrobert, with the RMs (rural 

municipality) of Snipe Lake and Kindersley. 

 

As well, a number of other villages and RMs are joining as 

associate members. This is the kind of teamwork we need to see 

to create economic activity and jobs. And the foundation of this 

REDA along our western border is just further proof that there 

is activity and optimism in every area of our province. 

 

Mr. Nargang said that there is already a history of regional 

teamwork and a commitment to economic development in this 

area. This new organization, he said, will help focus our efforts 

and strengthen our ability to work together to build our future. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what the REDAs are all about: working 

together to build our future. 



February 7, 1995 

 

8 

I congratulate the members of the West Central REDA, and we 

all look forward to great results. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Langenburg East Drainage Project 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today there are a number of Manitobans at the legislature, some 

of whom have travelled more than 400 miles to present their 

concerns to the government. They join the concerned ratepayers 

of Churchbridge in expressing their concerns about the 

Langenburg east drainage project, especially their concerns 

about how the proposed project would affect Manitoba. 

 

Members will recall that I asked the question about this project 

nearly one year ago. At the time the minister said the 

department would be investigating the effect of the project on 

soils, wetland habitat, and groundwater in order to determine 

whether the project should go ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Manitoba group consists of members of the 

Manitoba Wildlife Federation, Manitobans Against Assiniboine 

Diversion, Shellmouth RM officials and farmers, the Oak Lake 

First Nation, the Water Table Preservation Association, Dorothy 

and Bob Hutchinson who represent a group of farmers in 

Manitoba, and the National Farmers Union. 

 

They are joining the concerned ratepayers to present a 

document to the Minister of Environment. In the document, 

they express deep concern about the impact of the project in the 

Assiniboine Valley — not only at the Saskatchewan-Manitoba 

border but all the way across Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I trust these weary travellers will receive a full 

hearing of their concerns today. Thank you. 

 

Kipling Hog-breeding Business 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has had many 

success stories in the agricultural field over the years, and today 

I would like to tell you about another positive venture, this time 

in the hog industry. 

 

It was three years ago that six farm families from the Kipling 

area started a diversification of their farming operations and 

formed the value-added pork group. Over the past year, this 

group negotiated successfully with an international hog 

breeding company from the Netherlands, called Dalland. Now 

the home office for all of the North American operations of 

Dalland is located right here in Saskatchewan — truly a proud 

accomplishment. 

 

And further to their success, 900 animals have been imported to 

Saskatchewan from Europe, and they have made their first sales 

in the Saskatchewan market-place and to the third largest pork 

integrator in the United States. Dalland is the second largest 

breeding company in the world. Last month, I had the honour of 

attending the grand opening of this business in Kipling. Mr.  

Speaker, this is another example of how value-added 

diversification is working in the agricultural sector of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to extend my best wishes to the farm families who 

had a dream realized in setting up this business, and I am sure 

we will be hearing more exciting news from them as they seek 

new opportunities. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Prairie Malt 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many 

positive signs across Saskatchewan that the economy is on the 

upswing. In my riding there's a specific example of this and the 

optimism is picking up steam province-wide. That optimism has 

triggered a $10-million expansion of Prairie Malt in Biggar. 

 

The first phase is scheduled for completion in June and I know 

they want to initiate the second phase soon. This expansion will 

boost the total malting capacity to 180,000 tonnes from the 

current 125,000 tonnes, and comes in a year when Canada is 

expected to emerge as the world's dominant malt exporter. 

 

In October it was announced that Prairie Malt, along with its 

Wisconsin partner, bought a 25 per cent interest in a China-

based company. This joint venture has important implications 

for Saskatchewan. It makes Prairie Malt the only malting house 

in Canada with a joint venture in China. It will also give Prairie 

Malt a stake in the world's most densely populated region, and 

the fastest growing beer market with a potential of 1.2 billion 

customers. 

 

This company is demonstrating the innovation . . . 

Saskatchewan companies have much to offer in this global 

market-place. This kind of initiative is responsible for the 

economic turnaround we're experiencing right now in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. Prairie Malt buys its raw barley from its 

local producers, employs 70 people full time, and has a total 

payroll of more than $2 million a year. 

 

It's partnerships like this one that is a key to our economic 

renewal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Jack Wolfe 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 

we'll all have an opportunity to express our thoughts during 

motions of condolence later this session, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

rise to inform the Assembly that today marks the passing of a 

friend and a colleague of this Assembly, Mr. Jack Wolfe. Later 

this afternoon in Rockglen members will say farewell to the 

former member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and for that 

reason, Mr. Speaker, our numbers on this side of the House will 

be minimal. 



February 7, 1995 

 

9 

I just want to add that for those who really want to know who 

Jack Wolfe was and what he represented, I encourage them to 

read today's column in the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix. 

Dale Eisler's tribute was an accurate reflection of Jack's honesty 

and integrity and a moving account of the tribulations of public 

life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack will be missed by all who knew him and we 

look forward to the comments of all members of the Assembly 

during condolence motions. 

 

Prince Albert Curling Champions 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the city of Prince Albert can 

once again boast about having two provincial champions in 

curling. Last month Glenn Pryor and his rink won the 

Saskatchewan senior men's championship then placed second in 

the nationals. His rink consists of Gordon Widger, Ed Fusick, 

and Stan Toporowski. 

 

More recently, Sherry Anderson's foursome captured its second 

straight Saskatchewan women's curling championship in 

Regina. I know Prince Albertans are very proud of skip Sherry 

Anderson, lead Elaine McCloy, second Donna Gignac, and 

third Kay Montgomery. They came from the "B" event to win 

the provincial crown, and in doing so, this foursome displayed 

the tenacity that it takes to be a champion. 

 

Last year Sherry Anderson's team finished a respectable third at 

the national championships. These Prince Albert curlers will be 

a force to be reckoned with at the national championship again 

this year as the rink competes at the Scott Tournament of 

Hearts, the national event in Calgary Feb. 18 to 26. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to recognize in this legislature the 

curling skills demonstrated by these two Prince Albert teams: 

Glen Pryor, the senior provincial champion; and Sherry 

Anderson, the women's provincial champions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

White Cane Week 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The week of 

February 5 to 11 is White Cane Week, the week sponsored by 

the Canadian National Institute for the Blind to publicize the 

services available to the blind and visually impaired, and to 

remind us all of the need for those services. 

 

The Saskatchewan division of the CNIB (Canadian National 

Institute for the Blind) has over 4,000 clients, Mr. Speaker — 

74 per cent are seniors; 263 are children. With only 20 per cent 

of its funding from governments, the 33 staff members provide 

a wide range of services across the province. These include 

counselling and referral, orientation and mobility training, 

career development, and employment services. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, the CNIB gives awareness and information workshops 

and a number of other services to complement individual 

attention. We recognize these services for this one week. They  

take place daily, every year, every week of the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this afternoon in Regina and tomorrow in 

Saskatoon, there will be open houses to officially launch 

technical aids demonstration centres. These centres will provide 

information and access to technical aids which will increase 

independence in daily living and daily activities. These aids 

include new computer and software technology, reading 

scanners, and voice synthesizers. Mr. Bob Waugh, national 

chairperson, will attend both openings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe we all owe our thanks and our 

admiration to the work of the CNIB. We wish it and its clients a 

successful week. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I direct 

my questions today to the Premier of the province. Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier's throne speech once again refers to the myth that 

his administration has created 12,000 new jobs in 1994. It 

appears that, like an addicted gambler, the Premier refuses to 

admit that he has a problem and refuses to see the truth because 

the truth hurts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, StatsCanada has recently shown that 

Saskatchewan has lost nearly a thousand jobs last year — the 

only province in Canada to do that. The throne speech has not 

. . . has been made partisan by the government opposite and 

now it's also been made inaccurate by the government. 

 

My question to the Premier is simply this: will you begin this 

session of the legislature by admitting that you have a problem; 

that the great Saskatchewan comeback refers to the fact that 

Saskatchewan people want to see their jobs come back from 

Alberta? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to be 

back in the House again for the opening of the session and the 

beginning of a new session with question period. And I do want 

to respond to the Leader of the Opposition as it would relate to 

jobs and job creation in the province. 

 

I think the member should be very clear in his approach to job 

creation. And he knows very clearly that jobs are being created 

in the province by the thousand — not by government. Because 

if you look at the same StatsCanada numbers you'll find that 

when it comes to the number of people employed in 

government, we are not creating a lot of jobs. And I'll readily 

admit that. If he expects the government to go out and hire a lot 

more people, that simply isn't possible with the mountain of 

debt that was left by that very administration when they sat on 

the government benches. 



February 7, 1995 

 

10 

But when it comes to small business creating jobs, I think the 

president of the Saskatchewan chamber made it clear in her 

year-end comments that governments should facilitate job 

creation, but business will create jobs. And they're doing it in 

Saskatchewan by the thousand. 

 

I need only remind the Leader of the Opposition that Bourgault, 

for example their expansion, creating 400 new jobs in the small 

town in Saskatchewan, where Mr. Bourgault many years ago 

started the plant, this year, 1994, and the previous year, created 

400 new jobs. 

 

In the Swift Current area . . . I met with the employment centre 

people in Swift Current a few weeks ago where they said: 

urgent need for workers in the south-west part of the province 

in the oil fields. Many hundreds if not thousands of young 

people coming back to that area from Alberta, where they went 

when you were in government, to get jobs in Saskatchewan in 

the private sector. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my questions 

once again to the Premier of the province. Mr. Speaker, it's the 

Premier's inability to recognize a problem and subsequent 

failure to address the problem, correcting this loss-of-job 

situation in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the Leader-Post, University of Saskatchewan economics 

professor Eric Howe placed the blame for poor job growth 

squarely on the provincial government. He said that higher 

taxes and higher utility rates implemented by the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government weakened job growth. 

 

Mr. Premier, the province of Alberta is balancing its budget by 

reducing government rather than increasing taxes and utility 

rates. Ralph Klein's government is the envy of this country. In 

the midst of these cuts his administration has generated a 3 per 

cent increase in jobs in Alberta  an increase in jobs even with 

massive downsizing in government. 

 

Mr. Premier, isn't it time to swallow your pride and look to 

Premier Klein for guidance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the 

members opposite have visions of grandeur from the good old 

days of Conservative governments here in Saskatchewan. The 

sad part is — maybe not so sad — but the public of 

Saskatchewan have caught on to that myth; not that you can cut 

government but you can do away with it, which is what Ralph 

Klein is talking about doing. Eliminate government. 

 

Some would argue with you that government does have some 

responsibility, for example in helping parents with day care, 

which Mr. Klein has no commitment, no compunction to help 

out families in the province of Alberta. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that there have been many, 

many stories written — not only in Saskatchewan but in  

Alberta as well — about the comparison between Saskatchewan 

and Alberta. And I have here a Lethbridge Herald, November 

23, 1994, an editorial which says "no splashy award for the 

Romanow approach". But it goes on to say that the approach 

contrasts strongly with the Klein government's use of deficit 

reduction program to hide behind its real agenda which is to 

dismantle government. That's the issue. 

 

And the members opposite, the member from Maple Creek 

nods his head because he knows that's what they are talking 

about. And they tried in the 1980s. Privatize SaskEnergy. 

Privatize SaskPower. I say it was rejected . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, it's 

interesting that your minister likes to take shots at Premier 

Klein here in Saskatchewan. I understand that you also called 

Klein a slash-and-burn Premier while you were at a recent NDP 

convention in Ontario. 

 

But funny, Mr. Premier, that's not what Premier Klein says 

when you're talking to him away from the cameras. In fact, in a 

speech delivered in Toronto, this is what Premier Klein had to 

say about you. And I quote from Mr. Klein: Roy was asking me 

how Saskatchewan could share in our prosperity and how we 

could do things together. And what's more, I'm really not NDP, 

you know. 

 

That's what you told him. It's amazing . . . Mr. Klein went on to 

say: it's amazing what they get away with when they're away 

from home, Klein concluded. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you're not, if you're not really NDP, then how 

about reducing government instead of spending more on 

everything from arts grants, to 90th birthday celebrations, to 

your own million-dollar pension. Will you do that, Mr. 

Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, while I'm very pleased 

to agree with the member opposite that Mr. Klein is not a New 

Democrat — that we totally agree with — I want to say to the 

Leader of the Opposition though, that when it comes to the style 

of government, there is a difference between what's going on in 

Saskatchewan and what's going in Alberta. We'll readily admit 

that. 

 

What we are doing in Saskatchewan is something that is very, 

very much more humane. When you look at the health care 

reform, when you look at job creation strategy, when you look 

at the fundamental changes that are going on within municipal 

government, within education, you'll find that it is being done 

as a partnership  a partnership of the people of the 

community working with their government to make 

fundamental change. 

 

That's very different than the top-down approach taken from  



February 7, 1995 

 

11 

Edmonton with Mr. Klein dictating to the public what economic 

development, what changes should take place, and I say the 

people of Saskatchewan will agree with the approach that the 

Saskatchewan government and the Romanow government is 

taking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the 

Leader of the New Democratic Party tells the Premier of 

Alberta that — and I quote again — that I'm really not NDP, 

you know, you really have to wonder about an identity crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the Premier, the leader of 

. . . what party is that again . . . No, not the NDP, I understand. 

 

Mr. Premier, at a time when jobs are a priority for 

Saskatchewan people, your solution is to spend more taxpayers' 

money on gimmicky programs like JobStart and Future Skills. 

These programs sound more like you planned some kind of 

Sega game rather than anything meaningful to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have made bold predictions before and I'm 

wondering if you could tell us how many more jobs are you 

going to create this year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

when you travel around the province speaking to business 

organizations and community groups, the optimism there is for 

example in that member’s own home riding of Kindersley; and 

we were recently up there for the announcement of an 

expansion of a small helicopter plant in his home town — a 

great deal of optimism. His mayor, who he knows very well, is 

very optimistic about the future of that community. 

 

If you go to Swift Current, what they talk about down there are 

all the jobs and the problem with getting enough workers in, in 

Spar industries. And the member from Morse will know that. 

Too many jobs being created and difficulty getting enough 

trained workers to fill those positions. 

 

And the government comes forward to facilitate training for 

young people to take those jobs, and the Leader of the 

Opposition mocks that. I don't quite understand where you're 

coming from. 

 

But the clear objective of the Leader of the Opposition is to 

preach gloom and doom about how bad it is out there. That is 

not what we're hearing. I spoke at the chamber of commerce in 

Weyburn last night. Mayor Brown was saying it's as good as it 

ever has been in the community of Weyburn for job creation. 

 

Now you can preach gloom and doom all you want, but you're 

going to have to convince a lot of people out there if you're 

going to have success on that line and I would urge you to 

become more positive. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you know 

very well that the job growth in Kindersley is not a result of 

anything you are doing at all, your government is doing, but it's 

in spite of what you are doing the job growth is happening in 

Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the Premier's Minister of Finance is NDP, 

and we know that. She believes in welfare economics. Just 

before the new year she said in a letter, and I quote: 

 

 While increased investment and job creation that result 

from an E&H tax rate reduction would translate into 

higher tax revenues that could offset the provincial 

revenue loss associated with the E&H tax reduction, 

federal equalization payments would be reduced, leaving 

the province worse off fiscally. 

 

Now that's typical NDP policy, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier. 

Mr. Premier, now that you are not a member of the NDP any 

longer, will you admonish the Finance minister and instruct her 

that Saskatchewan people want tax relief and economic 

development rather than a hand-out from the federal 

government. Or do you believe in that same kind of welfare 

mentality in economics? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I'd be 

pleased to answer that question. As I've explained before, that 

particular quote was taken quite out of context and does not 

accurately reflect the situation. 

 

But I do want to deal with the members opposite with respect to 

taxes. We laid out before the people of this province a plan to 

balance the budget. One part of the strategy was to grow the 

economy. We have achieved that. Retail sales in this province 

are the highest in all of the Prairies and the highest since 1981. 

 

The other part of the plan was to make cuts and, yes, to increase 

taxes. Both the opposition parties are running around the 

province saying, oh trust us; we would have balanced the books 

and we wouldn't have increased taxes. Don't trust them; make 

them show you. 

 

How would they have balanced the books of this province 

without increasing taxes? How would they have gone from a 

deficit of $842 million to zero as we have done and not 

increased taxes? We have to be accountable. So do they. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Expansion 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's good 

to be back here again. Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct my 

questions to the new minister of gambling. And quite frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to give my personal congratulations  



February 7, 1995 

 

12 

to the new minister, one of many over the last few years; and 

that perhaps condolences might be more in order, Madam 

Minister. 

 

However I think, Mr. Speaker, we recognize a bit of irony here. 

We have finally heard the Premier admit that really he is not 

NDP. We have also noted that he supports job creation and at 

the same time is morally opposed to gambling, Mr. Speaker. So 

what do we get as a result? We get expanded gambling and no 

job creation. 

 

So with that in view, Madam Minister, I would want to give you 

an opportunity to address the people of Saskatchewan by giving 

us your personal views on the gambling expansion. Do you 

personally believe we should have government-run VLTs 

(video lottery terminal) and casinos in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

thank the member from Rosthern for his question, and start out 

by saying that I don't think any of the decisions around gaming 

had to do whether anybody personally prefers gaming or not. 

 

There was a condition existing in the province which I might 

compare to some of the trade agreements, where a recognition 

occurred in the business community that Saskatchewan is not 

an island. We're surrounded on three sides by provinces that 

have gaming options for their people in the tourism industry 

and in the hotel business. It was these people who came to the 

government and said that they couldn't compete as people in 

tourism and people in the hotel business unless they had a level 

playing-field with people in the other provinces. 

 

Now I might want to remind the hon. member opposite that 

under the Tories bingo revenues increased from 4 million in '82 

to 100 million in '91. And I'm not sure why that wasn't of some 

concern to him if he's really concerned about people's personal 

positions on the gaming issue. 

 

And I would just like to reiterate that, having spent some eight 

months in a democratic caucus where this issue was discussed 

at length, that I feel that the positions that we've taken on 

gaming are the ones that have to be taken for a practical 

situation on gaming. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I 

believe that you're the fifth NDP minister of gambling over 

three years. And I repeat that for your benefit — I believe you're 

the fifth NDP gambling minister now in three years. In fact your 

government changes gambling ministers almost as often as the 

Liberals change press secretaries. 

 

But I'd like to give every new minister the benefit of the doubt. 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 

Mr. Neudorf: — I must stay on track. 

 

Madam Minister, you're fifth gambling minister. Now I'd like to 

give you the benefit of the doubt, and assuming now that you 

have been appointed as the new minister because you are 

supposed to set this gambling direction of your government on 

track, assuming that, I believe then, Madam Minister, that you 

will have learned from your predecessors and your Premier's 

past mistakes; that you are now heading in the right direction. 

 

This is an opportunity for you to set the gambling direction 

properly in this province, and that is by referring to the people 

of this province who say they want a say in the direction that 

you're taking. In other words, Madam Minister, are you 

prepared to get up now and commit to holding a referendum in 

this province on your gambling direction? Are you prepared to 

hold a referendum in conjunction with the next election, so that 

indeed you have the mandate from the people of this province 

who so far have had no say in this direction? Would you make 

that commitment, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member opposite 

for his question. I, unlike the member opposite, don't believe in 

government by referendum. I believe that there are 

circumstances that exist that governments have to deal with, 

and I don't think that a referendum would change the reasons 

why, in 1969, gaming began in this province, and gaming 

products have been added continuously over that time period, 

including bingos, break-opens, raffles, horse-racing. It has been 

a continuous movement of various gaming products as that 

particular industry has developed. 

 

So a moratorium is not going to change any of that. That 

circumstance will still exist. And a moratorium or a referendum 

is not going to change the fact that there's gaming on three sides 

of us. You still have to deal with the issue of revenue drain 

from the province and you still have to deal with the issue that 

customers are making a statement about where they spend their 

dollars. There would not be these dollars if people weren't 

making some of those choices. 

 

I think that we have taken a measured approach. We've certainly 

looked at it every step of the way. And for myself in looking at 

this issue, the kind of things I used to evaluate our position is 

whether what we were doing was fair; whether we were 

regulating gaming in a responsible way in terms of crime and 

other issues; whether we were sharing community benefit in a 

way that would benefit the majority of people with these dollars 

rather than putting those dollars in specific pockets here or 

there — the principle of revenue sharing. And those are the 

principles that I've looked to in development of this policy. And 

I don't think that a referendum would change that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — In your evaluation, Madam Minister, why 

don't you ask yourself the fundamental question: what do  



February 7, 1995 

 

13 

people want? What do people want? You have never answered 

that. Because you've been involved in a shameless bidding war, 

Madam Minister, in which your government is attempting to 

buy support for your gambling . . . for your gambling policies 

by outdoing and by increasing the gambling take. 

 

And even worse, the Liberal leader has been trying to raise the 

stakes by promising to give away more than what you're 

prepared to give away. So your government and the Liberals are 

acting like two addicted gamblers in a high-stakes poker game. 

And do you know what, Madam Minister, and Mr. Premier? 

You're not even using your own money in that game. 

 

We, as our party, do not believe in that, Madam Minister. We 

believe that you should be deciding . . . you should start 

deciding who gets how much revenue. Before you do that, 

you've got to answer that fundamental question. And here it is, 

Mr. Speaker. And here it is: do Saskatchewan people want 

expanded gambling? 

 

Why don't you have the courage to get that question answered 

once and for all by having a province-wide vote so the people 

can have a say, Madam Minister? Will you commit to that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

thank the member from Rosthern for his question. It is a very 

emotional issue. We're concerned about the impacts of gaming; 

obviously you're concerned. But the fact is that 86 per cent of 

the people in this province gamble. And there may be people 

who think that one form of gambling is better than another form 

of gambling. Some might think horse-racing is a little better; 

some might think break-opens are a little better; some might 

prefer VLTs; and there's some who prefer casinos. 

 

But the fact is that 86 per cent of people participate in some 

form of gaming. And I think it's a mixed feeling because they're 

feeling bad about the fact that there's some side-effects; at the 

same time that it's something that they obviously are 

participating in and want to engage in. 

 

And again I would have to say that I do find this a bit confusing 

in the sense that if you really felt this way, why did you make 

the changes you made to bingo which changed it from a little 

church kind of basement activity to a major industry in the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Statistics Canada 

numbers, Mr. Speaker, released last week show that 

Saskatchewan ranked dead last in the country in terms of job 

creation in 1994. That's the 10th out of 10 provinces in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to Sask Trends Monitor, the number of 

employers has decreased every single year since this  

government was elected. NDP policies and taxes have made it 

so tough for business to be competitive that this province has 

lost 1,331 Saskatchewan employers. These businesses used to 

issue pay cheques to real people. 

 

To the Premier: how can this government claim to be creating 

jobs when you're actually exporting or destroying the job 

creators? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this may appear to be 

a bit repetitious because these questions in a different format 

were really put by the Leader of the Opposition. I might say, 

maybe more succinctly by the Leader of the Opposition. But at 

any rate I will try to give a response that will satisfy the Leader 

of the Liberal Party. 

 

But I say again that the gloom and doom that you are spreading 

across the province wherever you go, and I've talked to people 

who have attended your meetings, but they say that you are like 

a dark cloud floating around the province trying to dampen the 

optimism that exists almost in every community in the province. 

 

"Saskatoon on a roll" is the headline from the Star-Phoenix, and 

it says, the mayor paints a rosy picture of the province's 

economic engine. That's the mayor of the largest community in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And when you roll into town, 

you would have them believe and you preach to the business 

people, how terrible it is. Now why is that? What is the purpose 

of you wanting it to be so terrible and so bad in the province. 

 

Well everyone knows what you're up to; it's politics — old 

style, Liberal politics — to try to get yourself elected. 

 

Saskatchewan-Mexico deal opens doors for businesses  

literally hundreds of calls from businesses who want to go to 

Mexico to invest, to make money, to create jobs in 

Saskatchewan as a result of that investment. Upswing in 

Estevan, boom in agricultural and natural resources; the media 

is full of it until Lynda rolls into town. And then on the eighth 

page, there's usually a little clip, Leader of the Liberal Party in 

town saying how terrible the economy is. It ain't working. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That's l,331 

Saskatchewan employers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Since the 1992 budget, this government supposedly set out in 

pursuit of jobs. The Department of Economic Development has 

spent a cumulative total of $112.201 million of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers' money. This department has on average 215 people 

per year dedicated to the priority of jobs in the economy. 

 

Once again, my question is directed to the Premier. Is that value 

for money, Mr. Premier? Can you table for us today a list of 

every company you've attracted to Saskatchewan and all of the 

jobs that this investment has produced since 1992? What did 

our taxpayers actually get for their money, sir? 



February 7, 1995 

 

14 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

Leader of the Liberal Party that she had promised me a project a 

week that she was going to bring to me, and I'm still waiting. I 

haven't had one project yet, but I'm still waiting. I sit in my 

office from morning to night, waiting for her to bring those 

projects  not one, not one yet. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Party 

rolls around the province, gloom and doom, in her limousine, in 

her limousine, with her senator, out there trying to create 

bedlam, trying to preach gloom and doom. And for what 

purpose? To elect more Liberals, not to create an economy, not 

to deal with the issue of job creation; because if she were 

reading in the press, especially at the local level, she would find 

that thousands of jobs are being created, not by the government 

as she believes has to be, but by private sector businesses, many 

of them based in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now she's jumping to the conclusion that what you have to do 

is follow the 1980s Tory line that you have to attract people 

from all over the world and buy them to come to our province. 

That's not how this economy has ever developed. It's companies 

like Flexi-Coil, Bourgault, doing their own thing right here in 

the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, the point of order that I want to 

raise is one of the accuracy of transcripts in this House. And I 

refer specifically to the Hansard as it is printed from yesterday. 

And Hansard on the introduction part of the throne speech 

indicated this, and I will just quote: 

 

 . . . but of an expanding local business sector and job 

growth; 

 

That is what the Lieutenant Governor is purported to have said. 

And if you take a look at the throne speech that we received 

prior, it says: 

 

 . . . but of an expanding local business sector and job 

growth. 

 

So it would appear then that the two are similar. However, I 

was sitting here very carefully during the presentation of this 

throne speech and following in my copy. And the Lieutenant 

Governor did not say, job growth. It was not read into the 

record. However, when I take a look at my transcript of 

Hansard, it is indicating job growth. 

 

My office contacted Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and the response  

that we got from them was that because it was tabled and 

because it was on a prepared manuscript, they — and I want 

you to listen to this, Mr. Speaker — they stated that it was their 

judgement call that he had meant to say job growth. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that if Hansard is supposed 

to be an accurate reflection of what was actually said in this 

Assembly and not what should have been said, then I think we 

are on dangerous grounds, Mr. Speaker, and I would say that it 

then becomes open to interpretation. 

 

My point is simply this, Mr. Speaker. I would like you to look 

into that and see what Hansard is supposed to do — accurate 

reflection or what should have been said. Thank you. 

 

(1045) 

 

The Speaker: — I think the member makes a valid point. And I 

have not seen Hansard. I will certainly look into it and if an 

error has been made, a correction will be made. 

 

I think I listened very intently to the member and I wish the 

member would just give me a few minutes to . . . or a few 

moments to say that I will look into it. If an error has been 

made, correction will be made. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on the issue that's 

being dealt with here, I think there's a motion moved as a 

standard procedure that would make the writing of the speech 

in Hansard in the appropriate format. And I don't know what 

the concern of the member opposite is, and I don't think there is 

a point of order here because I think it's already dealt with in the 

motion we moved, seconded, voted on. That member opposite 

voted for the motion when it was carried in the House 

yesterday. 

 

The Speaker: — I respect the member's comments. As I 

indicated before, I will check with Hansard. If an error has 

been made, a correction will be made. 

 

Order, order. Order. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of the By-laws of the Professional Associations and 

Amendments to the Standing Committee on Regulations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day, I have several routine motions I would like to move. The 

first motion, moved by myself and seconded by the member for 

Churchill Downs, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the by-laws of the professional associations 

amendments and thereto be referred as tabled to the 

Special Committee on Regulations. 

 

I so move. 



February 7, 1995 

 

15 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, 

seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the retention and disposal schedules approved 

under The Archives Act by the Public Documents 

Committee be referred as tabled to the Standing 

Committee on Communication. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Annual Report to the Standing Committee on 

Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, finally I move, 

seconded by the member for The Battlefords, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library 

be referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to move 

the motion in support of the throne speech, the fifth throne 

speech of this government. I am honoured to follow in the 

eloquent paths of the members from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, 

Meadow Lake, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and Regina Lake 

Centre. My colleagues set high standards of eloquence, and I 

hope today to approach their excellence. 

 

But I am fortunate because rich material makes for good 

speeches, and this throne speech, like the previous four, is rich 

in substance, bold in promise, and sure in delivery. It gives a 

message of security, hope, and opportunity. It is easy to speak 

to its message because, simply, this throne speech proclaims 

that our long climb out of the Tory dungeons of debt, disarray,  

disaster, and despair is at last completed. 

 

It announces that we can now continue our ascent towards the 

compassionate, fair, prosperous, and tolerant society that has 

been the destination of every CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation)-NDP government since 1944. That 

journey has never stopped; it's just been put off course for a 

while. The backpack of debt left us still slows our step, but 

finally as we promised when we resumed the journey, the 

weight is not increasing with each step. In short, the first 

balanced budget in 15 years is but one announcement in this 

speech I am happy to endorse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Before I continue, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

how pleased I am to see you once again in your proper place, 

directing our business with your customary sternness and 

fairness. As a former teacher, I appreciate your role in keeping a 

well-run, fair classroom . . . no, I mean Assembly, with a sense 

of justice and decorum but always with democracy as your 

foundation. 

 

I also want to congratulate the member from Kindersley on his 

recent election to the leadership of his party. It does take a 

dedicated, hard-working, healthy individual to take over the 

leadership of any organization, especially when it's in  let me 

say  maybe its ebb in its history. I and all the members do 

wish you well, but of course not too well. My only question I 

suppose is, why would any young person with most of his life 

before him choose to lead a party so committed to the past? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, and all members, were surprised and saddened 

last week to hear the announcements of the members from 

Regina Hillsdale and Swift Current. Excellence in any 

endeavour is rare, and I have no hesitation in saying both met 

the test. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — I'm sure other times and other places we will 

take at length to talk about them. Now I simply want to say to 

both, well done; we will miss you. 

 

I wonder though if anyone else was as surprised as I was at the 

total lack of grace in the response of both opposition speakers. 

All I can say is that the minister from Greystone . . . or the 

member from Greystone, with the fastest revolving door in the 

province, is the last person that should be commenting on 

anyone's resignation. 

 

When I was asked to move the throne speech, I was actually out 

in my constituency. Ironically my constituents do not get the 

legislative channel, so my first thought was that here was an 

honour my constituents could not share immediately with me. 

But as I reflected I realized that this truly is an honour, an 

honour that is shared by the people of Bengough-Milestone 

because their representative has the privilege of speaking to 

their concerns, their plans, and their successes. And as the  



February 7, 1995 

 

16 

member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster said two years ago, we 

will represent our constituencies, but we are also servants of all 

the people of Saskatchewan. I am speaking to them through the 

perspective of Bengough-Milestone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past three years, I have put more than a few 

kilometres on my car travelling my constituency and meeting 

with the people. One of the fundamental reasons I became an 

MLA was to strengthen the ties between government and the 

people, to bring government closer to the people. I am proud to 

say that this throne speech, like the previous ones, supports a 

government that is achieving economic and social justice 

through the power of community and cooperation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Cooperation, community, and consensus 

building are essential elements in bringing government closer to 

the people. I am proud to represent the constituency of 

Bengough-Milestone, a constituency where farming, 

entrepreneurship, oil, small business are all integral parts of the 

economy. I represent people who are hard-working, creative, 

adaptable and resilient, people who believe in community and 

cooperation. 

 

As the MLA for this area I've taken seriously my role in 

communicating the wishes of the people to government and in 

turn communicating to them the initiatives of government 

through numerous accountability meetings, meetings with 

school boards and health boards, meetings with local 

governments. I am also pleased that the Premier and several 

cabinet ministers have attended some of these meetings with 

me. 

 

I look forward with equal pleasure to meeting the people of the 

new constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy  many of the same 

people and much the same economy. They share the same sense 

of pride, fairness, community spirit and cooperation that define 

all Saskatchewan and make up much of its rich heritage. 

 

We have a remarkably varied province which far exceeds the 

standard guidebook impressions of Saskatchewan, and it would 

be good for all of us, I think, to experience this variety 

firsthand. My constituency is rich in its people, in its agriculture 

base, in its natural resources, and in its share of our province's 

history. 

 

We have the Big Muddy badlands, once the temporary home of 

Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, but more recently the site 

of the re-enactment of the boundary commission mounted 

police trail ride of 1872 to '76. Mr. Speaker, this exciting tourist 

attraction recalls one of the most significant and least-known 

events in western Canadian history, significant for what it 

accomplished and for how it marked our character. 

 

The boundary commission was charged with defining the 

border between the new country of Canada and its southern 

neighbour. The members of this commission went about their 

business in the unchartered prairie wilderness in a professional  

and quiet manner. They created what the original inhabitants of 

the prairies  the Cree and Assiniboia and other tribes  

called the medicine line, so called because south of the line, 

marked by the stones left by the commission, was violence; 

north was the law and peaceable order of the Crown. 

 

The commission withstood blizzards, mosquitoes, black flies, 

bad water, and the feeling of being lost in a sea of grass, but 

they persevered and finished their work. They were quiet, 

unassuming, unheralded and thorough. And they defined our 

nation for us, the line that separates us from the more 

flamboyant, more individualistic, more violent society to the 

south. 

 

I am proud that my province honours this event in our history. 

And I think it's not too big a leap of the imagination to suggest 

that today we are continuing in the spirit of the boundary 

commission and in the tradition of the first Mounties in the 

West who made their mark by doing a job, a job with a plan and 

a purpose. The achievements of this government in its first 

three years have been solid, necessary, and trail-blazing. 

 

As the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd said two years ago, we 

have acted in a spirit of inclusion for all our citizens. 

 

As the member from Regina Lake Centre said last year, we have 

treated government as a tool . . . Excuse me. We have treated 

wisely and judiciously the authority of government in the 

assumption that government is the instrument of the people, not 

their enemy. 

 

We have worked side by side with the people of Saskatchewan 

to bring about the great comeback of our province. All citizens 

have been a part of the process of rebuilding. All equally 

deserve to share in the celebration of our accomplishment. 

Saskatchewan is on the move again. It is our year to celebrate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, the past four throne speeches 

and budgets have of necessity been about fixing the mess, about 

restoring the infrastructure and foundation of our province. The 

throne speech is about building, building on that firm 

foundation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about how we are building with all 

our resources. I want to talk about how we have returned our 

province to the people of Saskatchewan from whom it had 

previously been mortgaged. I want to talk about how we have 

combined responsible fiscal planning with progressive 

adjustments to our social foundation. I want to talk about youth 

and their opportunity in our province. 

 

(1100) 

 

In particular, I want to talk about the way we have been guided 

by those old Saskatchewan principles: community, compassion, 

cooperation, economic and social justice. These are still our 

guide words, the words on which this province was built. 



February 7, 1995 

 

17 

Mr. Speaker, His Honour referred in his speech to 

Saskatchewan's comeback. That comeback is in every sector of 

our economy. Things are on the move, and there's optimism in 

the air not felt for years. The indicators are everywhere, and we 

will all enjoy hearing the Leader of the Opposition and the 

Leader of the Third Party tell us how the numbers don't say 

what they do so plainly say. 

 

Our population has grown steadily every quarter since October 

1992. Twelve thousand more people are working in 

Saskatchewan than a year ago; our unemployment rate is 

consistently the lowest in Canada. Retail trade is up. Exports 

are up. Manufacturing shipments are up. Oil production hit a 

new provincial record of 94 million barrels in 1993, and that 

has been exceeded in 1994. 

 

It is a mini-boom, and in my area of the province, as across the 

province, it relates to more jobs and economic activity. 

Uranium sales are up. Potash production and sales are up. And 

just last week, Canada Housing released its yearly survey which 

stated that housing starts in Saskatchewan increased by nearly 

12 per cent in 1994. In the fourth quarter alone, starts in both 

urban and rural Saskatchewan increased by 73 per cent over 

1993. And CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation) says it expects the same impressive growth in 

1995 — more optimism. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, new houses are built for young people — 

that goes without saying — new houses for young people with 

new jobs. In every area of the province, every MLA here, I'm 

sure, can relate many more success stories. I'm only going to 

briefly describe one success story in my constituency: TWC, an 

investment firm, a financial firm, with its head office in western 

Canada, right here in Radville, Saskatchewan. It has expanded 

twice in the last few years. It employs over 40 employees, and it 

is one of the fastest growing firms in western Canada. Its 

success is partly due to the advance communication technology 

that can be offered through SaskTel. 

 

And that leads me to another area of excellence: 

telecommunications, with SaskTel leading the way. We are in 

the passing lane on the information highway. 

 

What rural electrification was to Saskatchewan in the 1950s, 

communications technology is to the society of today and 

tomorrow. The SaskTel announcement about making Internet 

accessible across Saskatchewan is vital to our economy. It's 

important in keeping small business alive and viable, whether it 

be in rural or urban Saskatchewan. And like the fishermen on 

the new ads on television, we are all looking forward to surfing 

the net. All of this is good news. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no doubt the Leader of the Opposition will say 

that all this very good news for Saskatchewan people is just 

good luck, that we just happened to be around when the 

markets changed. We would never deny that behind every 

successful plan is a pinch of luck. But I can remind the 

opposition of a comment by the 18th century historian, Edward  

Gibbon: "The winds and the waves are always on the side of the 

ablest navigator." 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — We were lucky the sun rose and set but all of 

the people of Saskatchewan worked and planned and sacrificed 

so that opportunity could be seized when it presented itself. 

That is the difference between this government and the previous 

one. We use the plan. It's called Partnership for Renewal and 

it's obviously . . . it's working. 

 

We have changed Saskatchewan's economic development 

strategy from one geared to megaprojects to a strategy that puts 

local businesses, cooperatives and communities first. It is set 

out in our Partnership for Renewal paper. We are facilitating 

economic development. The thrust of our jobs policy is to build 

on our natural strengths  agriculture, forestry, mining, 

communications, tourism, and people  in such a way that our 

economic community is home-grown, with deep roots; 

independent and yet globally competitive. 

 

We are bringing communities together in economic 

development authorities using our principles of cooperation and 

community to identify and pursue opportunities. It is a 

comprehensive strategy of training, education and economic 

planning. 

 

And I am pleased to see continued funding for the continuation 

of forming REDAs in the throne speech. I know the success of 

many of these authorities are exciting. And I know and I 

encourage the formation of a REDA in my area of the province 

as many of the communities are presently working on it. 

 

Another partnership I just briefly want to acknowledge is in the 

establishment and operation of the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Authority. There are many emerging opportunities such as the 

T-Rex fossil discovery, the eco-tourism value of the Big 

Muddy, historic sites like the Claybank brick factory, only to 

mention a few in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a relief to be able to also comment on good 

news in agriculture. Our farmers have travelled a rough road 

these past few years and deserve some good fortune. I hesitate 

to say much more than that for fear of changing their luck, 

except of course we are dealing with far more than luck here. 

Certainly the markets have changed for the better but our 

farmers have been primed and ready to meet those changes. 

 

Our Ag 2000 policy seeks to further diversification and value-

added food processing and biotechnology. And the new, whole-

farm safety net program allows for diversification without 

penalty while offering an affordable level of risk protection. 

Diversification is the key to agricultural health and we are 

seeing diversification in spades. Saskatchewan farmers have 

increased production of canola, flax, and other specialty crops 

by 119 per cent in the past four years. And it is paying off. 

 



February 7, 1995 

 

18 

As well, livestock operations are diversifying. For 1994 

Saskatchewan farm market receipts will reach a promised 4.3 

. . . projected 4.43 billion, a half billion more than last year. 

That is good news. 

 

This government supports our farmers, and supports them in 

practical ways, ways which encourage and support their moves 

to take advantage of the changing market-place. The Agri-Food 

Innovation Fund Act announced in the throne speech 

encourages partnerships of government, private sector, and 

producers in developing diversification projects, while the 

agriculture operations Act helps to diversify our livestock 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not called next-year country for 

nothing. And as I said, although things are turning around, no 

one is home free yet. And as His Honour said, the federal 

Liberal government appears to be determined to counter the 

progress our farmers have made. The elimination of the Crow 

benefit will wipe out all the gains that our farmers have 

realized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is still one area I wish to touch on in 

agriculture. This is the exciting expansion of the biotechnology 

sector in our province. We have the fastest growing biotech 

industry in Canada, with almost one-third of Canada's ag 

biotech firms. And the number of firms operating in 

Saskatchewan has grown by 300 per cent in the past three years, 

far ahead of the other provinces. 

 

It is also interesting to note that all of our agriculture graduates 

from the University of Saskatchewan last year have found jobs, 

with the greatest majority of those jobs being right here in 

Saskatchewan. We are becoming leaders in agriculture research 

and development and this again translates into jobs for our 

students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday after the throne speech 

we were privileged to listen to a youth choir from Balgonie 

school. Other young people assisted in making the festivities 

surrounding the legislature opening a success. It was good to 

have them right here in the building, to remind us of why we 

are here in the first place. And because all MLAs want the best 

for our children, we should all be happy that the throne speech 

emphasized the government's commitment to education and 

training. JobStart and Future Skills are both programs which 

will match young people with new jobs. 

 

I am also very pleased to see the expansion of distance 

education. This initiative is vital to keeping our education 

affordable and accessible right across our province. These 

initiatives — JobStart, Future Skills, distance education — will 

ensure our young people have the opportunity to live, work, and 

build their futures here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been no greater initiative in our term 

than our health care renewal, wellness. Wellness is a renewal in  

health care, and as was aptly stated in the throne speech, as the 

world watches, Saskatchewan has secured the future of 

medicare and is providing new services that will keep people 

healthy longer. 

 

There is little dispute, except from the opposition perhaps, that 

changes to the health care system were absolutely essential. 

Other provinces and other countries are looking at making 

changes as well. Many other areas are looking at Saskatchewan 

as the model on how to handle reform. Many of those areas will 

have an easier time of it in some ways because they can learn 

from us. 

 

Our government has had the courage to take the route of 

greatest political risk. We have taken action to make changes. 

As bumpy as the journey has been, at least there has been 

movement forward. We did not take the cowardly approach and 

do nothing. To make no changes at all would have spelled the 

end of public health care. 

 

Our government has forged ahead with important changes to 

health care. I am pleased and proud to be part of these changes 

because I do believe that over the course of history the changes 

that we are now making will be seen to be just as significant as 

the changes that were made when medicare was first introduced 

in 1962. 

 

And we made these changes the Saskatchewan way, not the 

Liberal way as seen in the Maritimes by imposing districts on 

communities — remember, imposed from the government 

down — and not the Conservative way as in Alberta by massive 

cuts and privatization of health care whereby you move to the 

front of the line for treatment if you have enough money in your 

pocket. 

 

No, we did it the Saskatchewan way. We had communities and 

people working together across the province to form districts on 

their own. Many said it couldn't be done, but it was done, and 

we did it because Saskatchewan people are the kind of people 

who will cooperate and work together. 

 

Today health districts are into the second stage, developing and 

implementing the programs they need to build a healthier future 

— the actual wellness plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the people in this province 

who are sitting on the health district boards. They face many 

challenges in assessing the real health needs of our 

communities and being able to implement a delivery program to 

serve these needs. 

 

I have been very involved in health care reform in my area. The 

changes are not easy and have often been contentious. But 

change would never occur if we were afraid of mistakes. But 

importantly, we have learned from our mistakes and we have 

made adjustments, as we will continue to do. 

 

We now have a rational and a fair system in place to ensure that 

our residents have reasonable access. Health care is now being  



February 7, 1995 

 

19 

viewed in a holistic manner. The whole human environment 

must be tackled if we are to prevent illness and maintain 

wellness. 

 

(1115) 

 

Thirty health districts now empower Saskatchewan people, 

communities, and health professionals to come together to plan 

and deliver services which best meet their community needs. 

This is a dramatic reduction from the 400 governance boards 

which existed previously. This new system is integrated and 

efficient. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from listening to the opposition and our 

critics about health care renewal, I still keep hearing words like 

closures and lack of services, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

Well I have continued to talk about conversions and changes of 

services that better meet the needs of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know, as politicians, we often worry that we're not 

making ourselves understood or clear enough in our speeches, 

or at least the media seems to struggle with our messages. With 

something so new and radical as wellness, we all wondered 

from time to time if the implementation matched our rhetoric. I 

can honestly say that in the past few months in my constituency, 

I have seen enough evidence to convince me that what we are 

experiencing is indeed the second stage of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — A reality matching the words used to describe 

it, an increasing fact of people's lives. Like the Boundary 

Commission members, we are getting the job done. 

 

Wellness is becoming a reality in our communities. And let me 

take you just on a brief visit of health care renewal 1995 as I've 

witnessed it over the last few months. 

 

Health renewal is about community control. The South Central 

Health Board held four accountability meetings in Coronach, 

Ogema, Radville, and Weyburn. I attended three of those 

meetings and saw health renewal firsthand. The board 

explained its structure, budget, and decisions to the 

communities. They in turn responded with questions, concerns, 

and ideas. These were positive and constructive meetings, both 

board and community understanding each other and their 

reliance on each other. 

 

Health renewal is about my visit to a constituent in Ogema who 

had just returned from the cancer clinic in Regina. He told me 

how he had been a bit perturbed with us for putting up the 

deductible on the drug plan, but after his recent experiences, he 

now told me he understood. He said he could afford the 

increased deductible on his drug plan. But $25,000 for a bottle 

of medication for his blood he couldn't afford. And he had four 

of those bottles in his chemotherapy and that was only part of 

his treatment. He is thankful he lives in Saskatchewan and he 

knows he can trust us to preserve the system which provided  

his care and will provide similar care for his children and his 

grandchildren. 

 

Health renewal is about a pilot project funded by the Regina 

Health District in Milestone to be used by Carrington Court, the 

senior housing unit. This project will address health needs of 

seniors in my community. And the community is deciding in 

consultation how the funds can be best spent. 

 

Health renewal is my father having hip replacement surgery and 

being allowed to go home four days after the surgery, with a 

home care nurse coming to give an injection daily, saving seven 

days of hospital care. 

 

Health care renewal is youth being consulted about their needs 

in one-day workshops, and my son coming home to discuss 

health care problems that he thought only occurred in Toronto 

or Vancouver. 

 

Health care renewal is about establishing first responders in 

isolated communities. 

 

Health care renewal is about a new health care centre being 

built in Bengough and being integrated with the long-term care 

facility. It will offer emergency services, lab and X-ray 

facilities, a doctor's office, and visiting health professional 

offices, observation beds, and it was funded by the local 

community and the provincial government through 

infrastructure money. A local community advisory board 

worked closely with the district board and department to 

achieve a plan. They are still discussing phase 2 as there are still 

some needs they would like to address. 

 

Health care renewal is about an ad in the Radville Star 

advertising the dates that the mobile breast screening van will 

be in their community. 

 

Health care renewal is about a constituent graduating as an 

advanced clinical nurse from the first graduating class from 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology). She can now do diagnosis and treatment of minor 

illnesses and emergency intervention. 

 

Health care renewal is working in real, practical, down to earth, 

visionary ways, and it's occurring across this province. Health 

reform is exciting in its possibilities. Our government is very 

deliberately shifting the focus in health care. In the past, health 

care has been limited almost exclusively to hospitals and other 

institutions. Institutional care is important and necessary, but it's 

only part of the equation. With health reform we're able to 

explore a much broader definition of what health services 

should entail, and the possibilities are limited only by our 

creativeness. 

 

And looking to the future, I see improved emergency response 

for rural areas; health care centres both rural and urban 

providing a variety of services — chiropody, speech and 

language, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, preventative 

services, educational programs, crisis intervention, dental  



February 7, 1995 

 

20 

services. But the beauty of this reform is that these will be 

crafted to suit the needs of each individual community. 

 

The one last structural change that will be in place this year is to 

move to the election of district health board members. This will 

be another first for Saskatchewan, another area where the 

government has shown great courage and great leadership. Mr. 

Speaker, we have revamped health care to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people now and into the next century. And unlike 

Mr. one-way-ticket Klein, we have kept pace with the needs of 

those among us who are most in need of support. 

 

Just last week, for instance, The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Act came into force, an Act lauded by police, social workers, 

and victims alike. We have expanded the action plan for 

children in a number of ways — in nutrition programs, in child 

care expansion, by creating the Children's Advocate, and so on. 

We have much yet to do because no one can be happy as long 

as any child in Saskatchewan is hungry, but we have made 

progress. 

 

Fiscal responsibility does not have to mean casting the 

unfortunate out of sight. Living within our means does not have 

to deprive others of no means at all. We can worry at the same 

time about the debt and about our duty as human beings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the Saskatchewan way to do both; to pay our 

way and to make sure we all go along together. Others might 

attempt to restore their finances by penalizing the helpless, but 

that is simply not to be tolerated here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much has changed in Saskatchewan in the 120 

years since the members of the Boundary Commission made 

their historic and heroic trek across western Canada and forever 

marked us as a distinct region of a distinct country. 

 

As we move closer to our second century as a province of 

Canada, I think it is fair to say that we can look back over our 

first one with some pride and satisfaction — pride in what the 

generations before us began; satisfaction in how we have 

carried forward their gifts to us. And because we owe so much 

to our forebears, I trust and believe we will conduct our own 

affairs in a way that will do honour to our children and their 

children. 

 

In its first century Saskatchewan has truly been on a roller-

coaster ride. We are the province which gives definition to the 

phrase, boom and bust. We've had years of 40 bushels to the 

acre. We've had years of grasshoppers and hail. Years of plenty. 

Years of drought. Perhaps it is the nature of this land to 

experience those ups and downs, landlocked as we are and 

dependent as we are on outside markets and environmental 

conditions beyond our control. 

 

But I will say, Mr. Speaker, that given the evidence as outlined 

in this throne speech, we have set the stage for gradual, steady, 

solid, sure growth and progress in Saskatchewan for the future. 

We have climbed out of a huge financial hole and are looking 

to a brighter day. We have not only turned the financial corner,  

we have set in place the programs and policies which will 

prevent a government from ever again mortgaging our 

province's future. 

 

And we have learned that we can achieve respectability at the 

bank without sacrificing our collective soul — and I do not use 

that term lightly. We can make Saskatchewan a community of 

communities where shelter, food, and opportunity are available 

for all. That is the final and the most important message. 

 

Our 90th birthday will be celebrated across our province by 

many cultural and community events this year. The Grey Cup 

will be the highlight of our celebrations. Saskatchewan truly is a 

good place to call home and the throne speech is its 

endorsement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be part of the government which has 

had the courage to make the hard choices necessary to bring 

about this great comeback. It was a tough task. I am confident 

that the decisions made in our first four sessions, combined 

with the direction announced in this throne speech, will built a 

better quality of life for all the people of this great province. 

That is the vision. 

 

The vision and the task as set out by our government reminds 

me of a quote that our Premier used shortly after winning the 

'91 election. It is a quote that I felt had meaning of how we as a 

government and people of the province do things in 

Saskatchewan. And I quote: 

 

 A vision without a task is merely a dream. A task 

without a vision is drudgery. But a task with a vision is 

the hope of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this speech sets out the vision and 

the task before us, and it offers hope and opportunity to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — I therefore move, seconded by the member 

from Saltcoats: 

 

 That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor, as follows: 

 

 To His Honour, the Honourable John E.N. Wiebe, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 May it please Your Honour: 

 

 We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan 

in session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for 

this gracious speech which Your Honour has been 

pleased to address to us at the opening of the present 

session. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



February 7, 1995 

 

21 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased, as 

I'm sure all my colleagues are, to be back within the halls of this 

Assembly. It's great to be back in what I believe will be a calm, 

quiet, reflective and, above all, decorous atmosphere of the 

legislature where under your wise guidance and counsel, Mr. 

Speaker, we seek to conduct the affairs of the people of this 

province with appropriate dignity and deliberation. 

 

Before I begin my address, Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment 

you and thank you for the leadership you have shown and for 

the firmness you have exemplified in the rulings you've had to 

make over the last year. I anticipate a positive and productive 

session, and you can count on my cooperation on achieving 

those objectives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to welcome Margaret Woods to the Assembly and 

wish her well in her duties as Clerk Assistant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Members of the Select Committee on 

Driving Safety enjoyed and appreciated the assistance and 

expertise that Margaret provided to the committee as it 

conducted its hearings across the province of Saskatchewan. I 

know she will serve the Assembly well. 

 

As well I want to congratulate our pages for this session and 

recognize the important role they play in allowing the members 

to get their work done in the House. Welcome to the legislature. 

 

I don't want this to sound like the confessions of an MLA, but 

I'd like to point out that one of the pages, Trevor Hande, is from 

the Saltcoats constituency, and more specifically, originally 

from Esterhazy, my home town. And not only that, but would 

you believe that I've had the opportunity and privilege to teach 

Trevor in junior high? Despite having me as his teacher, he 

went on to graduate from the high school and went on to 

University of Saskatchewan where he completed a Bachelor of 

Arts degree with double honours in English and political 

science. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Mr. Speaker, I'm privileged to have the 

opportunity to second the motion in support of the Speech from 

the Throne. I'm honoured as well to follow my colleague from 

Bengough-Milestone who spoke so eloquently in moving the 

motion. She pretty well covered the waterfront and covered it 

brilliantly. Congratulations. 

 

In my remarks I will try not to simply echo her speech. I will 

say, Mr. Speaker, that one of the side benefits of this job is the 

opportunity to listen to and to learn from one's colleagues in 

this House, colleagues like the member from Bengough-

Milestone. There's a lot of talent here on both sides of the  

House and a diversity of interests, just as there is in our 

province, and I am pleased to be part of this Assembly. 

 

I too want to congratulate the new Leader of the Opposition. He 

has assumed a tough position at a tough time, and I know we all 

wish him well in his 15 minutes in the spotlight, the 15 minutes 

that Marshall McLuhan said we all get. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to join my colleague from Bengough-

Milestone in expressing admiration for the accomplishments of 

the former minister of Health, the member from Regina 

Hillsdale. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Just one quote from the book, Strong 

Medicine, suggests the magnitude of her achievements. The 

authors say, and I quote: 

 

 Something wonderful is happening in Saskatchewan 

again. The country watches with awe. Pretty soon all 

Canadians will be singing from the same hymn book. 

 

And the member from Moosomin still says health reform was a 

mistake. Amazing. 

 

What, I wonder, would it have taken both the member from 

Moosomin and the member from Greystone to have said we are 

also in this game. Understand the desire to leave it. Could they 

not have said, we disagree with your principles but we 

appreciate your effort? Would it have been too much to expect 

a farewell and best wishes from the harbinger of the new 

politics? Apparently so. Mr. Speaker, I thought from everything 

that the member from Greystone had said that she was bringing 

a new sense of graciousness to this House. I guess I 

misunderstood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take it as an honour to the people of Saltcoats, as 

well as to myself, that I've been asked to second the motion. It 

is a privilege as well as a challenge to represent this vast and 

varied constituency. As the member from Bengough-Milestone 

said, I would love the opportunity to show you around the 

constituency. From the Qu'Appelle valley in the south, north to 

Saltcoats, from the Manitoba border on the east, to the Melville 

constituency on the west — a big constituency, great people, 

and a varied economy. 

 

Everyone knows that the Saskatchewan potash industry got its 

start in my home town of Esterhazy, but we are all blessed as 

well with many successful small businesses and hard-working 

professionals. We have some of the best mixed farms in the 

province, about which I want to say more in a moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I got into this business to work for the people of 

my constituency and my province. They deserve good 

representation. And I, and we all, work very hard to fulfil their 

expectations. In three years I have already amassed many 

memories and made many friends to last a lifetime, and I hope 

to continue serving my constituents for some time to come. 



February 7, 1995 

 

22 

One way we serve the people is to provide them with the best 

government we possibly can. Franklin Roosevelt once said, and 

I quote: the first essential of doing a job well is the wish to see 

the job done at all. Unquote. 

 

And as the new minister for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) said last year: one of the differences 

between the New Democratic Party and the two old-hat parties 

is that we believe that the government is the instrument of the 

people, not their enemy, and with their guidance government 

can serve our desire for a fair and prosperous society. 

 

I think this throne speech, like the ones before it, shows that the 

job is being done well. There is much to praise here, as the 

member from Bengough-Milestone has said, much beyond the 

announcement of a balanced budget, although that by itself is 

something to celebrate. 

 

We don't really need to go over this ground again in detail, Mr. 

Speaker, but we should never forget that we are talking about a 

$1.5 billion turnaround in less than four years — a turnaround 

that didn't involve the scorched earth policy of Alberta. And we 

should remember that this turnaround took place in a province 

of a million people and growing. That is absolutely remarkable. 

 

We should also remind ourselves that balancing the budget and 

beginning the long, slow pay-down of the Tory debt are not 

ends in themselves; they are simply means to a real aim of 

reaching that ideal society never to be achieved but always 

nearly within reach. We strive for that goal on two fronts, 

economic and social, and both obviously are connected — the 

lesson of the wellness model. 

 

The member from Bengough-Milestone talked eloquently of the 

social aspect, particularly health. She also had some very good 

economic news to report and I would like to elaborate more in 

this area. 

 

First in our province, of course, is agriculture. Agriculture is 

turning around in Saskatchewan because farmers are leading the 

way in diversification and value added, and because the 

government is investing in the future of our farm economy. Our 

government set up a 20 million agri-food equity fund to invest 

in value added rural businesses. We now have the fastest 

growing biotechnology centre in Canada — 300 per cent larger 

than it was in 1991 — attracting important investments from 

leading European firms. The payoff? New sales for farmers, 

new jobs for young people, and increased exports for 

Saskatchewan products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last month I had the opportunity to attend the 

grand opening of an agri-business which is typical of the new 

entrepreneurial spirit of Saskatchewan rural people. In Kipling, 

Dalland Value-Added Pork Incorporated is now the home office 

of all North American operations for the parent company in the 

Netherlands. It is capable of marketing hog genetics throughout 

North America and expects rapid growth because of the need 

for superior genetics. This is an operation begun by six farm 

families interested in diversifying their operations, and who  

realize the value of a cooperative effort. Those who have 

predicted the end of rural Saskatchewan might want to check 

with these families first. 

 

As previously mentioned, diversification is occurring in many 

areas. Acres seeded to canola increased by 43 per cent in 1994, 

field peas by 53 percent, and mustard by 75 per cent. The same 

can be said for other crops like flax and canaryseed. This is a 

spectacular increase in diversification, and more is promised. 

As well, as is already said, the government is actively working 

to bring about sustainable national farm safety net support 

program which hopefully will finally put an end to the ad hoc 

programs so favoured by the previous Tory administration. 

 

One thing this government is committed to is returning to the 

people control of their institutions and of their economic 

destiny. The days of big government knowing best are long 

gone. This is one of the many virtues of the new health wellness 

model, and the same idea forms our approach to economic 

development. 

 

As the throne speech states, nine regional economic 

development authorities, or REDAs, have already been formed 

in Saskatchewan, and another 17 are expected in 1995. These 

authorities are finding local solutions to local economic 

challenges. They are creating jobs, and they are promoting 

development, and they are doing it with only seed money from 

the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, REDAs were introduced in June 1993 as a major 

part of the Partnership for Renewal announced by the Minister 

of Economic Development. This is a rational and achievable 

10-year plan to improve our economy, and it is working. 

 

The Partnership for Renewal is meeting its targets and is 

sparking economic growth in Saskatchewan. Some of those 

targets include the following: 173 million invested in 

infrastructure projects in our province, the founding of the 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, the establishment of 

the Saskatchewan Tourism Authority, a new partnership 

between government and the tourist industry which is taking 

over many of the functions previously done by government. 

 

I should add parenthetically here that the hard work of the 

Tourism Authority and of the hundreds of volunteers involved 

in Grey Cup '95 guarantee that the first Grey Cup held in 

Saskatchewan will be a memorable one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — At this point I think it is appropriate to 

mention Saskatchewan's 90th birthday and the wide range of 

activities and festivities that are being planned in communities 

across the province — just another example of the 

Saskatchewan spirit and pride. 

 

We need to recognize as well the hard work and 

accomplishments of two other organizations that are also 

celebrating 90 years of existence, namely our municipal  



February 7, 1995 

 

23 

governing bodies of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), organizations which will generate 

a great deal of economic activity on the local level. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to support all this economic activity and to 

ensure that our workers and our youth can take advantage of the 

opportunities it provides, we are adapting our education and 

training systems to meet the needs of changing technology. Mr. 

Speaker, like you and like several other members, I am both a 

teacher and a parent. I have devoted much of my life to 

preparing young people for adulthood, and I have more than a 

passing interest in what others are doing to prepare my family. 

Education, training, jobs — these are not subjects of just 

passing interest to me or to you, Mr. Speaker, or to any other 

parent of a young person ready to strike out into the world. 

 

Therefore I am more than happy that this government will be 

introducing JobStart, a program designed to help young people 

bridge the gap between school and that first job. JobStart will 

be a fine complement to the Future Skills training program 

announced in November. Future Skills will provide employers 

with up to 50 per cent of recognized training costs per trainee 

placed in a long-term, full-time job. Future Skills is another 

example of government working with the appropriate groups 

and institutions, not trying to do things on its own. SIAST and 

the regional colleges will work with employers to develop and 

deliver short-term training for jobs that will meet immediate 

industry needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have said that job creation is our top priority. 

To create jobs, it seems to me that you need two things: one, 

economic activity; and two, available trained personnel. As the 

member from Bengough-Milestone said, there is economic 

activity aplenty taking place. And this government and its able 

ministers of Education and Training are seeing to it that people 

will be ready to join in. Indeed that is already happening. As 

His Honour said in his comprehensive speech, 12,000 new jobs 

were created in the past 12 months, and our unemployment rate 

remains the lowest in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say one more word about 

education. I am proud to serve on the government caucus 

committee on education. We on the committee have worked 

closely with the ministers to try to bring education in line with 

the realities of today. New training programs are a part of what 

we have done, but all the technical training in the world means 

little if you have workers who know not who they are, where 

they're from, or what preceded them. 

 

(1145) 

 

In other words, Saskatchewan students and Canadian students 

need to study Canada in Saskatchewan. I am pleased that the 

Minister of Education, as part of the recent high school review, 

made it her personal commitment to strengthen the Canadian 

content of our high school curricula. 

 

The Canadian author Margaret Atwood once said, and I quote  

that: sometimes being a Canadian is like looking into a mirror 

and seeing the reflection of someone else. We need to look at 

ourselves and our accomplishments, not just those of other 

nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say one brief word about population in 

our province. It has been an opposition party cliché since at 

least the 1940s that the governing party is depopulating the 

province. It has been the campaign promise of those parties to 

bring the children home. And since 1932, regardless of those 

promises, our population has gone up and down, following the 

boom-and-bust cycles that the member from Bengough-

Milestone mentioned. That is the nature of this province. More 

to the point, that is the nature of young people everywhere, any 

time — the desire to see something more of the world. Many go 

elsewhere to school, for jobs, or for just adventure. Some come 

home eventually, and some don't. 

 

Saskatchewan youth are just like youth anywhere else in the 

world. Some young people from elsewhere even come here. 

Looking about me, for instance, I can see members from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, Saskatoon Sutherland, Assiniboia-

Gravelbourg, Saskatoon Westmount, Regina Victoria — all 

who were born elsewhere and ended up here in Saskatchewan. 

And I'm sure there are others. So we shouldn't worry if some of 

our children have wandering shoes. We should worry if there is 

no corresponding influx. And since October 1992 our 

population has grown steadily, grown at the same time that 

optimism and hope have been restored to the provincial 

vocabulary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Coincidence, Mr. Speaker? Perhaps. Let's 

check the numbers in another year or so. Meanwhile the 

members of the opposition can carry on with their tired old one-

note song. 

 

In a few days, the all-party Select Committee on Driving Safety 

will submit its report to the Assembly. I was privileged to serve 

on this committee under the very able leadership of the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we travelled over 5,000 kilometres and held 37 

meetings throughout Saskatchewan — all safely, by the way. 

We listened to the people, and our report will be based on what 

they told us. We heard some very strong arguments. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we heard some heart-rending stories about how lives 

have been changed suddenly and tragically in an instant. I said 

earlier that the chief pleasure of being an MLA is serving and 

representing the people and responding to them. Serving on the 

Driving Safety Committee reinforced this feeling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much to praise in the throne speech. There 

is much to give us hope for the future, hope that justifies the 

hard work and sacrifice of Saskatchewan people over the past 

three years. I have mentioned a few items. I have not mentioned 

the promised improvements to transportation, to the 

environment, to forestry, or to energy. 



February 7, 1995 

 

24 

The throne speech indicates that this government is on target 

and on budget. It demonstrates that we have delivered on our 

promise of October 1991 to restore the province's financial 

integrity, to maintain and to improve our network of social 

services, and to get the economy moving again. Three out of 

three isn't a bad average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 19th century British prime minister, Benjamin 

Disraeli said and I quote, “A nation defines itself by the 

institutions it creates." In Saskatchewan I believe we have a set 

of institutions which very accurately reflect the kind of people 

we are and the kind of society we are trying to develop. They 

are institutions which, for the most part, attempt to bring each 

of us into the community. 

 

Our health system, for instance, the finest and most progressive 

in North America, does not discriminate. It ministers to those in 

need; that is the only criteria. Our schools, our churches, our 

pools, and co-ops, all in their own way have tried from the 

beginning of our province to be inclusive, to bring people 

together so that together they could do the things not possible 

for the individual alone. 

 

Our social agencies do the best they can to salve the wounds of 

those left behind and to pick up the fallen, so they can once 

again join in the community. Our Crown utilities were created 

and still operate so that their services are extended to the 

farthest reaches of our vast province. They operate on a profit 

basis certainly, but profit is not their only motive. 

 

And all these institutions did not assume this cooperative, 

caring attitude by accident. They were created by and for 

Saskatchewan people to be the tools of Saskatchewan society. 

And Saskatchewan people know that in a land that demands 

much but offers more, working together is the way to success 

and security. Institutions may define the nation or province. 

Individuals create the institutions. Saskatchewan people 

designed cooperative, caring institutions. 

 

This government takes its cue from that spirit. It provides 

leadership by listening. As an English teacher I call this the 

oxymoronic approach to government. This government was 

able to achieve what it has achieved in three short years and 

will take us boldly and securely into the next century because it 

has learned the meaning of planning, of sacrifice, and of 

perseverance from the people we serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a member of this Assembly and 

honoured to represent the people of the Saltcoats constituency. I 

chose my party and my leader very carefully, and I believe I 

made a wise choice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: — Because I trust my Premier, his cabinet, and 

my colleagues in caucus, and because I believe the course we 

have set for the province of Saskatchewan for the next year is 

the right one, I am pleased to second the motion in favour of the 

throne speech. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

begin my remarks this afternoon . . . this morning I guess, by 

complimenting the member from Swift Current and the member 

from Hillsdale on their work and their service to the province of 

Saskatchewan. I may not have agreed with them all the time in 

their efforts, but I know that not only the responsibility but the 

hard work that is required to be a minister and serve the people 

of Saskatchewan is indeed an honour. And I think they served 

their province well, and I want to compliment them on that. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the role that the Lieutenant 

Governor played in his Speech from the Throne yesterday . . . 

not only was I privileged to be here to hear it, but it was a 

privilege for me, as a member from the Morse constituency, to 

have an individual who has served that constituency in the past 

in this Legislative Assembly as now the Lieutenant Governor of 

the province of Saskatchewan. Not only does he represent my 

constituency as well as the province nor did he . . . as well as 

represent at one time my constituency, but he has served the 

people in his community exceptionally well in the various areas 

of responsibility that he has assumed. And so I want to 

congratulate him on his speech yesterday. 

 

I also want to say that his position is accented by the fact that 

his wife is a very strong supporter of not only his position but 

his responsibilities in the community. And it was a privilege for 

me to have her on the Consensus Saskatchewan committee, 

travelling around the province, and Mrs. Wiebe did a very 

excellent job of that. She was not only a good participant, but 

she did a lot of the things really very well. So to them and to 

their family, it's an honour for them to be a part of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to deal now with some aspects, as I see, in relation to the 

throne speech. It starts out with an introduction that deals 

primarily in a very political way — and I found that not 

unusual, but I found it rather interesting — talking about the 

years prior to '91 as those years of problems in the province that 

they probably had nothing to do with. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out some of the things that I 

think that they had involvement with. They didn't have 

involvement with the weather which we had to deal with in the 

1980s — extremely tough, extremely hard to handle  and a 

population that was very, very demanding, coming out of the 

1970s when they were the government of the province, with the 

expectations that were very, very high and very difficult to 

meet. 

 

I want to make one remark about a short part of a sentence that 

says there ". . . but of farm families who are enjoying their 

highest level of optimism in years." Well, Mr. Speaker, that has 

nothing to do with the people opposite. It has a lot to do with 

the changes in the markets; it has a lot to do with the changes in 

the markets. It has a lot to do with the world situation as it 

relates to the value of the products that they grow in the 

province of Saskatchewan. It has almost nothing . . . In fact,  



February 7, 1995 

 

25 

Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has been a negative 

influence in agriculture in the past three years. 

 

And I want to point that out in a couple of ways. One is the role 

in crop insurance, taking from the people of Saskatchewan that 

the farmers in Saskatchewan what was rightfully theirs, not only 

in how they changed the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) Bill and taking that money away from the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, but now in this past year taking the premiums 

away from the farmers of Saskatchewan  very, very unsettling 

in how they did it and the precedent that was established by 

them. 

 

So is there a level of optimism in relation to this government? 

No, Mr. Speaker, it's not. In fact they're very cynical about what 

this government does and how it's presented itself. I want to 

point out that the new safety net program that they have 

suggested that is going to be a part of what the farmers are 

going to use and be able to serve their communities in their 

farms is in fact held in some very strong cynical views. 

 

And I want to say that the majority of them will tell me that 

they do not trust the government because the moment they 

decide to trust the government, the government's going to 

change the rules, and they will have absolutely no recourse even 

in a court of law to any of those changes. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is very, very concerning to them. 

 

I want to deal just briefly with the aspect of the financial 

stability and public accountability. We will wait to see what 

your Bill has in relation to the balanced budget Act. We will 

challenge it on a number of areas, Mr. Speaker. Those areas 

will include . . . Does the public agree with the kind of 

accountability that you have put in the balanced budget Act? 

Will it represent the kinds of things that the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan deserve and are expecting? 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, are some of the questions. Those are some 

of the questions that we will be asking of the minister and the 

ministers responsible for the balanced budget Act. 

 

The other thing that is very important to consider and that is the 

area of taxation as it relates to the government opposite. They 

can say that they balanced the budget. Yes, but, Mr. Speaker, 

did they balance the budget on the basis of fiscal restraint, fiscal 

accountability, fiscal responsibility in dealing with allowing the 

people of Saskatchewan to make investments that are going to 

improve the conditions for jobs, improve the job creation 

capacity? No, they haven't, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact the 

amount of taxation dollars that flow into this government from 

the various sectors are almost astronomical. In the four areas of 

income tax for small business, tax on corporations, and the 

various kinds of things that lead directly to job creation in this 

province have been taxed, Mr. Speaker, to the amount of over 

$150 million over and above what was taxed prior to the year 

'93-94. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is very significant in job creation. Why 

do we have fewer jobs created in Saskatchewan than we have  

ever had before? As a matter of fact StatsCanada says that we 

have the most dismal record of anyone in Canada and that we 

had a negative job creation in the past year. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that reason behind that is that the taxes flowing into this 

government are exceptionally high. 

 

(1200) 

 

And I want to say that I read an article by Mr. Eisler that was 

very significant. It was significant, Mr. Speaker, in a number of 

ways. But he pointed out, in his view, that this government had 

lost touch. And the reason they had lost touch is they have a 

fundamental belief and the belief is this: that what's good for 

the government is good for the people. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why they have said that we will tax 

the people of Saskatchewan and not allow them to create the 

wealth of the province. If you tax too much you're going to have 

no development in job creation, and which is exactly what we 

have had in the past year. And that is a very dismal record. 

 

So when we talk about tax reduction, we're going to have 

substantial changes in the way the federal government is going 

to do this. We're going to have substantial changes in payments 

to the provinces, as I see it. What are you going to do about 

that? 

 

We're going to ask those kinds of questions in our budget 

estimate questions on the Department of Finance, and we're 

going to have to have some very serious answers because we 

have some very serious questions to face, and not only in this 

Assembly but in every Assembly in Canada, including the 

House of Parliament. 

 

We're going to have some very serious questions as it relates to 

the structure of Canada, and that is going to have very serious 

implication in an economic way in this province — very 

serious. And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to have to take some 

will on the part of the people of this province and also this 

government to deal with that in a very serious and a rational 

way. 

 

And the discussion that is taking place today — it started 

yesterday in Quebec — on sovereignty is going to have an 

agenda of its own. And that agenda, Mr. Speaker, is going to 

seriously implicate or involve the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, perhaps not as it relates to how we would 

respond to their vote, but how we would deal in an economic 

way in relation to what their vote is going to say. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is very serious. 

 

I want to point out too another thing that I noticed in the throne 

speech that was of some interest to me, and that is The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act dealing with 

used oil containers and filters. Mr. Speaker, we are going to 

have to very seriously consider some of these things, but we're 

going to have to very seriously consider not only the protection 

of the environment but also whether the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan can afford to have higher taxes paid or  



February 7, 1995 

 

26 

premiums paid or whatever the requirement will be to have 

these items collected. Somebody's going to have to dispose of 

them; somebody's going to have to be paid to do that. And can 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan afford the cost that 

is going to be delivered in that Act? And so we have serious 

questions in relation to that. 

 

One other thing that I want to point out as it relates to 

agriculture is that we have had serious discussion in a number 

of areas in agriculture. But one of those that is going to be 

discussed this year  and negotiations are taking place  is 

the changes to the method of payment. Method of payment has 

been discussed long and tediously by people in the province of 

Saskatchewan for many, many years. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what we are going to have to deal with at the conclusion of this 

session or during this session or perhaps by the end of the crop 

year. 

 

That is something that is going to have to be addressed. And 

what we're going to be doing is asking the Minister of 

Agriculture some of the questions as it relates to those kind of 

influences that the federal government is going to make on the 

economic capacity of Saskatchewan's agriculture to compete in 

the international market. And that is going to make a very 

interesting discussion. 

 

Our caucus have made the decision, and I think it's right, that 

we have to deal with this, but we have to change it 

fundamentally so that we will not impede in the international 

agreement in GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 

so that we will not have a problem with that. On the other hand 

we also need to say that, because some of the problems in 

relation to grain transportation into United States have 

developed by how the payment was made to producers. And so 

we strongly support a payment directly to the producers. We 

can discuss how that is to be done. We can talk about the 

various ideas about how it should be done. But we need to deal 

with it in a very real way. 

 

I think that the last item I want to deal with is the anniversary of 

the province of Saskatchewan. It's a unique experience to be a 

member of this Assembly. It's a unique experience at any time 

in the province's history, but today we have an opportunity as 

the province celebrates its 90th birthday that we have a very 

capable honour to preside over the various things that are going 

to happen, not only in my constituency but throughout the 

province. 

 

This comes in the face, Mr. Speaker, of people in Quebec who 

are deciding that they don't want to be a part of this country any 

more. And that really bothers me a lot. I listened to television 

yesterday, and their commissions are going throughout the 

province and tearing the very fabric of Canada apart and saying 

it hasn't contributed. It hasn't done this, and it hasn't done that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to ask the questions. Are our 

expectations anywhere close to reality in what the country can 

give us? And I have to think about what John F. Kennedy said 

at one time, in 1960 or thereabouts. He said, it's not what we  

can do for you; it's what you can do for the country. And I 

believe that that's a part of what we have to consider in relation 

to how we debate, how we discuss, and how we view Canada as 

a whole. 

 

There are many people who their first reaction is going to be to 

say, let them go. Let them go, and they will find out. But in any 

kind of a divorce, Mr. Speaker, there are no winners. There are 

absolutely no winners. And I believe that when we celebrate 

Saskatchewan this should be our message, when we celebrate 

our 90th anniversary in this province that we carry this message 

that we want to have Canada as complete as it has been. In fact, 

we could easily expand it into a province position for the 

Northwest Territories and the Yukon. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that's what we should be considering rather than tearing this 

country apart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in lieu of a number of things that transpired in the 

last few days I want to say to the Government House Leader 

and to the members opposite that we appreciate their 

willingness to change the schedule for today. And due to the 

circumstances of the day, I want to move adjournment of the 

debate on the special order on the throne speech. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:08 p.m. 

 


