






















































March 30, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 30, 1995 

 

 
1237 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions from south-west Saskatchewan, namely the 
towns of Piapot, Maple Creek, Consul, and that area along No. 
1 Highway. 
 
I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
directed towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions comes from the Eston, Rosetown area, Mr. 
Speaker. I so present them. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, two gentlemen from South Korea who are seated in 
your gallery. Mr. Yoon, managing director of Namsung 
Corporation, and Mr. Lim, representative director and 
vice-chairman of Ihl Shin Chemical Company Limited. 
 
These gentlemen were invited by the Asia Pacific Foundation of 
Canada under the future leaders program to travel across 
Canada making stops in a few centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of the future leaders program is to have 
individuals of the Asia Pacific region learn firsthand about 
Canada's people, industry, resources, and culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like all members to join me in welcoming our 
guests to the legislature today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you,. Mr. Speaker. Prior to 
this session beginning, I met with several representatives of the 
commercial carrier industry and the you-drive and rental 
industry who are in the Speakers' gallery, and I would like to 
introduce them to you and through you to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and ask them to indicate who they are so that members 
of the House can recognize them. 
 
There is Warren Smith, who is the general manager of the 
Saskatchewan Trucking Association; Erwen Siemens from the 
Kindersley Transport Ltd., and Doug Siemens, also from 
Kindersley Transport; Jim Street, president and owner of 
Tri-Star Transport Ltd.; Brent Leach, Saskatchewan general 
manager of Custom Truck Sales; Lyman Waite, manager of 
Quill Transport Ltd.; Dennis Dohel, president and owner of 
Jay's Moving and Storage; Les Reid, owner of Circle R 
Transport Ltd. of Saskatoon; Terry Lay from Saskatchewan 
Interline Freight Systems; and from the you-drive and rental 
vehicle companies, Kelly James, district manager with Tilden 
for the Regina-Moose Jaw district; Lorne Boldt, general 
manager of Avis rent a car; Robin Wallace, city manager with 
Thrifty Car Rental; and Fred Howman, general manager of 
Hertz Rent A Car. 
 
I want to, on behalf of the members here, extend a welcome to 
these representatives here today who were here earlier to get a 
briefing on some changes in the SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) rates for the industry that I am going to 
speak to in a ministerial statement here today. And I ask 
members of the House to join me in extending a very warm 
welcome to these gentlemen who are here with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you  



March 30, 1995 

 
1238 

to my colleagues in the legislature, five special guests seated in 
your gallery. These gentlemen have just come from making a 
very important announcement with respect to the Big Valley 
Jamboree line-up this summer. 
 
I'm going to introduce them and I'm going to ask them to stand 
as I introduce them because we have so many fine people sitting 
up there today. Mr. Speaker, they are Alan Vinet who is the 
executive director of the Big Valley Jamboree; Glen Vinet, the 
general manager of the Big Valley Jamboree; Danny Hooper 
who is the master of ceremonies and will be for both Big Valley 
in Craven and also in Camrose; Brian Andrews who is the 
director of operations for Big Valley Jamboree; and Bruce 
Oleson who is the co-chairman of the Big Valley Jamboree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was greatly pleased to attend the press 
conference this morning and I would say that if they are going 
to have as much fun at the jamboree as they had at the press 
conference, it's going to be a great time for everybody. Please 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce someone else in the gallery today. This person is a 
very renowned citizen of Saskatchewan, and more specifically 
of the city of Regina. She is a key person in the Asia Pacific 
Foundation. She's also the person who I would think should 
take full credit for starting the dragon boat races in Regina — 
likely the second largest of anywhere in the world, I understand 
— and also a member of the SaskPower Commercial board. 
 
I'd like all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming Mary Chan to the legislature here this afternoon. 
Welcome, Mary. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
present to you and through you to the legislature, 29 grade 12 
students from Aberdeen high school. They're seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. They're here with their teachers: David 
Herron, Donna Doriez, Trudy Betthel, Warren Jacobsen. And 
the bus driver is Gary Evans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Aberdeen is a community that's just a short 
distance to the north-east of Saskatoon, and it's a community 
that's showing a great potential for the future economically and 
in other respects. And I know that they take great pride in their 
educational institution in Aberdeen. And it's a pleasure to have 
them here today. They've come to partake in our democratic 
process here. And I want to welcome them, and I'll be meeting 
with them a little later. 
 
So I'd like to ask all the colleagues to welcome them here today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Big Valley Jamboree 
 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
have good news for all you legislative line dancers and fans of 
country music. The Big Valley Jamboree in Craven has 
announced that this year's entertainment will feature such 
international talents as the Oak Ridge Boys, Pam Tillis, Sammy 
Kershaw, and Ricky Van Shelton. They will join Canadian stars 
Prairie Oyster, Patricia Conroy, Lisa Brokop, and home-grown 
talents the Johner Brothers, Saskatchewan Express, and Scott 
Kyle King. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the jamboree will take place from July 12 to the 
16 and promises to be another huge success. A study done a 
few years ago showed that Big Valley impacts the 
Saskatchewan economy to the twangy tune of seven and a half 
million dollars. That's a huge benefit to all manufacturers, 
retailers, hoteliers, and charities involved. As well, a $7 million 
investment in my constituency means many jobs, especially 
summer employment for youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year for the first time, the Big Valley 
Jamboree has invited the 11 regional tourism authorities to host 
booths advertising their areas. This innovation will greatly 
encourage jamboree goers to spend more time and hopefully 
dollars in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Big Valley Jamboree is not only a week of great fun, it is a 
significant economic boost to both Craven and Saskatchewan. 
For their part in helping the jamboree thrive, I want to 
congratulate the organizers, especially Alan Vinet, Glen Vinet, 
and Danny Hooper. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Gyug Benefit Hockey Game 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
report that a benefit hockey game last night in my riding was a 
huge success and the proceeds will be going toward a good 
cause. Over 600 people attended this hockey game in Esterhazy 
which saw the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
team take on the Esterhazy Ol’ Flyers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this benefit hockey game raised over $8,300 with 
the proceeds going to Robert Gyug and his family. Robert is 
fighting a battle against leukemia and had to leave his job with 
the Highways department because of his illness. There are many 
people to thank for making this event a big success. The 
Esterhazy Lions Club, under their theme of people helping 
people, did an excellent job of organizing all the work for this 
event. The rink was donated for the game, as well as the 
announcing, the time-keeping, and refereeing. A special thanks 
to all the volunteers. And of course we must thank the 600-plus 
fans who attended the game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ol’ Flyers won the game 11-7, but the score  



March 30, 1995 

 
1239 

isn't important. What is important is the fact that the community 
got together and was able to raise over $8,300 for this 
worthwhile cause. 
 
On behalf of the MLA hockey team, I want to thank and 
congratulate all who participated and contributed to this 
excellent event. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spiritwood Hosts Regional Drama Festival 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, to be or not to be in Spiritwood 
today, tomorrow and on Saturday — that is the question. The 
answer, Mr. Speaker, for those who enjoy lively drama 
performed by student actors, is definitely to be. The Spiritwood 
High School drama clubs are proudly hosting the Saskatchewan 
Drama Association's 1995 regional eighth drama festival this 
weekend. Twelve plays will be performed by drama clubs from 
Leoville, Medstead, Spiritwood, Meadow Lake, North 
Battleford, Edam, Turtleford, and St. Walburg. On Saturday 
evening, there will be a banquet and awards night. I'm looking 
forward to attending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of 12 regional festivals in the province, 
with the winners of each performance attending the provincial 
festival to be held in May in Yorkton. Of course this is a 
win-win event for the actors, the technicians, the directors, the 
crew, and the audience; all benefit from their exposure to live 
theatre. 
 
I congratulate the staff and students of the Spiritwood High 
School, and I say to each competing club — break a leg. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Save Our Environment Guide 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The good people at 
Regina's Z99 and CJME have done it again. Hot off the press is 
their third annual Save Our Environment Guide. 
 
This publication is now available free at any Sherwood Credit 
Union and has been distributed to every teacher in Regina, 
thanks to the corporate sponsorship of Western Business 
Machines, Cornwall Centre, Southland Mall, Dairy Producers 
Co-op, and of course the Sherwood Credit Union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you open this paper to the third page and there's a 
question printed in large letters: "What kind of world will we 
leave for our kids?" The answer to the question can be found in 
the number of clear, informative, useful articles contained in the 
guide. 
 
There are articles on clean air, on the ozone layer, on waste 
reduction, on water conservation, and much more. And they are 
useful. Because of an article last year, the Trew family is now 
composting. We no longer dig up dirt; we make it. 

A new feature this year, Mr. Speaker, is a "Kid's guide to the 
environment." The sooner kids become concerned about the 
environment, the better the environment they will pass on to 
their own kids. Environmentalism is not a fad like 
skateboarding; it's a deadly serious, ongoing concern for each of 
us individually and collectively. 
 
Again I congratulate Z99 and CJME for their community 
leadership. Once again the Z and CJME have demonstrated in a 
practical way their commitment to our community and our 
environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Terry Puhl, Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The community of 
Melville has always produced high calibre athletes. Today I take 
great pleasure in recognizing Terry Puhl of Melville, who 
recently became the 37th member of the Canadian Baseball 
Hall of Fame. 
 
Major league baseball fans will remember Terry's years with the 
Houston Astros. He spent 14 seasons with the Astros and one 
year with the Kansas City Royals before retiring in 1991. 
 
Terry excelled in this sport and his statistics prove it. He holds 
the major league record for highest career fielding percentage 
by an outfielder at 993. He shares the record for a single season 
of a perfect 1,000 for having no errors in 1979. Terry was also 
impressive at bat. He hit 300 or better in three seasons — 1977, 
1984, and 1988 — and retired with a career average of 280. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not many Canadians make it to the major league 
teams, and to excel when they get there and do well over a span 
of 15 years is quite an accomplishment. 
 
I wish to extend congratulations to Terry Puhl and I know that 
the community of Melville is proud of his accomplishments. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Office Closures 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question today is for the minister responsible for 
cleaning up Jack Messer's messes. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that Jack Messer is considering 
closing 16 SaskPower offices across the province including the 
Lloydminster office and, Mr. Minister, can you tell us which 
offices are scheduled for imminent closure, or do you plan to 
run away from the question like you ran away from Mr. 
Goldhawk on television last night. 
 
Can you answer that, Mr. Minister? 



March 30, 1995 

 
1240 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'd like to thank the member for his 
question. There are no offices that are imminent for closure. 
There is not a list that stipulates which offices will be closed 
and which will be left open. 
 
I would inform the member that under way at the present time, 
SaskPower is into the most extensive dialogue process that has 
ever been undertaken between the employees, between the 
management, and between the board of directors of SaskPower. 
There has been some talk of office closures. If SaskPower 
continues on the course that they have continued in the past, 
faced with externalities that will affect them from beyond our 
borders and beyond our control, there certainly would be 
closure of offices in Saskatchewan. 
 
The employees don't want to close offices; the board does not 
want to close offices; the management do not want to close 
offices of SaskPower. And that's why the most extensive 
dialogue process ever undertaken is currently under way at 
SaskPower. There are other options and those options are being 
explored by the corporation and by the employees of the 
corporation, to continue having SaskPower as one of the best 
electric utilities of anywhere in North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that Mr. 
Messer threw some bananas out to keep the minister away from 
us today, but I would say maybe he's considering suspending 
the minister like he's done to others. 
 
To the Minister of Labour: Mr. Minister, you obviously have a 
plan to close offices down and lay off SaskPower employees. 
That's very evident. I suspect you didn't want to talk about it 
until after the election is over, until the member from 
Riversdale has called his election. So, Mr. Minister, why was it 
necessary to suspend an employee who was simply telling the 
truth and informing Saskatchewan taxpayers about what the 
plans of SaskPower are? 
 
So will you be honest with us? I know that the current minister 
can't be, because he's under the thumb of Mr. Messer. But 
would you be honest with the public today and table Jack 
Messer's hidden agenda for closing down SaskPower offices in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well if Jack Messer had a hidden 
agenda at SaskPower certainly the members opposite wouldn't 
find it. There is no hidden agenda over at SaskPower. 
 
I explain to the member again, in the floor of this Legislative 
Assembly, that there's a dialogue process going on to explore 
the options as to how SaskPower will handle the future, which 
is very uncertain for many electric utilities across North 
America. 
 
If you look south of the border, many of the electric utilities in  

the United States of America, Mr. Speaker, are in great turmoil. 
You don't find much investment these days in the private sector 
going into electrical utilities. Those same factors that affected 
the electrical utilities in the United States will soon be affecting 
the electrical utilities here in Canada. 
 
What SaskPower is doing is that they're into a planning process, 
Mr. Speaker, whereby they want to face jointly, with the people 
of Saskatchewan, the employees, the board of directors, and the 
management, those challenges which will tax to the limit the 
corporation that has served us well over many, many years. 
Those options are being explored. 
 
I said previously to the answer to your first question, that if 
nothing is done, there likely will be closures for SaskPower. 
But they are doing something; they're looking at the options for 
the future. And I have confidence, if the member will just hold 
on for a little while and wait for those that are involved to run 
the process, we'll continue to be well served by one of the 
greatest corporations in the electrical industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can understand the 
Minister of Labour's hesitancy to tell the Assembly what is 
going on in SaskPower. 
 
The question I asked, Mr. Minister, was why did you suspend 
the employee for telling the truth to Saskatchewan taxpayers? I 
don't want to hear about all the rest of it. I want to know, why 
did you suspend the employee for telling the truth, even though 
he perhaps did something that interfered with your election 
campaign? Why didn't you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you for that question. I didn't 
quite catch that as a full thrust. If you hadn't have put as much 
rhetoric into your previous question, I would have caught the 
actual question that you were asking. 
 
I didn't suspend the employee. The management at SaskPower 
suspended the employee and I backed that decision — I backed 
that decision. It's not an issue of employees telling the truth. It's 
an issue of an employee leaking a confidential planning 
document that gives a one side of a perspective, which is not 
motivated by the good interests of the corporation. 
 
There isn't a private sector company in all of North America 
that would allow an employee to leak confidential planning 
documents without taking action on it. The employee is lucky to 
only have been suspended for five days, in my opinion, sir, and 
I back the decision in this particular case. Employees should be 
encouraged to tell the truth. But there's a good interest in the 
code of conduct which all employees in SaskPower have agreed 
to. The employee broke the code of conduct and was therefore 
suspended for five days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 30, 1995 

 
1241 

SaskTel Computer Sales 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister responsible for SaskTel, and it's a very short question, 
Mr. Minister. Can you confirm that SaskTel has entered into the 
computer retail business and that they're now selling computer 
systems and supplies in direct competition to private computer 
retailers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think, Mr. Speaker, a brief 
question deserves a brief answer. And the brief answer is no, 
SaskTel is not into the computer retail business. It has done 
maintenance of computers for quite a large number of years 
under the previous administration and under ours. But as a 
policy SaskTel is not in the retail computer business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find your 
answer very surprising since we've received a letter from 
Harvest Moon Technologies, a computer retailer in Yorkton. 
And Harvest Moon has recently lost a large contract to a 
corporate client, International Minerals and Chemicals. And 
that was because IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 
Corporation Ltd.) started purchasing their computer systems 
from SaskTel. When Harvest Moon called their MLA, the 
member from Yorkton, he confirmed — he confirmed, Mr. 
Minister — that SaskTel is indeed selling computers in a 
number of places in southern Saskatchewan and that SaskTel is 
poised to make a decision in the first part of April whether or 
not they should go full stream into retail sales to the general 
public. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it necessary for SaskTel to compete with 
private computer retailers by muscling into a service that is 
already being provided by the private sector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 
respond to the member's question opposite. And as I said in my 
original response, that servicing computers and performing 
other maintenance work has been done by SaskTel for several 
years. In some cases, regular customers of SaskTel come to 
SaskTel and request that SaskTel make a quote on supplying 
certain hardware equipment from time to time. But as a policy, 
SaskTel is not in the retail business. 
 
Because these are customers that are valuable to SaskTel, 
SaskTel from time to time makes this kind of a quote at the 
request, and only at the request, of the client as a service to the 
client. In this case at IMC there was such a request. And the 
member is wrong. As far as I know, IMC has yet at this point 
not decided as to which of the tenders is going to be taking up. 
But it's an isolated case, and it's done only at the request of a 
client, which happens from time to time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know how 
you cannot not be in the retail business and then put forward  

tenders for sales of computers. Your own member from 
Yorkton agreed with Harvest Moon that you were indeed in the 
retail business, Mr. Sector. 
 
I'd like to quote a little bit from the letter, Mr. Minister. 
 
 Doesn't SaskTel or the NDP understand what they are 

doing? By taking the bread and butter out of our 
business, it means the very good possibility of 
additional layoffs and/or computer store closures in 
Saskatchewan and more unemployment. Is it SaskTel 
and the NDP government's job to try and finish us off 
for good? 

 
Is that your objective, Mr. Minister? Mr. Minister, are you 
trying to run the private computer retailers out of business and 
out of Saskatchewan? And if not, why on earth is SaskTel 
getting into the retail sales of computers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know of no 
computer business in Saskatchewan that has laid off staff 
because of competition from SaskTel in the retail computer 
business. And I think the member would be hard-pressed to 
give us an example that is a legitimate one where that might 
have happened. 
 
The role of SaskTel is to provide total solutions to its 
customers. And in some cases, because SaskTel is in a 
competitive business with some pretty large corporations, from 
AT&T (American Telecommunications & Telegraph) through 
Unitel and others, it is necessary for SaskTel to service its 
customers well because SaskTel is a customer-orientated 
corporation providing a very important service for those 
companies in order for them to be able to do business and 
compete in the world which they have to compete in. 
 
So from time to time when a corporation such as IMC comes to 
SaskTel and asks us if we can provide through SaskTel a total 
solution, SaskTel is prepared to look at it because it's a service 
that it must provide to valuable customers. 
 
If the question is whether SaskTel is going directly into the 
retail business, available, like any other retailer, for the sale of 
things like computers, I have already said to the member 
opposite, the answer is no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, there's not a lot of 
difference between going into the public retail or providing 
tenders to large corporations. You're selling computers, and that 
is in the purview of the small business of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, this concern is being brought forward by a 
Mr. Kordell Roberts and a Mr. Robert Slywka of Yorkton. And 
Mr. Kordell Roberts at one time was the NDP youth president 
for the Yorkton constituency. So, Mr. Minister, they have a  



March 30, 1995 

 
1242 

very real concern about this, about what SaskTel is doing, 
because computer retails are exactly the kind of business that 
we need in this province — more smaller businesses  because 
they provide a valuable service and create employment. 
 
But just when some of them are starting to make a little money, 
in steps the big fat Crown corporation to muscle them out and 
to take their business. Can't you just see that someone in private 
business making money, Mr. Minister, needs to be left alone? 
They don't need your Crown corporation infringing on them. 
All you see is one more opportunity to take over a business 
from private enterprise. 
 
Mr. Minister, this sends absolutely the wrong message to every 
single person who ever thought about coming to Saskatchewan 
and starting up a business. Mr. Minister, will you stop SaskTel 
and get them out of the computer retail business immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, from time to time we 
hear complaints from people in the business sector, and we try 
to be sympathetic and understand what the complaints are. And 
if there is a problem, we'll deal with them. This particular 
business has complained before. They have complained about 
SaskTel providing universal access to Internet around 
Saskatchewan which nobody else is providing. That's fine, and I 
think that's an interesting problem for them to raise. 
 
But I think SaskTel does have a responsibility to provide 
universal access — whether it's telephone services or whether 
it's Internet services. We're only one of two provinces in Canada 
who are prepared to do that. And it's also the responsibility of 
SaskTel to provide the best possible service it can to its clients. 
And in some cases, it has to do these things in order to provide 
that service — not at the expense of small business, because 
there is more effort made by SaskTel to assist small business in 
Saskatchewan and partner with business in Saskatchewan in 
order that those businesses can prosper than ever in the history 
of SaskTel or any Crown corporation in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that's the right way to go. SaskTel has a good 
reputation for doing that, and they will continue to do that into 
the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cargill Canola Crushing Plant 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Cargill recently announced that it will invest in a crushing plant 
in Saskatchewan. We certainly welcome those jobs. However it 
is interesting to note the comments about why they came. The 
Leader-Post reported on March 7, and I quote directly: the 
choice came down to Saskatchewan or Alberta, which has a 
more favourable business climate. 
 
The province provided $3.9 million in the form of a grant in  

lieu of tax credits, Mr. Speaker, that were announced in the 
budget. The CEO (chief executive officer) of Cargill stated: we 
wanted the money up front. 
 
My question to the Premier this afternoon: if your government 
believes that tax credits are the answer to creating a more 
favourable business climate, why did you decide to provide 
Cargill with cash up front? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — If we are today learning that the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone is opposed to this kind of 
economic development, that indeed has been a worthwhile day. 
I can hardly believe that's what she's telling us. 
 
A relatively modest sum of money used to provide tax 
equalization and for training has brought us a development of 
very considerable economic value. If the member is opposed to 
that kind of economic development — a large number of 
good-paying jobs for a relatively small investment of public 
funds — we want to know that. And I'll tell the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone, the public of Saskatchewan are going to 
want to know that too, at a time . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is quite obvious that the member opposite has 
absolutely no understanding of the concerns of many 
small-business people in Saskatchewan who are seeing tell-tale 
signs of a double standard at work here: cash up front for 
pre-election announcements and tax credits down the road for 
everyone else. 
 
On March 8 your Premier, sir, said to this Assembly, and I 
quote: 
 
 This is a uniform tax concession applicable right across 

the piece, fairly, to everybody. 
 
It appears to be a little more fair to some people than to others, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the average taxpaying business in Saskatchewan 
has to borrow money to invest in equipment for manufacturing 
and processing; they then have to hope for a profit; then they 
have to pay their taxes and then wait somewhere down the road 
for tax credits. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister: obviously you see Cargill as 
worthy of special treatment — how do you decide which 
companies get cash up front and who has to wait for tax 
credits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I don't have one with me, but I'm 
going to recommend for the member's reading a document 
called Partnership for Progress. Some two years ago my 
colleague, the Minister of Economic Development, prepared a 
report called Partnership for Progress, the substance of which 
was, rather than paying enormous sums of money for outsiders  



March 30, 1995 

 
1243 

to come and do the job for us, we were going to begin a 
partnership with Saskatchewan business. 
 
That was done two and a half years ago. That tree is now 
bearing considerable fruit. 
 
I remember the member from Saskatoon Greystone promising a 
new job creation project a week. Well I can say that this 
Partners for Progress which my colleague planted sometime 
ago is now bearing fruit, and in fact we're delivering on a large 
number of projects which are done in partnership with 
Saskatchewan business. And if the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone is opposed to our partnerships with Saskatchewan 
business and the results it has achieved, I want to know that and 
so do the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What 
small businesses around Saskatchewan want to know is, is what 
is fair for Cargill fair for them as well, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier's so-called fair and across the board tax policy is not 
fair; it is not across the board; and it is not available to the little 
guys under the same terms as it is to Cargill. 
 
And the Premier's government is in debt, but it is willing to 
borrow money to write cheques to seal the deals on pre-election 
announcements. Apparently, ordinary business people are not 
worthy of the same treatment — that's what they're saying by 
their actions, Mr. Speaker. The NDP government is now in the 
business of picking winners and playing favourites with 
taxpayers' money. 
 
My question to the minister. Will you admit that your tax credit 
policy is one more example of the two-tiered, double-standard 
treatment that your government has become famous for — your 
double standard for pensions, your double standard for health 
care, and now your double standard on tax policies, as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — What it is is one more example of the 
Leader of the Liberal Party who doesn't know what she's talking 
about. That's what it is. This is a tax break which is available to 
anyone — anyone in Saskatchewan — and the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone seems unaware of that. She seems to think 
this is a special deal for Cargill. It's available . . . it is a tax 
arrangement which is available to everyone. 
 
The one thing I like about the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone, she just doesn't get tired of being wrong. You raised 
the issue of the district health board deficits and you're wrong. 
You raised the issue of job numbers on several consecutive 
days — you were wrong each day. You raised the issue of 
patronage appointments — you were wrong. 
 
And I keep getting material in here — you were wrong on any 
number of issues and you're wrong on this issue. This is 
something that's available to anyone. I expect the member from  

Saskatoon Greystone to come back tomorrow with a flip and a 
flop on this issue as well. So I look forward to Friday morning's 
question period when we'll find out how you were wrong on 
this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Agreement with Small Business 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
question to the minister responsible to the family of Crown 
corporations, this time to SaskEnergy. Mr. Minister, your 
government has claimed that you are trying to bring about a 
better environment for small business in this province. You say 
you create the growth that small business and the jobs that go 
with them will bring. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, as with your increase in taxes, we have 
another example of how hollow that pledge truly is. We've been 
provided with a copy of an agreement that SaskEnergy is 
forcing small-business owners to sign. And the agreement states 
that SaskEnergy will be able to sue the owner of the company 
for payment should the business fail. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you know that the incorporation laws of this 
province are designed to encourage entrepreneurs to start new 
businesses without fear of being personally liable. When 
Saskatchewan people start a limited business their estate is not 
at risk. Why then do you implement a Draconian measure on 
small-business owners, and how does this square with creating 
a positive business climate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well as I understand it — and I can get 
the member further information — in the past there have been 
some contracts let by SaskEnergy to a contractor. The 
contractor has then sublet work to other contractors, and there is 
at least one particular case where the subcontractors weren't 
getting paid by the general contractor. We don't want that 
situation to happen. If that's the case which you refer to, that's 
the rationale behind the policy  to ensure that those who 
subcontract to general contractors actually receive payment for 
the work that they've done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
answer is what's wrong with the family of Crown corporations. 
The family of Crowns goes off and does whatever it wants to 
Saskatchewan people, and the ministers who are supposed to be 
responsible don't know what's going on. 
 
Mr. Minister, this form is from a carpet warehouse — a carpet 
warehouse. Now SaskEnergy has a monopoly power over 
providing gas to these businesses and they are using this 
monopoly power to force people into signing an agreement that 
bypasses long-standing incorporation laws. This agreement 
allows you, sir, and your family of Crowns, to go after their  



March 30, 1995 

 
1244 

homes or their life savings should their business fail. Now how 
in the world does . . . is that conducive to starting a new small 
business? It's not; it's a detriment. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, this flies in the face of what the former 
minister of Justice is promoting. He says he shouldn't be 
personally responsible for activities while acting as minister of 
Justice. He says he shouldn't be held personally responsible for 
breaking legal contracts with farmers or judges. One law for 
politicians and one law . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I want the 
member to put his question — the member put his question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it's 
one law for members of your government and another for the 
little guy. Mr. Minister, be consistent. Will you allow the 
incorporation laws of this province to protect small-business 
men and women from your own corporations — Crown 
corporations, Minister? Let's at least be fair, okay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well as Lorne Hepworth used to used to 
say in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that's the worst speech I 
ever heard. 
 
Is that a question from the administration that left 
Saskatchewan with a $15 billion debt, massive unemployment, 
businesses closing down, megaprojects losing money, 
haemorrhaging of the funds of the public purse? Is that the 
same people? I find it hard to believe that you would ask us 
about fairness towards companies in Saskatchewan. 
 
The example you use about the carpet business — I assume 
someone has to lay the carpet, so what happens if that company 
does not carry through? The contractor lays the carpet. So the 
contractor lays the carpet; we don't want to be held at 
SaskEnergy as being responsible to pay the carpet-layer because 
he's already paid the carpet supplier. We do that to protect other 
Saskatchewan contractors in an issue of fairness. 
 
For you to be lecturing the government of the day on the issue 
of fairness to business and the fairness to Saskatchewan people, 
is the height of hypocrisy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Vehicle Insurance Rate Reduction 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
purpose of my ministerial statement today is to inform members 
of the House about some positive news for commercial trucking 
and car rental industries. It's another important measure of 
support for Saskatchewan business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm pleased to announce that beginning May 1 of this year,  

vehicle insurance rate for certain commercial trucking carriers 
and car rental agencies will be reduced between 10 and 25 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 25 per cent reduction for heavy class A trucks 
will mean that a commercial carrier will pay between 92 and 
$964 less for their insurance. For heavy class AG trucks, 
insurance premiums will be reduced between 75 and $660. 
 
Those who register a commercial class TS trailer will also see a 
reduction in their insurance premium between $6 and $43. For 
you-drive or car rental agencies, their insurance premium 
surcharge will be reduced by 10 per cent from 71 to $109. 
 
In total the reductions will amount to $1.2 million in saving 
between these two industries each year. 
 
(1415) 
 
Insurance rates for these classes of vehicles are being reduced 
because of lower claims cost to SGI and less severe accidents. I 
say this is very important, positive news for these two 
industries, Mr. Speaker, because of their contribution to the 
provincial economy. Reducing insurance rates for these two 
important industries will benefit the entire province through 
economic spin-offs. 
 
The reductions will enable these two industries to lower fleet 
operating costs, allowing businesses in these industries to be 
more cost-effective and competitive, especially for commercial 
truckers. Lowering insurance premiums for commercial truckers 
will help them be more competitive with out-of-province 
carriers. 
 
These two industries are very important to this province's 
economy. Besides the many jobs that exist and are created by 
these two sectors, they also provide a vital service to many 
other sectors of the economy. By reducing their insurance 
premiums, we also believe there will be economic spin-offs that 
will benefit others in the provincial economy as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example of where this 
government is doing what it can in a reasonable fashion to help 
business be cost-effective and competitive. We all know how 
important these two elements are in running a successful 
business. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are very excited about the 
economic turnaround taking place in this province. The 
reduction in insurance rates that I have announced here today is 
just one of the many positive initiatives happening throughout 
Saskatchewan as our economy continues to grow and rebound 
for the benefit of all of the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed good news when this government is 
prepared to drop taxes or fees and I'm sure that the trucking  



March 30, 1995 

 
1245 

industry appreciates that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you're talking about giving a real break 
to an industry, such as the trucking industry which is a highly 
capitalized industry, perhaps a better method to do that would 
be to drop the E&H (education and health) tax. Now that would 
be a significant savings for the trucking industry and for 
everyone else across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you're going to make changes to the insurance rates that the 
companies are paying, one of the other areas that needs to be 
looked at, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, is to allow for a staggered 
payment of those premiums. Rather than making the premium 
simply one time a year, stagger it, as is being done right now for 
the general consumer; that it be done every six months or on 
every quarter, and that would provide a significant cash flow 
advantage for those companies. 
 
When we look at all of the other fees, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government has raised over the last three and a half years . . . 
fuel taxes, Mr. Speaker, there's another area in which would be 
of real benefit, a competitive advantage, for the trucking 
industries as they move through Saskatchewan, if this 
government was to look at that. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, we have a small decrease in insurance rate 
just before an election — just before an election, Mr. Speaker. 
And that's what is happening here. It's small, Mr. Speaker, in 
comparison to the amount of taxes paid by the trucking industry 
on the fuel they use. Mr. Speaker, that would be a much better 
way for this government to help the industry in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the Liberal caucus, we would like to say of course that we're 
delighted with any undertaking that might facilitate businesses 
to be more competitive and profitable in the province of 
Saskatchewan, thereby improving our economy and providing 
more people with jobs. 
 
But I must concur with the member from Souris-Cannington 
that indeed given what people have been facing, particularly 
small businesses in Saskatchewan, with the taxes, both indirect 
and direct, as well as every single fee being raised to the 
ultimate limit, that this indeed is a little bit what we could call 
too much . . . too little, too late. 
 
I think that as much as we are appreciative that something is 
being undertaken, one of the things to recognize here is that we 
will be watching with great interest what happens in fact with 
other kinds of insurance rates once the election is over. It is 
most interesting to those of us on this side of the House to look 
at everything in its overall perspective. 
 
So as much as we welcome this, we will wait with great 
anticipation as to what else is forthcoming as far as possible 
hikes are concerned in the insurance industry. Thank you. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, in accordance with 
section 67.1(3) of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, and pursuant to order in council 847 of '94, dated 
December 21, '94, I herewith table the Report of the 
Independent Committee on MLA Compensation. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Interior Designers 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It would have been useful, Mr. 
Speaker, had we agreed to give it second reading now, but I'm 
not sure opposition members would have agreed to that. So I 
will move second reading instead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of The Interior 
Designers Act. The Interior Designers Act reflects general 
government policy regarding professional legislation using 
guidelines provided by the Department of Justice. 
 
The majority of the sections in the Bill are standard sections 
that appear in all new professional legislation. Recognizing that 
interior designers have an impact on the public's health and 
safety in buildings, this Bill will give title protection to the 
term, interior designer. 
 
Designing building interiors involves knowing building and fire 
codes, the properties and use of materials, construction 
standards and applications, accepting standards of planning, 
integration of building systems, human psychology . . . human 
physiology and ergonomics, the psychological impact of space, 
light, and colour on work performance. 
 
To protect the health and safety of the public, it is necessary to 
set professional standards of competence for persons who call 
themselves interior designers. 
 
To meet these standards, the interior designers association of 
Saskatchewan has been pursuing professional legislation for the 
past 20 years. In addition, interior design associations in other 
provinces and the Interior Designers of Canada support 
professional legislation. Seven other provinces, Mr. Speaker, 
have similar legislation. 
 
The proposed Bill will govern the members of the interior 
designers association of Saskatchewan, which will do the 
following. 
 
(1) continue the interior designers association of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2) establish a council to manage and regulate the affairs and 
businesses of the association. 
 



March 30, 1995 

 
1246 

(3) provide authority for council to make by-laws which must 
be approved by two-thirds of association members and the 
minister responsible for the legislation. 
 
(4) require the council to keep a registry of members. 
 
(5) specify that only persons belonging to the association, who 
are members, will be able to use the term, interior designer. 
 
(6) establish a professional conduct committee and a discipline 
committee consisting of persons appointed by the council. 
 
(7) require that the interior designers association of 
Saskatchewan provide an annual report to the government as 
well as a list showing the names of members. 
 
This Bill will come into force on a day to be fixed by 
proclamation by the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Interior Designers. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it would 
appear that this Bill is fairly straightforward. However, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it would be appropriate for us to find out who 
the government has consulted with, what groups it has 
consulted with, and the real purposes and the real meaning of 
this Bill. 
 
And I think at the same time we should take the time to talk to 
some of the interior designers who may have had some input, to 
find out where the Bill is really going and what the Bill is really 
accomplishing. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, to allow further deliberation and 
further review of the Bill before us, I think it would be 
appropriate for us to adjourn the debate; research the Bill a little 
more closely before we would allow it to move into committee 
and for further debate in this Assembly. Therefore I now move 
for adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 37 — An Act 
respecting Medical Laboratory Technologists be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
indicated a few days ago when I gave a second reading speech 
on this Bill, there were a number of areas that were highlighted 
by the Bill. Highlights of this Act provide the society with the 
power to make by-laws; by-laws that affect the public will  

continue to require the approval of the Minister of Health. 
 
The Act also outlines the society's responsibilities with respect 
to investigation in disciplinary hearings. It also ensures that 
complaints of incompetence or misconduct are acted upon in an 
effective manner. And it establishes investigation-discipline 
committees that have authority to investigate complaints, apply 
to the court for subpoenas, and levy penalties, including fines of 
up to $2,000. 
 
It also indicates that disciplinary decisions may be appealed to 
Court of Queen's Bench, and a public representative will sit on 
the discipline committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears just from the information we have 
received and the intention of this Act, that the Act is fairly 
straightforward. Certainly the medical community have 
indicated they are quite supportive. And therefore at this time 
we see no reason to further hold up debate but to allow for the 
Bill to move into committee where we can get into some 
specific questions with the minister before the Bill would be 
passed out of this Assembly. And so therefore we would allow 
this Bill to now proceed to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 45 — An Act 
respecting Trading in Real Estate, the Real Estate 
Commission and Brokerages, Brokers and Salespersons 
Trading in Real Estate be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here again, Mr. 
Speaker, we've talked to members of the industry, and I've also 
had the privilege of talking to my own brother who happens to 
be involved in the industry and is on the real estate board. And, 
Mr. Speaker, what I've found in talking to most individuals, that 
they are indeed very supportive and in fact have been looking 
forward to the amendments that this piece of legislation is 
proposing regarding The Real Estate Act. 
 
They did have a couple of questions, however. They feel the 
Bill before this Assembly . . . or the legislation does deal with 
some of the questions that they have raised and are looking 
forward to the further debate in this Assembly as the Bill moves 
through the natural processes when it would be proclaimed and 
become law. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it isn't really in our best interests or the 
industry's interests for the Bill to be held up any further in 
second reading and I would therefore move that An Act 
respecting Trading in Real Estate, the Real Estate Commission 
and Brokerages, Brokers and Salespersons Trading in Real 
Estate be allowed to move into committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a  



March 30, 1995 

 
1247 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1430) 

Bill No. 46 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 46 — An Act 
to amend The Wascana Centre Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just a 
few comments on the Bill to amend The Wascana Centre Act. 
Essentially, of course, what this Act does is maintain the level 
of statutory funding for the Wascana Centre Authority from the 
same participating parties at the same levels for 1995-96 as it 
was in 1994-95. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maintaining the funding is I suppose going to have 
to be adequate. I know that the centre believes that this funding 
is too low to begin with, but accepts the situation as it is. And I 
might add, Mr. Speaker, that of course the level of funding 
remains today the same amount as it was in 1991. So there's 
certainly been no increase in spending to the Wascana 
Authority Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, knowing that this was coming up, I did a little bit 
of reading, and I was kind of intrigued with the Wascana Centre 
and some of its history and some of its development. 
 
I didn't know, for example, that the . . . and I apologize to the 
people who live in Regina for whom this is common 
knowledge, but that this was a make-work project. It was 
actually a work-for-welfare project back in the 1930s. And we 
had so many jobless men in Regina, and this was an initiation 
of some general public work projects, relief projects, in an 
effort to gain meaningful employment for Regina's jobless men. 
 
And we find, Mr. Speaker, that, for example, during this period 
of time the Albert Street bridge was widened. And that 
employed meaningful employment for 700 men, Mr. Speaker, 
during that period of time. And for those of us in the legislature, 
we know what that bridge can do and what it cannot do during 
the period of time when it was under reconstruction and repair. 
It was . . . we begin to appreciate what that can do. 
 
But at the same time, directly in Wascana at that time, it was 
these same men that, with shovels, dug the lake that we have, 
what we call Wascana Lake, and they deepened the lake by two 
feet, Mr. Speaker — a tremendous amount of work, a 
tremendous number of jobs. And of course the material that 
they dug out has become the two islands that we see in 
Wascana Lake right now. 
 
So it has rather an illustrious history and it's certainly something 
that . . . our forefathers, I guess, were very futuristic in their 
outlook in terms of what that could do for this particular city, 
and we're appreciative of that. 
 
Now the minister's second reading speech, when it went over  

that, became obvious to me, Mr. Speaker, that he was trying to 
politicize this issue by referring to some tinkering with the 
centre's spending that the last government did. And I believe 
really, Mr. Speaker, that it's an unfortunate situation that he 
would invite a political response to what is essentially a 
unpolitical Bill. And I'm going to resist, Mr. Speaker, the 
temptation to respond in like. However the NDP clearly have 
not learned their lessons about tax-and-spend policies in finger 
pointing to the past like that. They not only criticize us for our 
spending, but here again just like the '80s, they say it's not 
enough. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our caucus has a respect for the importance 
of the Wascana Centre. We know for example that it's the home 
of the Saskatchewan museum. It's the home of the Science 
Centre, the Saskatchewan centre, and the Diefenbaker 
Homestead, the University of Regina, and of course the 
legislature. 
 
And so because of its rich diversity, it is certainly something 
that is very, very valuable to the people of Regina, but not only 
them, but to all of the people in the province when they come to 
our capital city and they see what we have here in terms of an 
interior city park and be proud of what we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the way, in conclusion we are also pleased to 
hear from the minister that Regina will be hosting the second 
national capital cities' workshop, and we are sure that the 
contribution that Wascana Centre will make is going to be 
appreciated by all people at that event. Essentially, Mr. Speaker, 
that summarizes the brief remarks that I have, and we will be 
allowing this Bill to go to committee at this time. 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to just comment briefly on this Bill and point out that I have 
been familiar with the centre for some 28 years, having worked 
first at the museum beginning in 1967 and later at Wascana 
Centre Authority itself and now here in the Legislative 
Building, also located within Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
Our forefathers are to be commended for their foresight in 
setting a green space in Regina, and as a member opposite 
pointed out, also building the lake and creating the islands. And 
virtually every tree in this centre was planted by hand, and this 
takes decades to make a park as we now see it in Regina here, 
in Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
Wascana Centre Authority is a unique green space within our 
city and it is a place for people. And throughout the year there 
are a number of events, from winter festivals to dragon boat 
races, Pile O' Bones Sunday, various displays in front of the 
Legislative Building here. And it is a place for people 
throughout the year  even on Christmas Day people visit 
Wascana Centre to feed the Canada geese which do stay here all 
year round. 
 
People travel to the city to partake in activities in the centre not 
only from around Saskatchewan but from neighbouring 
provinces and also the United States. 



March 30, 1995 

 
1248 

Wascana Centre Authority and the centre itself is also very 
important to wildlife. The centre is renowned for its Canada 
goose flock, of which has been instrumental in establishing 
these birds in various places throughout North America. 
Offspring from Wascana Centre have been taken as far away as 
Quebec, Florida, New Mexico, and British Columbia, and as a 
result, the Canada goose is one species in today's time that is 
making a comeback whereas many other species are declining 
in numbers. 
 
Many unusual species also gather, or are found, within the 
centre, including recently a scissor-tailed flycatcher, green 
heron — first record of these species for Saskatchewan found 
right here in our capital city. So it is really a tribute to the 
people of Regina in past as well as present for maintaining this 
unique oasis in our urban centre. 
 
And also the many other facilities that we do have within the 
centre: of course the museum  I guess it's the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum  the Science Centre, the University of 
Regina, and even the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) has been able to find a home in Wascana Centre. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is regrettable that we are not able to provide 
at this time more funding for Wascana Centre, but the staff of 
the centre in the past . . . and continue to provide a very 
excellent service for the people of Saskatchewan in maintaining 
the centre in these times of difficult economic realities. We look 
forward to the staff continuing to maintain the Wascana Centre 
as a unique beauty spot within our city, and hopefully in the 
very near future, we will be able to start bringing the funding 
back to close to what it used to be a number of years ago. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly my pleasure to speak in favour 
of this Bill and look forward to better times with funding for 
Wascana Centre in the years to come. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Pringle that Bill No. 47 — An Act to 
amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again, some brief words on The Meewasin Valley Authority and 
I'm a little bit more knowledgeable about this particular 
situation since it's only a few miles from my own home. I'm just 
beyond the boundaries of the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, essentially what this Bill will do is 
maintain the current level of funding to the Authority. And I 
might add, Mr. Speaker, that the current level of funding has 
not risen since 1991. I guess we would have to say that we're  

fortunate to have been able to maintain at least the same level. 
 
And I couldn't help but thinking after I sat down on the 
Wascana Authority, Mr. Speaker, that both I and the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley, Mr. Speaker, both neglected to let 
the people who perhaps are listening and watching and are 
concerned about these, what kinds of monies are we talking 
about. And I will correct the error of my previous situation and 
indicate to you that what this amendment will do is maintain the 
level of statutory funding for the Meewasin Valley Authority at 
the same level as it was in '94-95. 
 
And as the Wascana . . . in Wascana there are three levels that 
help fund, and the three levels are the federal government, the 
provincial government, and the University of Saskatchewan, 
here in Regina. While we have in Saskatoon, with the 
Meewasin Valley Authority, we have the two levels of senior 
governments — the federal and the provincial. But as is the 
case in the Meewasin, it is the University of Saskatchewan this 
time. 
 
And here are the funding amounts. The province of 
Saskatchewan is the . . . I was mentioning federal, and I should 
retract that, Mr. Speaker. It's not the federal. It's provincial 
government of $740,000; the University of Saskatchewan, as I 
indicated to you, for $573 . . . actually almost $574,000 and the 
city of Saskatoon is also contributing $556,000 for a grand total 
of $1.87 million Mr. Speaker, and there are the contributors and 
the amounts that this Act will make and officialize. 
 
The one item, Mr. Speaker, that I want to draw to people's 
attention is the explanation given about section 69.1, and this is 
an issue that I intend to be asking some questions about, 
particularly the amendment that will permit the Authority to 
share Meewasin's knowledge, expertise, and experience with 
other organizations, agencies and municipalities throughout the 
province. 
 
Right now, apparently, Meewasin is limited to agreements with 
parties relating to or incidental to the Meewasin Valley. Now 
the ability to extend the provision of expertise outside of the 
Meewasin Valley makes the Authority a resource for all 
municipalities and organizations in the province. 
 
And what I particularly would want to know is precisely how 
that objective is to be accomplished and how the Act is going to 
be set up to allow this to happen, and not that I have any 
particular concerns, it is just that I think that a better 
explanation is needed, and I look forward to the opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to quiz the minister responsible for this 
Act in Committee of the Whole. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would at this time say that it's time to move 
to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 



March 30, 1995 

 
1249 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to establish the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation and to enact a Consequential 

Amendment 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to Clause 1, I would ask the 
minister to introduce the official who has joined us here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left is 
Mr. Clare Kirkland, the deputy minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome, Minister, 
and Mr. Kirkland. It's going to be a good opportunity here this 
afternoon for us to discuss Bill 22 and the implications and 
ramifications that it will have for the province of Saskatchewan 
and in particular, at this point, for our Saskatchewan road 
construction people. 
 
We have, Minister, this morning received the memorandum 
from the road builders of Saskatchewan. In this memorandum 
they list five things that they would like to have you consider in 
this Bill. These five things can be addressed by amendments to 
the Bill. And I will read these five concerns into the record for 
you so that you will understand what the road builders of 
Saskatchewan are concerned about in the Bill. These will not be 
the amendments, of course, but the general principles involved. 
 
First of all, no. 1, that all work done by public . . . open and 
public tendering. This is a pretty straightforward request, 
Minister. What the folks are saying is that basically the way the 
tendering is done through the Department of Highways under 
its present and past structure would continue. And I think it's 
fairly self-explanatory and I'm pretty sure that you know and 
understand what these people are asking you for. 
 
A simple amendment to the Bill would ensure that that would 
happen. We're not saying that it couldn't happen by not having 
the amendment, but we are saying that if you intend in good 
faith to deal with these people, then we will leave no doors 
open, that we will make this airtight so that it's guaranteed to do 
what you have told people it's going to do. 
 
No. 2, that the corporation be specifically not allowed to 
borrow monies. Here I think the realities, Minister, are that the 
people in the industry are worried about our province; they're 
worried about our debts; they're worried about our deficits. 
They are worried about the use of a Crown corporation as a 
manipulative tool to play politics just before an election, for 
example, where you might in fact borrow 3 or $400 million that 
wouldn't show up on the year's budget but in fact would become 
the province's long-term debt. 
 
Those monies could be used in a program of announcements of 
construction projects and projections that would make it very  

attractive for people to want to vote for the government in 
power, but in fact that it would be left with a legacy of a terrible 
debt burden for the province and for the taxpayers. So I think 
that is a pretty straightforward, understandable request from the 
folks that are involved in the very business that we're 
discussing. 
 
No. 3, that there will be no union preference or referrals such as 
the Crown corporate tendering agreement. Here again, Minister, 
the people in this industry have come to understand two things: 
first of all, they understand that we do have now a union-
preference tendering policy for all Crown corporations, as 
announced by the minister in charge of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation) some weeks back. That tendering 
policy is a reality now in the CIC Crowns, and it is only a long 
stretch and a short step until this would happen as well in the 
Treasury Crowns. 
 
We already have the example of course of how the union 
preference tendering was used in the Water Corporation. And 
because that has happened to a Treasury Crown already at 
Melfort, Saskatchewan, we now know that the door is basically 
open to have that happen, and it's only a short stretch in fact in 
order for that to become a reality. 
 
These people do not of course want that to happen because of 
the second factor in their consideration and thinking, which is 
that in the construction industry the very reality of life is that 
most of it happens outside of our big cities. It happens out on 
the roads. It happens miles and miles, many times, away from 
just about anywhere. And the reality of life is that those 
construction crews are very rarely unionized and very rarely can 
they be practically unionized because you couldn't follow the 
rules of the union halls' hiring policies and all of the 
implications and ramifications that go with a union tendering 
policy and union membership being part of the prerequisite of 
working on these jobs. It just does not fit with this particular 
industry. 
 
So as an act of good faith, again we have heard people say from 
your department that there is no . . . it is not intended at this 
point for this policy to be applied to this Crown. However if 
that's what you mean, then put your money where your mouth is 
and put it into the legislation as an amendment, and absolutely 
assure these people as an act of good faith that you intend on 
doing what you say you're going to do. 
 
And very simply, I guess, that has explained itself there, that 
they want you to show them by writing into the legislation that 
you are going to be above-board on this principle and that 
you're not going to stab them in the back down the road. 
 
No. 4, corporation be not allowed to purchase construction 
equipment or hire employees directly. It's very obvious, 
Minister, that it becomes a very big concern of people in the 
private sector who are dealing with government to be concerned 
about who their competition will end up being. 
 
And when they ask for the government to set up a corporate  



March 30, 1995 

 
1250 

structure or some kind of a funding pool structure to hold 
money so that certain things can be achieved, the last thing in 
the world that they want to have happen is for that pool to be 
used to buy equipment and to hire men to compete against them 
in their very industry. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Like SaskTel. Like SaskPower. We can go 
through a lot and we could go through a lot of history here, 
Minister, an awful lot of history about how left-wing 
governments have decided to have the state own and control 
everything rather than to have the private sector involved. 
 
That basic, fundamental philosophy ends up having the 
government decide to buy their own Euclids, their own Terexes, 
their own trucks, and their own Cats and their own graders, and 
hire people and go out and start doing road construction and 
road maintenance work on their own. 
 
This, of course, would basically eliminate the need for the 
private sector and would provide a new source of competition 
to them that they could not possibly compete against because 
always these entities end up being subsidized one way or the 
other. And the rules are never, ever fair again. And it is not a 
level playing-field. 
 
And while you have suggested to us that you have no intentions 
of doing these things, we say again, if you don't intend on doing 
them, then as an act of good faith let us introduce an 
amendment to this legislation that will absolutely ensure that 
what you say is fact and that it will remain fact, written into the 
law. 
 
No. 5, that corporations be responsible directly to the legislature 
and not to any government body other than the Department of 
Highways. Again, Minister, I think it's very important to the 
people in the industry to know that there is going to be 
accountability. 
 
However, this goes a step further than accountability just to the 
people in the industry. It is a question of accountability that the 
auditor has brought to our attention, and we believe that he 
makes a very good point. We are oftentimes not accountable in 
a timely enough manner about the way that we spend taxpayers' 
money. 
 
Oftentimes it has been in the past that we examine Crown 
corporations in committee work, for example, and we examine 
them two to three years after the fact. Nobody cares any more 
what has happened back then. They want things to be current 
and examined. They want to have accountability before supply 
and accountability before supply has not been built into this 
particular piece of legislation. Accountability can be built into 
this piece of legislation. We can be open and above-board, and 
we can in fact do this right, simply by, again, placing a small 
piece of amendment into the legislation to ensure that there will 
be proper accountability as suggested by the auditor. 
 

Now obviously the member from Saskatoon doesn't like the fact 
that we are challenging the government and that we are 
challenging you to be up front with the people. We're 
challenging you to be honest with the people; we're challenging 
you to say, in words, in writing in the legislation, exactly what 
you're trying to suggest and imply  that people should trust 
you. 
 
Well unfortunately, Mr. Minister, we don't trust any of your 
government; we trust you more than most of them. Obviously 
the ones that protest the most would be the ones we trust the 
least. 
 
But the truth of the matter is, sir, that we want this program to 
work. There is some good here. And the good of it is to save 
you from embarrassment of losing $20 million out of last year's 
budget that you should already have taken care of. 
 
(1500) 
 
We understand that fully. You just, quite frankly, went to sleep 
at the switch and you've almost lost $20 million out of last 
year's supplementary estimates, and there were no proper 
vehicles in your grasp to do this. And so now you're trying to 
come through the back door to save your butt and the 
government's butt so that you can save last year's budget, to still 
spend it and not end up having to do some work on the books to 
transfer that money into this year's budget. 
 
Well I'm sorry to say that we find ourselves embarrassed a little 
too, because we have to go along with that. Because there's a 
greater need than politics here  there's the need to try to get 
the roads built and to try to get people back to work. And it's 
unfortunate that you run such a shabby administration that you 
can't even save your own $20 million, don't even have an 
infrastructure program on paper that you announced with the 
federal government last fall, and in fact blow the whole deal 
because you never, ever had it properly endorsed by the feds 
when you announced . . . Premature announcements always 
lead to failure. You embarrassed the federal government and 
now the truth of the matter is that they're getting even with you 
at the expense of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Quite simply put, I think it's time, Minister, that we challenge 
you. We have read a list to you of the five concerns that the 
road builders of Saskatchewan have. We've read that list to you. 
In fact behind the scenes we've had the Law Clerk working and 
we have in fact had drawn up the amendments that would apply 
to these principles. Those amendments now are in writing and 
they have, my understanding is, been presented to you and to 
your people. 
 
You have access to them; your experts are at this moment, I 
understand, studying them. I'm sure that your official will be 
able to coach you as to the results of those deliberations. 
 
So we put it to you now, and we put your foot to the fire, 
Minister: will you agree to allow the amendments that bring 
these principles into effect to be passed into this piece of  



March 30, 1995 

 
1251 

legislation as we go on here this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member for his 
long-winded questions. One of the reasons the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation was set up in November of last year 
was because of a meeting with the federal Minister of 
Transport, Mr. Young, in mid-October. And what Mr. Young 
said at that time is that all provinces go back home, decide what 
you can spend, how much can you put in as your share of a 
national highways program. He also said, give us some kind of 
time frame that you would like to spend this money, and what I 
will do then is take it to my cabinet and we'll see what we can 
do. 
 
So what we did in Saskatchewan is we came back home and we 
talked to the Finance minister and told her, and she understood 
the need for a national highways program, especially in regards 
to the twinning of No. 1 and 16. And I'm sure many members 
on your side in fact bring petitions in day after day after day 
after day in regards to No. 1. So you know the seriousness of it 
and so do we. 
 
So on December 15 we were expecting the good news, but of 
course the federal minister said no. So we came back home and 
decided, well how can we do this, what can happen now? And 
private sector industries, private industries, trucking companies, 
mining companies, forestry companies, expressed an interest, 
and have expressed interest from time to time, in participating 
with government on improvements to the highways 
infrastructure. 
 
So we pursued that, and of course now are looking to pass this 
Bill so that we can use that $20 million so we can lever 
additional funding from the private sector industries. And of 
course the fight with the federal minister will continue because 
I am not satisfied with his answer. 
 
In Canada we spend . . . the federal government spends 6 . . . or 
contributes 6 per cent to the national highways network. And 
the next lowest country is the United States at 33 per cent. It's 
not fair. And I will continue to tell the Liberal minister that it 
isn't fair and we need some federal help to twin the Highways 
No. 1 and No. 16. 
 
This innovative, creative idea is a good idea and industry 
respects it and likes it. The road builders respect it and likes it. 
 
It is a Treasury Board Crown and does not come under any 
jurisdiction or any rules of any other . . . any CIC Crown. It's 
different; it's a Treasury Board Crown. And the member 
opposite knows that and the road builders know that and the 
industry that want to contribute to the partnerships fund 
understands that. And so I want to tell you again that that is 
fact. 
 
It will be open in public tendering. It's going to operate under 
the same rules as the Department of Highways. The member 
knows that and members on that side of the House know that, 
and the industry knows that and the road builders know that. 

It is a great idea. I'm sure that once we get the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation rolling many other provinces will look 
to this idea as refreshing, new way of providing infrastructure 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it helps everybody. What happens is industry will receive 
a savings, whether it be maybe longer trucks, if it happens to be 
a trucking company, or maybe weights, or whatever that case 
might be — always considering safety. But for any savings that 
they gained, they will return a portion of that savings into, for 
an example, Highway No. 1, and allow us to perhaps start 
twinning. 
 
So it's a very good idea. It's a benefit to the company; it's a 
benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. It's a benefit to the 
tourists that visit Saskatchewan; it's a benefit to the economic 
development of the province of Saskatchewan. It's a benefit to 
the communities that live along Highway No. 1, for an example. 
They've been demanding improvements and they travel that 
road often, and so these things are very, very important to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to industry. And so we believe it's a 
very innovative idea. Industry believes it's very innovative. 
 
I want to mention one more partnership that has been created 
not long ago without any money from the provincial 
government; it's all industry money. And that's the agreement 
with COGEMA and Cameco on Highways 102 and 905 from 
La Ronge to Wollaston Lake. And what happens on that 
highway is that we are allowing these large trucking . . . this 
company to have larger trucks. And with the larger trucks, they 
save money. 
 
Seventy-five per cent of what they save they're going to turn 
back into developments in 102, 905. It might be straightening a 
curve. It might be widening the highway. It may be levelling a 
hill. It may be taking some stones from the ditches and then 
maybe someday even paving; who knows. But that will give the 
government, the people of Saskatchewan, 2 to $2.5 billion a 
year from 10 to 15 years. 
 
It's a great idea. They're saving some money. They're returning 
75 per cent of those savings into our highway system. That not 
only helps them but it helps the local residents. And it helps the 
other industry develop in that area. It helps tourism. So it's just 
a good news situation. So I would hope that the opposition 
would give quick passage to this Bill. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
you can be absolutely assured you will get our full cooperation 
for quick passage to this Bill just as soon as you commit to the 
necessities of the people of this province and the road builders 
of Saskatchewan. And that won't be all that hard for you to do 
very quickly if you choose to. 
 
Now out of all that rhetoric, I heard you say that you agree to, 
one, that all work done by open and public tendering will 
become, in general principle, a part of this Bill through an 
amendment. And we're happy to hear that; we hold you to that. 



March 30, 1995 

 
1252 

Now let's deal with the other four that you managed to miss. 
Maybe we'd better go a little slower for you. This might be too 
much for you to grasp all in one big lump. 
 
I'll go to number two, the principle that the corporation be 
specifically not allowed to borrow money. Minister, would you 
agree to commit to that principle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I want to tell the member opposite that 
the reason the corporation may need to borrow money at some 
point in time, though it may never as well but it should be left 
to some flexibility, is in fact  we would take a look at 
Highway No. 1; perhaps that's a good example  if we in fact 
found partners that were willing to partnership with us, and the 
cost to complete No. 1 is 35 or $40 million, for an example, if 
we could in fact borrow that money, do that, because the 
contributions may come from savings by the users. 
 
So these savings will not come all at once, as I'm sure you're 
aware. These savings will come year after year after year after 
year after year. So as the savings come to the company, they 
then will return a portion of the savings to the government or to 
the Crown. 
 
So what I'm saying I guess is that there has to be some 
flexibility in the corporation to borrow some. You have to also 
remember that it's an open corporation. There's going to be 
complete financial statements and the annual report will be 
tabled annually in the legislature. The corporation will be 
audited by the Provincial Auditor. The corporation's 
expenditures will be reviewed by the Standing Committee on 
Crown Corporations. The corporation will have a limit on any 
purchase or sale of real property. If a transaction exceeds the 
limit, the Lieutenant Governor in Council would approve . . . 
approval would be required. 
 
So as you can see, there's a lot of safeguards here. But we have 
to allow the corporation to do its job. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Highways and Transportation has talked about the actual 
benefit of doing business through the corporation that would 
allow for a tender to be accepted that would build a road, and 
then have the financing of this road through a loan to the 
corporation; and use the example on the No. 1 Highway to 
deliver a better opportunity for efficiencies, I think he was 
probably wanting to talk about. 
 
What I want to point out to this Assembly and to the people in 
the province, what happens when this sort of thing gets its own 
momentum. I just want to bring to the people's attention the 
headline in yesterday's paper, in the Star-Phoenix: "B.C. 
finance minister said playing shell game". One of the main 
topics that was considered as a part of the discussion under the 
headline from Vancouver, and dealing with the budget brought 
down by the Minister of Finance in British Columbia, the 
Minister of Finance in British Columbia said that there is going 
to be $114 million surplus in the B.C. budget. That's what she 
said. 

And then when you read the fine print, the debt of the province 
of British Columbia is going to move up by $1.2 billion, or 1.1. 
It's going to be a total . . . right now B.C. (British Columbia) 
has a total of $26.9 billion worth of debt and next year it will 
have $27.9 billion worth of debt. 
 
And do you know what? They have no deficit; they have a 
surplus. But the debt is going up. And our view of this, to the 
people of the Assembly, our view of this is stated here: 
 
 Spending on transportation has been moved to a new 

Crown corporation, the B.C. Transportation Financing 
Authority. The corporation will borrow $337 million 
this year — debt that previously would have shown up 
in the government's annual ledgers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that's what the concern of this Assembly should 
be. The Minister of Highways has asked us to consider another 
opportunity for this government to borrow more money. That's 
the first thing. The second thing is, it is putting into place a 
system whereby this Legislative Assembly will not be able to 
talk about the capital projects that are going to be delivered 
through this Crown corporation. 
 
Now the Minister of Highways has said, well this is a Treasury 
Board Crown; we can talk about it here. Well I just want to 
know, how many people in this Assembly talked about the 
water pipeline from Melfort to the Saskatchewan River? How 
many people in this Assembly or how many people in the 
province of Saskatchewan got to talk about the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation delivering water into Melfort? Nobody, 
nobody. 
 
(1515) 
 
And that, Mr. Chairman, is the reason why this Assembly is 
asking this minister to say, I want to clearly emphasize that this 
is a holding corporation for monies that will be put into it, not a 
spending corporation to borrow money into infinity and then 
have to have the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan go 
and bail it out. 
 
And that, Mr. Chairman, is the reason why we want this kind of 
an amendment in this Bill, to deliver that. And that is the reason 
why we are concerned that this minister is not going to do that. 
And we still haven't got a precise answer as to why he wants to 
have it in there. 
 
He says it's for efficiency. Well, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of 
Highways has the right, through the Department of Highways, 
to access money from the Department of Finance to deliver 
money to build and construct highways today. He has that 
opportunity to do that, and he has had that opportunity since the 
Department of Highways was established. I want to say to this 
Assembly and to the members of this Assembly and to the 
people of Saskatchewan that this minister has the right to access 
money, to borrow through the Department of Finance, to access 
money for the Crown . . . for a Department of Highways' capital 
project. 



March 30, 1995 

 
1253 

If he does that, he has to come to this Assembly to seek 
approval. He has to come to this Assembly to seek approval for 
the spending in capital projects or whatever the Department of 
Highways does. We say to you, Mr. Chairman, that if he puts 
this Crown corporation in the way he has suggested it will be, 
we will not have the opportunity to see the spending of the 
Crown corporation. We will not. 
 
He can borrow the money anytime he wants through the Crown 
corporation, build roads anytime he wants, and this Assembly 
will not have the freedom to do it. In fact the auditor has said to 
us, watch this government and how it transfers money from one 
entity to another. And that is the way this government operates. 
It's like, where is the peanut, under which walnut or which cup 
is the peanut. And that, Mr. Speaker, is who knows? 
 
Another way that the auditor has suggested this is . . . this is 
like moving wheat from bin to bin to bin. You never have more 
wheat; you just have it spread around in different arrangements. 
And that is what is exactly what this Minister of Highways is 
proposing to do. And if the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld 
wants to get involved in it, she can — or Wildwood — she can 
get up and say her piece anytime and maybe ask the Minister of 
Highways exactly what the problem is. 
 
We think that you are doing this to borrow money specifically 
for an election, and that is the way that you want to handle it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That is the most ridiculous thing I've 
ever heard. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well I think I touched a nerve here, Mr. 
Chairman. The people in this Assembly have come to the place 
where they want to hide how much they borrow so that they 
don't have to come to this Assembly to finance these capital 
projects. 
 
Now let's go one step further. The Department of Finance, in all 
of the history that I have been involved as a minister of the 
Crown, has always said, we want to know what's in these funds. 
We want to know. And therefore they have hoarded the 
privilege of dealing with these through only the Department of 
Finance. Do you know why they said this, Mr. Chairman? They 
said this so that there is some control of the spending — control 
of the spending  because the Department of Finance has to, 
under the direction of this Crown corporation, then go and say 
to the money markets, I need $100 million more, not the 20 
million. The 20 million isn't a concern to us, Mr. Minister. It's 
the $100 million this year and 25 to 75 the next year and the 
300 the next year. That's what's a concern to this Assembly and 
to the taxpayers. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Minister? The road builders, the road 
builders who are going to use this money, believe that this is 
accurate. This is the thing that they want to have. And, Mr. 
Minister, if I had the opportunity to be the Minister of 
Highways and the road builders agreed with me to defining 
clearly how much money was going to be spent, I would say I'd 
come a long way, because then I can say, in a defensive fashion  

to the taxpayers, I’ve protected your money, number one. And 
number two, I'm going to deliver the service on the basis that it 
is going to provide a decent service but also a fair one dealing 
with how much money you are going to borrow. 
 
And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why you haven't given us 
any reason, beyond one small reason of efficiency which can be 
done through the Department of Highways already, that you 
want to have this Crown corporation established. 
 
Now let's go to the next point. You talked about the role of the 
Department of Highways in pulling in money from various set 
fees and different ways that outside people would want to 
contribute. Well, Mr. Chairman, we had in this gallery today the 
trucking industry. The trucking industry was told that their costs 
of licensing their vehicles and doing business in the province of 
Saskatchewan was going to be reduced by a million dollars. 
 
Now this minister says that he is going to have some of that 
money flow from some of that running rights of these truckers 
. . . is going to flow into this Crown corporation, which tells 
me, Mr. Chairman, that this minister is going to tack a toll fee 
on every one of these trucks whenever he wants. And whatever 
that rate should be, he is going to put a toll on the trucking 
industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think if he has the opportunity to do that, I think it's 
wrong. The Department of Highways, the Highway Traffic 
Board should be the agency that delivers that. They have the 
right to do that. And I don't think this Crown corporation should 
have the right to set those kinds of fees. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
or Mr. Chairman, is the reason why I think it should be left in 
the Department of Highways and left where it has traditionally 
been. The industry doesn't need another complicated step to 
deliver money. 
 
When we talked about . . . or when you talked about November 
the Crown corporation was set up. Well, Mr. Minister, it wasn't 
set up in November. You just had a sparkling idea putting a 
Crown corporation together . . . would be a nice easy kind of a 
thing to do, and we can get this Crown corporation going, and 
when we have it going we can plunk $20 million into it. 
 
Well the day I heard this, Mr. Minister, that you were plunking 
$20 million into this, I said, you know, there's one fundamental 
mistake that this minister has made and that the Premier has 
made. And that is that he is going to take the opportunity to 
lower the debt and plunk it into another Crown corporation so 
that somewhere along the line the people are going to have to 
deal with a Crown corporation who is going to perhaps have a 
union-preference tendering policy. 
 
That is a fundamental belief of this government, and it's a 
fundamental belief of this minister that that's what it should be. 
So why shouldn't we assume that that's what's going to happen? 
And then they will come and say, well the Department of 
Highways doesn't do it that way. 
 



March 30, 1995 

 
1254 

Well let's talk about the Department of Health who said we 
don't fundamentally do it that way. But when we have architects 
coming back to us and stating that the Department of Health has 
indicated that there is a union-preference hiring policy and 
you'd better have the tenders reflect that, then I say this Minister 
of Highways is going to follow in exactly the same line. And I 
believe and I think the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
have a right to believe that they should fear that very thing. And 
that, Mr. Minister, is why we object to the kinds of things that 
you are going to do here. 
 
And borrowing for the sake of borrowing, the Department of 
Finance has the right and authority to already borrow for you, 
and you should in fact have that right left there. How are you 
going to bring all these borrowing capacities of all the agencies 
of government under one roof and have one single agency do 
this for the people of Saskatchewan? That is to have the 
Department of Finance put this together. And that, Mr. 
Minister, is the reason why we believe and the people in the 
construction association believe that this is necessary to have 
happen. 
 
And if efficiency and the fact that the federal minister did this 
in November are the two reasons why you want to have this put 
in there, that those aren't good enough. 
 
We want to have that put in here so that you are giving a benefit 
to the taxpayers by saying, I'm not going to be allowed to 
borrow. If we're going to borrow money, it's going to come 
through the General Revenue Fund of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that's the only vehicle that we're going to 
use. And that, Mr. Minister, is the big question. Are you going 
to allow that to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. First 
of all, I note that the member mentioned the Melfort pipeline. 
And it's very interesting that he mentioned that pipeline because 
I happened to be in Gronlid the other day at an opening of snow 
machines — snow machines that are putting snow on the ski 
hill. And where does that water come from? By jiminy, from 
the Melfort pipeline. 
 
It's piped off that line over to the ski hill, and now they make 
snow. And what happens with that? They have tourism, and 
now the economy is picking up. If you talk to the Melfort 
people and they have a drink of water . . . or they'll even give 
you a taste of water when you visit Melfort. And they'll tell you, 
can you remember the water we used to have? 
 
So I think it's just an excellent pipeline and an excellent service 
to the people in that area. Certainly you have problems 
sometimes when you have pipelines. But they're fixed, and 
everything is working fine. 
 
I guess I'm wondering . . . certainly I will want to see . . . you're 
talking about an amendment to borrowing. I would like to see 
that amendment, to take a closer look at it. 
 
But I want to say, say you're dealing with a forest company, for  

an example. The project might be a 15 million project. I'm just 
using this as an example. Maybe the agreement says the 
province puts in 5 million, and the forest company puts in 10 
million. But the savings to the forest company doesn't come all 
at once, but we still have to spend the $15 million all at once 
for the particular road. So the government funds the $15 
million. The 10 that the forest company would owe would come 
in maybe on a yearly basis over the next 15 or 20 years. You 
see, that's the problem with limiting the borrowing. But 
certainly I will want to look at your suggested amendment 
because perhaps there is something that we can live with. 
 
You say that you don't want a complicated system. And that's 
what industry has said; industry has said that they want a clear 
vehicle so that they can see where this money is being spent and 
on what project. That's why the Crown corporation is created — 
not for my benefit, not for your benefit, but for the benefit of 
industry, the people that want to participate in the partnership. 
 
You were saying that the truckers here today are going to get 
some savings now on their SGI plates, and that's very, very 
good news. And you were saying that maybe I will be now 
grabbing at that money. No, that's not the way this corporation 
works. It's a volunteer program. It's for companies that in fact 
see a way of saving and are willing to participate. It's a 
volunteer system; it's a willing participant system. And I want to 
keep you informed on that. 
 
I have a real concern about how are you going to explain, if in 
fact this Bill doesn't pass, to the road builders and how you're 
going to explain to the people that sent in the petitions — 
hundreds and hundreds of petitions on Highway No. 1. You 
know I don't understand your concern, but furthermore I have a 
hard time to understand that now the road builders may lose 
work. Some important projects will not get done. I guess I have 
a hard time to understand that. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have a vehicle to 
borrow money already. You have a vehicle to borrow the 
money, and that is through the Department of Finance. You 
don't need to have a vehicle to borrow money for this Crown 
corporation. 
 
What we are saying to you is that the road builders would get 
the money in any case if they borrowed it through the 
Department of Finance. They don't need a Crown corporation to 
borrow money. And we say to you: what value is an additional 
borrowing power of a Crown corporation going to be? 
 
And what is going to happen is this Crown corporation . . . as I 
talked to the Minister of Finance this week, I talked to him 
about how corporations borrow the money. SaskPower goes 
and says, I need a hundred million dollars this year for projects; 
I need that money. SaskPower goes to the deputy minister of 
Finance and asks him for the money. 
 



March 30, 1995 

 
1255 

Why do you need borrowing authority in this legislation? We 
are saying you don't need it. Put it in there and prevent it from 
happening. 
 
Have you ever thought of protecting yourselves  maybe if the 
Liberals got in  on how this money should be spent and 
borrowing power? You haven't thought of that, and you should 
maybe think about it. If they would get in and run this 
corporation, it might go right down the tubes, and then what are 
you going to do? Then we have to stand back and look and say, 
oh my goodness, I should have done that. 
 
The Department of Finance, through the deputy minister of 
Finance, already has the authority to borrow money for this 
corporation or for any other corporation, so why don't you put it 
in there to allow it to be there? And it simply states: on the 
condition that the corporation shall not incur debt in excess 
thereof. And that, Mr. Minister, you could have a sinking fund 
there; many, many agencies have that. Municipalities have that; 
they understand that. The people who are in the contracting 
business understand that because they know that municipalities 
already do that. When they bid on tenders for municipalities, 
they already know that that is a part of the way that business is 
done. 
 
You've got these funds that are available on an annual basis. 
The Department of Highways puts this money in there, or the 
General Revenue Fund puts the money in there, and then you're 
allowed to spend it. That's the thing that needs to happen in this 
Crown corporation. And we say to you that this is not an unreal 
request on our part to have it in this corporation. And you 
haven't explained to me in any detail why it should be there or 
why we shouldn't restrict this corporation from having that 
authority. And I say to you, give me a good reason to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member opposite. 
I'm going to try to explain it one more time how this corporation 
would work. 
 
Let's take, for instance, a mining company. The mining 
company will need a road . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. 
If indeed there's a road that's needed, the cost of that road is so 
much. And let's take an example that it's $25 million, I guess. 
 
Now the private corporation or the private partner sees the road 
built. Now somebody has to pay for that road when it's built. 
They are going to pay their share or their partnership portion 
through savings that they receive. And so that will come over 
time, and it may be a 10-year period or it might be a 12-year 
period, or it might be a 15-year period. Somebody originally has 
to pay for that road. Maybe the province in fact would pay 
nothing on the road, but would have to front the money until it 
received the payments from the private sector. 
 
And I think it's a win-win situation. I mean, if an industry 
would like a road and are willing to pay for it in the province of 
Saskatchewan, should we refuse that? Well I would hardly 
think so. I would think if you talked to the taxpayers of the 
province, they would say, well I don't think you should refuse  

that. 
 
So I think you have to understand what we're trying to do with 
this corporation is to add to our infrastructure. And what we're 
trying to do is in fact if industry want a partnership with the 
province, fine, we will do that. And we're certainly willing to 
listen to industry to see what some of the projects they may be 
interested, to see if in fact we can put some partnership 
agreements together. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I have no problem, Mr. Minister, with the 
process that you've outlined. I have no problem with it at all 
because I understand how that works. 
 
Highways budget for the road and then they should put it into 
the corporation. The corporation then says . . . And the money 
is received from the Department of Finance. Here's a lump sum 
payment to the corporation called Transportation Partnerships 
Corporation. That money is transferred into there, and that's a 
holding company for monies to be disbursed. They disburse it. 
Then when the money is coming back from whoever it is — 
could be the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, for example, 
or Weyerhaeuser or any one of the corporations that have paid 
and contributed to roads  they then can take and put money 
back into that corporation. And there is no problem with that. 
 
And by the fact that you are restricted in borrowing has no 
reason to impact negatively on that method of doing business. 
The corporation can receive, any time, donations made back to 
it on the savings. We have no problem with that. That's the way 
the Ag Development Fund was set up in the first place. I have 
no problem with that. We've done that for 10 years for sure 
already. 
 
And I know that you don't have an agency to handle a donation 
by or a payment to the Department of Highways in lieu of 
benefits that are received from individuals or benefits that were 
given to individuals. You don't have it. I understand that 
completely. I have no quarrel with that. I have none at all. 
 
But I do have a quarrel with how other agencies are delivering 
that service. B.C. Transportation Financing Authority, the 
corporation will borrow this year, will borrow $337 million. 
 
Now that is a lot of highway, Mr. Minister. But you know 
what? The paper also goes on to say: 
 
 The leak of details on B.C.'s budget, now being 
investigated by the police, was one more embarrassing gaff for 
Premier Mike Harcourt, who must go to the polls within 18 
months and has been searching for the right moment to face 
cranky voters. 
 
Now he's going to pump $337 million . . . no, the corporation is 
going to borrow $337 million — it doesn't even say what they're 
going to spend. He's going to do this to buy the votes of the 
voters and they're going to pay for it themselves. That's what's 
going to happen. 
 



March 30, 1995 

 
1256 

And we say to you, no. We draw the line in the sand, Mr. 
Minister, and say no. Go get the Department of Finance to 
borrow the money, like it's traditionally been done, and allow 
them to do it, and then you come back here and say, this is what 
we're going to spend. That's what we're talking about, and that's 
what you have to give me. You haven't even come close to 
giving me a good reason for having the freedom to borrow the 
money. Now you tell me why you need to borrow the money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I'm going to try, Mr. Chairman, to 
explain once more time. Let's take an example of the recent 
agreement with COGEMA and Cameco on 102, 905. We're 
going to receive about $2 million a year to put into those two 
highways, and we're putting just our normal maintenance; we're 
not contributing. 
 
Well we'll take that one step further, and let's say we had two 
industries that wanted a partnership with the province of 
Saskatchewan on building a road. One industry was a $15 
million project and the other industry was a $15 million project, 
and in fact they were willing to pay for the whole project, based 
on savings that they would receive through the agreement. Well 
then somebody has to spend the $30 million to put . . . It hasn't 
really cost the taxpayers any money, you have to understand 
that. Not one cent for this road. In fact the private sector would 
be paying the shot. 
 
But are we going to limit ourselves that we cannot do this? I 
don't think that's what we want to do. I think we want to 
participate with the private sector, improve our infrastructure. 
And I know I've got lots of requests from members on that side 
of the House that a certain road needs improving. There's a new 
grain terminal coming here, there's . . . oil industry is really 
booming and it's affecting our roads. Well these are some of the 
things that perhaps can be addressed. 
 
And so I don't think we can afford to shut down a good idea 
where private sector industry want to participate with the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Give me the roads in Saskatchewan that have 
been built by contributions by other agencies outside of the 
Department of Highways and a government agency, like a 
municipal road. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — That's exactly what the problem is, to the 
member opposite. We've had these kinds of things, but what 
industry have asked is for a clear vehicle so that they know the 
$15 million that we said we were going to put in a highway 
such and such, is they can see it move there, and it's spent there, 
and now they're willing to put 75 or 50 or 100 per cent of their 
savings into that particular road. 
 
That's the problem we have and that's what industry has said. 
We have talked to them: okay, are you interested in partnering 
with us? They said, yes we are, but we need a clear vehicle to 
do this. 
 
It's not my idea; it's their idea and so I don't think we should  

discourage it. 
 
Mr. Martens: — How much did the mine at Esterhazy 
contribute to the construction of, I believe, it's the No. 11 
Highway. They actually put an extra layer of asphalt on the 
south-bound lane to handle the extra load for traffic. How much 
money did they put into that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — That's an example of what we're trying 
to do with Transportation Partnerships Corporation. They paid 
to us some savings — and certainly we have the thicker 
pavement on the load side and they participated in that — and 
we receive money each year. Okay? But they didn't contribute 
up front; it was actually money that we receive on an annual 
basis. 
 
Mr. Martens: — How much and who gets paid it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I haven't got the amount with me but I 
believe it's more than $100,000 a year. It's several hundred 
thousand dollars a year. And I believe — and I can't say that for 
sure — but I believe that goes to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Martens: — When was that highway built? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I haven't got an exact year. To the 
member from Morse, we certainly can provide him with that 
information. But it was done over several years. It wasn't done 
all at once. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well the member from Alberta . . . no, Regina 
Albert North says it was done in the early '70s. Well let's take 
and say that the province of Saskatchewan has earned on that 
road $200,000 a year since 1975. How many dollars is that? 
That, I would say, is $20 million, 20 million or 2 million? 
When I sit down, I'm going to multiply that out and see what it 
is. 
 
But what I want to point out to you, Mr. Minister, it has already 
been happening. Contributions made by industry is already 
contributing in a fashion that is not curtailing the opportunity 
for you to work together with industry. It's not. How much of a 
contribution did the P.A. (Prince Albert) pulp mill and 
Weyerhaeuser make to the construction of roads in the North? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — What I would say, through Mr. 
Chairman, to the member, what we can do is provide you with 
information on the Estevan agreement, and we can provide you 
with information on the COGEMA-Cameco agreement. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I don't need the specific details, but I need to 
understand what volume of dollars we're talking about — if it's 
$25,000 or if it's $100,000 or a half a million dollars. It has a 
massive impact on how this is done. As I would calculate, if it 
was a $200,000 payment annually from the mine at Esterhazy, 
on 20 years would be $4 million, $4 million of contributions 
that have been made over the last 20 years to the Department of  



March 30, 1995 

 
1257 

Highways indirectly. 
 
Now if you want to think that this is unusual, talk to the 
Minister of Agriculture one day and find out how many fees 
and services he collects for in doing business with the people of 
Saskatchewan. He collects on fees for pastures. He collects on 
fees for servicing livestock and buying bulls. He does all of 
those things over and over and over again on a fee-for-service 
to people in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, the 
method is not a problem. 
 
And I'll say this to you also. All you have to do is ask the 
Minister of Finance to keep an account of your specific project 
and he will do that for you. Collecting the money on an issue 
like this is not the problem. 
 
We say that if you have uncontrolled borrowing, as we have 
seen an example of in British Columbia in the same kind of a 
transportation partnership corporation doing building 
construction or road construction through the Department of 
Highways in B.C. . . . have the right this year to borrow 337 
millions of dollars — borrow. That's over and above what the 
Department of Highways is going to receive from the 
Department of Finance in a budget allocation. And that, Mr. 
Minister, is what we're saying. 
 
Have one agency, the Minister of Finance, the deputy minister 
of Finance, borrow the money for you on an ongoing basis. You 
don't need to have this function to have on an annual basis the 
freedom, put it that way, to borrow money. 
 
And as I said before, you're not going to be in government all 
your life and someday somebody is going to come along and 
say, I'm going to borrow free-wheel. And that's what's happened 
in British Columbia with exactly the same thing tied to one very 
significant issue. 
 
If this Crown corporation is like all of the other Crown 
corporations in its dealing with union preference tendering, then 
you have a big problem, Mr. Minister. 
 
And earlier it was said that this is a Treasury Crown. It's not a 
CIC, Crown Investment Corporation. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, on the one hand, the Crown corporations in 
the province of Saskatchewan are itemized under two separate 
functions. One is a Treasury Board Crown and one is a CIC. 
And who is in the union preference tendering? Well it's a 
Treasury Crown called the Sask Water Corporation — they are 
a Treasury Board Crown. You can't hide behind the fact that 
they have to go through the union preference tendering only, 
because they are not a CIC Crown. 
 
So what we're saying to you, Mr. Minister, allow us the freedom 
to have these amendments in this Bill so that you are going to 
give an opportunity for everybody to see up front what this 
corporation is going to do. 
 
My question to you is: are there two other agencies that are  

going to be . . . or have asked you for a way to put money into 
the Department of Highways in lieu of construction of roads. 
And I believe you said something about Cameco and then the 
Estevan agreement. Can you give me a ballpark figure about 
where those numbers are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I thank the member for his question. The 
member suggested he's proposing an amendment. I haven't seen 
the amendment, and I guess maybe we're still on short title, 
clause 1. But it certainly . . . you know it's hard for me to know 
what he's saying he would like to amend this section to. And 
perhaps when I see that, we can think about it. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, good to 
get back into the debate. Obviously you will know that we have 
been in discussion in the last few minutes with some of the 
representatives from the road builders of Saskatchewan. 
 
They have expressed their very deep concern about the lack of 
trust in the province of Saskatchewan between the peoples of 
this province and the elected representatives that come to this 
Assembly to represent the people. I think we ought to work very 
hard, Minister, to try to change that feeling of distrust. 
 
I think it's important not only that we try to help the feeling of 
distrust in this province between ourselves and the people that 
elected us; it's also important that we put into place a piece of 
legislation that will truly, honestly do what you have said it will 
do and what I have interpreted that you intend to do and what 
the people that I've talked to have interpreted that you intend to 
do. 
 
They say to me, as you have said to me, that you have no 
intentions of doing certain things with this Bill. And because of 
this era . . . or aura rather, of mistrust, I think it is absolutely 
essential that we write this Bill so that it cannot be interpreted 
as a back stab for people out in the country, basically the road 
builders of Saskatchewan in this instance. 
 
I'm suggesting to you that a few amendments will totally and 
completely make this Bill acceptable to the people that it 
affects. If in fact the things that you say are true and you do not 
intend to do any of these terrible things that people worry about, 
then what we're saying very simply is put it into the legislation 
through these amendments, close those doors and make the 
people comfortable that you are in fact not trying to do 
something behind their backs. 
 
And so I go back to the list that I referred to you earlier, when 
we talked about five specific requests that the road builders of 
Saskatchewan have with regards to this Bill. And in our earlier 
discussions you have indicated that the first item you are in 
agreement with, which basically I find now is a reference to 
paragraphs 11 to 14 in the provincial highways Act. 
 
Those specific tendering processes as outlined in that Act are 
pretty well the ones that we have mentioned in item no. 1, 
where all work will be done by open and public tendering. And 
by introducing an amendment that will put those into the Act,  



March 30, 1995 

 
1258 

we will have achieved a comfort zone with the road builders 
and the people of Saskatchewan on that issue. And for that we 
are happy and we acknowledge that we have heard that from 
you, that you are going to do that. 
 
Number two, that the corporation be specifically not allowed to 
borrow money. You have made your case that you may need to 
borrow money, and we are putting that under some 
consideration because it has been well described by yourself 
that there could be times when you might need to borrow 
money without in fact any devious intent to run up the 
provincial debt in order to cover off a deficit for an annual 
budget and to make that look good on paper, that there are some 
physical business requirements that may be needed. 
 
We are researching that at this very moment, as we speak here 
now. People are looking into alternatives in that area, ways in 
which we could assure, again, a comfort zone for the taxpayers 
in general in the province . . . that we are not trying to set up a 
vehicle that was used very wrongly in British Columbia in just 
recent days. We don't want that to happen in Saskatchewan, 
quite frankly, Mr. Minister. 
 
So we are going to leave item number two. We haven't come to 
any kind of an agreement or consensus on that issue. You know 
our concerns. We understand some of yours, and we're looking 
for a way around that at the moment. 
 
Number three, that there be no union preference or referrals 
such as the Crown corporate tendering agreement, Crown 
corporations tendering agreement. Minister, I guess I'll ask you 
straight out in simple terms: will you agree that we put this 
principle into an amendment in this piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. 
 
I think you are quite aware — so is the industry and so is the 
road builders — that this is a Treasury Board Crown. And when 
you have a Treasury Board Crown, you are not obligated, I 
guess, as perhaps the CIC Crown might be to the particular 
agreement or policy that you are talking about. 
 
I have said that time and time again. And we will tender 
projects just like we do now with the Department of Highways. 
We tender on the basis of low bid, and we will continue to do 
that. And the Crown corporation, a Treasury Board Crown 
corporation, will also do that. 
 
I want to say about the borrowing — you're quite aware that 
Treasury Board Crowns have to go through Finance. So we are 
accountable, and we will continue to be accountable. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Unfortunately, Minister, accountability in the 
present process means after the fact, two or three years down 
the road. That's simply not good enough. We're not going to 
accept that. That will not wash with the voters of Saskatchewan 
any more. 
 
Mr. Minister, the truth of the matter is — and I think I took  

some time to explain this to you already — the people of 
Saskatchewan don't trust politicians, and they don't trust 
governments. It doesn't matter if it's your party or my party or 
the other party or some new one that might come along; there is 
a general distrust of the political process. 
 
The reason that we have that distrust is that governments stand 
up and they say, we want to make a law to do such and such, 
but they word it in such an ambiguous way that sometime down 
the road a total different thing happens from that law than what 
was explained was going to happen at the start. 
 
Right away people say: oh, you must have planned this. Maybe 
you did. Maybe you didn't. Maybe it's just the times change and 
things happen. The truth of the matter is though that that 
distrust is developed and builds and it escalates. And it's not 
good, and we've got to put a stop to it. And we can start here 
today by putting into this Bill exactly what you say you want to 
do and then we'll do that. 
 
The people don't trust you when you say that you're not going to 
use union tendering policies with only union tendering the same 
as we now see in all of the Crown corporations. They just don't 
believe that you will stay to that because already we've had the 
experiment of the Melfort pipeline which is not a Crown 
corporation under CIC. You see, right away there's an example 
already happened with your government where there's an 
exception to the rule. Why would anybody trust you that you're 
not going to satisfy the needs of your union friends even more 
in the future and in this area? 
 
(1600) 
 
And the road construction people have told us very bluntly that 
if you force them into unions, they will not be able to survive. 
They will simply not be able to be in Saskatchewan. You will 
have to buy equipment. You will have to buy equipment, hire 
your own men, and pay them and subsidize them and run them 
as a state-owned, state-controlled construction operation. And 
we know very well that your philosophy and your government's 
philosophy lends itself towards that. And therefore they don't 
trust you, and they know very well that you would probably be 
most happy to drive them all out of business and have in fact 
this very same thing happen that you would own and control all 
of your own equipment and do it exactly the way you do with 
the power corporation today. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is not acceptable. Now on the other hand, you 
have said to us, no, you don't plan on doing it that way; that's 
not your intent. Very well. If it's not your intent, then let's put 
the amendments into the legislation that relieve all of those 
doubts and all of those fears. 
 
You have an opportunity; it's very easy. We've even done the 
work for you. We've gone to the Law Clerk. We have done our 
research; we've gotten our researchers to come up with the 
information. We've had the Law Clerk do the work for you. He 
has come up with the proper wordings and the proper 
structures; the amendments are done. We've done all of your  



March 30, 1995 

 
1259 

work for you. All you have to do, sir, is agree to do the thing 
that will guarantee that you are not trying to do something 
different than what you say. 
 
So I will repeat to you the question: will you agree to the 
principle being included into the legislation through an 
amendment that there will be no union preference or referral 
such as the Crown corporation tendering agreement? Will you 
agree that the union preference that is presently in effect will 
never apply to those things that are controlled by this Crown 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member from 
Maple Creek. I'm going to explain one more time that we will 
tender the same as we do now under the Department of 
Highways. It's low bid, and it will continue to be the same 
under the Treasury Board Crown. And I want to emphasize that 
this is a Treasury Board Crown. 
 
But what I really wonder is why the member opposite is playing 
politics on the backs of people that want No. 1 and 16 twinned 
on the backs of the road builders who want and need more work 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We have an excellent road 
building industry. They've gone through some tough times like 
we all have, sharing in the deficit reductions so that we could 
have a balanced budget. They participated in that. 
 
And now we are playing politics? I can't believe that. Wouldn't 
it be nice if we could build a road where in fact industry 
perhaps paid a large percentage  perhaps all of it  and a 
government could fund it upfront, and the savings that the 
private contractor received would go back into the province of 
Saskatchewan over time? Wouldn't that be a good deal? Would 
you think that's a good deal? 
 
I don't know how we should . . . why you would like to stop 
that, and I guess you're going to have to explain to the people 
that live along No. 1, and you're going to have to explain to the 
forest industry, and you're going to have to explain to the 
different industries, the mining companies like Cogema and 
Cameco. Certainly I will explain what happened. 
 
But I think you're going to have to understand that you are 
going to have to explain as well. 
 
Mr. Wormsbecker: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wormsbecker: — Mr. Chair, I would like to introduce to 
you and to the members of the Assembly, through you, 15 grade 
3 students from Stoughton School. And accompanying the 
grade 3 students are their teachers, or perhaps one teacher, 
Gwen Rusnak, and several parents and chaperons because it 
looks like these 15 students do need individuals to care for 
them while they're away from home. 
 

And I'm looking forward to meeting with these students shortly 
after they've had the opportunity to observe the goings-on in the 
House here. And perhaps we can share a drink afterwards, and I 
look forward to having a chat with all of you. Will you please 
join in welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's always good 
to have young people come into our Assembly to find out how 
our democratic process works. And today they will be interested 
in knowing that we are discussing Bill 22, which is a Bill that is 
designed to put money into a Crown corporation for the 
purposes of construction of roads and highways in our 
province. We already have a Department of Highways that does 
that and has done it for many, many years. 
 
The reality is though that this government has decided it needs 
another Crown corporation. We in the opposition don't feel that 
another Crown corporation is necessary. 
 
The Chair: — The member for Regina Albert North, why are 
you on your feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. I believe that 
there is a rule saying that members are not to involve guests 
with debate going on on the floor. I listened very carefully to 
the member from Maple Creek, who is trying to involve our 
school children guests in the debate here, and I ask you to rule 
on that. 
 
The Chair: — I think the point of order is well taken. I was 
listening very carefully to the member. I think that he was 
skirting a fine line. I was prepared to let him go, but I was 
listening, and I think the member gets the point. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — My apologies, Mr. Chairman. I certainly will 
get back to the issue. 
 
The issue, Minister, is whether or not you're going to agree with 
the road builders of Saskatchewan in their request to have this 
Bill cleaned up so that in fact it will do the things that you have 
said it will do. 
 
In your preamble of the last few minutes, you have dealt with 
item number three of a memorandum that we have received 
from the road builders of Saskatchewan, requesting 
amendments to your Bill. These amendments they feel are 
absolutely essential in order to save their industry from 
economic collapse and total destruction. 
 
I asked you about item no. 1 and you said that in fact you  



March 30, 1995 

 
1260 

would go along with an amendment for item no. 1, which in 
fact states that all work be done by open and public tendering. 
You have said you will agree to that and we're happy to hear 
that and it of course means that items . . . paragraphs 11 to 14 of 
the existing highways Act will now be incorporated in this new 
Act and into this new corporation. And that is fine and dandy 
and we're glad to hear that. 
 
Unfortunately you insist upon confusing that issue with some of 
the more important other issues, and this confusion that you are 
attempting deliberately to perpetrate on the people must be 
cleared up, because it is not the same as items no. 2 and no. 3. 
 
Item no. 2. The people here from the road builders have asked 
that the corporation be specifically not allowed to borrow 
monies. There is deep concern that this vehicle will be used to 
borrow hundreds of millions of dollars, as had been the case in 
British Columbia. Hundreds of millions of dollars, Minister, 
that are absolutely not, absolutely not necessary to be borrowed 
through this kind of a corporation, except for one purpose only 
and that is to deceive the public about what is a balanced 
budget or what is not a balanced budget. A deficit is not there if 
you balance the budget, but when the debt grows, the province 
has still got more debt to pay in the long run. 
 
So, Minister, that's totally unacceptable. And you've said you 
won't do anything about that and you will not  and our 
interpretation here today is that you have said you will not 
allow an amendment to correct that problem. And so we pass 
that on to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You've said under item no. 3, which states that there will be no 
union preference or referrals such as the Crown corporation 
tendering agreement. This issue has been addressed by the road 
builders of Saskatchewan, and they've asked quite simply that 
they not be forced to hire employees who are unionized; that 
they do not want to be forced into having to have union 
employees. They don't want to have any involvement 
whatsoever with unions because it just doesn't work out in the 
country when you're miles and miles away from the cities. 
 
You have, and I will interpret for you, in your preamble said 
flatly that you deny that this is ever a consideration, that it 
would ever happen, and that you will not include an amendment 
in this law that you are proposing in order to guarantee that the 
people in the construction industry will not have to unionize 
their workers. 
 
I am very disappointed, Minister, that you would take that kind 
of an approach and that you would suggest to me that I'm 
simply playing politics by standing up for the road builders of 
Saskatchewan and saying to you that they cannot continue 
financially to exist under these terms and circumstances. 
 
And that is a fact that they have pointed out to you and to me in 
private conversations and in private meetings that you had with 
them last night and in meetings I had with them yesterday and 
today. They have pointed out unequivocally that they cannot 
manage to continue to work and exist if they are forced into a  

union-preference tendering policy such as the one we have in 
Saskatchewan today for the Crown corporations. 
 
Now you say that there's a difference between a CIC Crown and 
a Treasury Crown and that the Treasury Crowns of course are 
exempt, when in fact we know for sure already that in Melfort 
you have built a pipeline under a Treasury Crown that has had a 
union preference tendered out on that pipeline, and it cost the 
people of Saskatchewan thousands of dollars more than all the 
rest of the pipeline. It was a total disaster. It was an economic 
disaster and a pipeline disaster, referred to as the Melfort 
sprinkler system. 
 
And the truth of the matter is that now we have an example to 
prove that in fact this law and this . . . rather, union tendering 
preference policy has already gone from the CIC Crowns and 
has already been applied to a Treasury Crown. There is 
absolutely nothing in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan 
that make them believe you when you say you're not going to 
invoke that policy onto the people who will be covered by this 
law. 
 
That, sir, is not right. It is unfair, and it should not be tolerated 
by the people of Saskatchewan. And I don't think they're going 
to. I think, quite frankly, they're going to tell you that the $20 
million carrot that you've hung on the stick in front of them is 
too high a price to pay in order to get that little bit of money 
into the construction industry. 
 
And the idea that you're going to go around and try to tell 
people that we stopped the construction of Highway No. 1 
because we stopped a basically socialist Bill in this House that 
is union geared and union preference directed . . . another plum 
for your union friends before the election. 
 
Your attempts to try to sell to the general public that we stopped 
you from constructing highways in this province, it is just not 
going to wash. It will never happen. Nobody in Saskatchewan is 
that bad at mathematics that they won't be able to figure out that 
$20 million will not build very much road, and it's not enough 
money to be giving away all of these rights and privileges and 
necessities for the people in our province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to go on to item no. 4. You have flatly 
refused on item no. 2 and item no. 3 and you have agreed to 
item no. 1. 
 
Item no. 4, they ask you, in principle, will you accept an 
amendment that in principle will allow for the corporation be 
not allowed to purchase construction equipment or hire 
employees directly? Will you agree to that principle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Certainly we would agree to that 
amendment. We think that was the intention and we would 
certainly agree to that amendment in principle. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. You now have copies, I  



March 30, 1995 

 
1261 

believe, of the amendments that we have had drafted for this 
process. And you will have your team of experts no doubt 
checking it over and going through the fine print and analysing 
the legal mumbo-jumbo that goes into these things. Always an 
amazement to me how we can't write laws in English; have to 
use some kind of a jargon that most of the people don't 
understand. But anyway, we will cipher our way through it, you 
and us, and we will try to determine that in the end it will mean 
what we want it to mean. 
 
Anyway. Minister, I'm glad that you have agreed to item no. 4, 
so now we're batting two for two. I guess that's 500 and we're 
getting a little ways anyway. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we're happy with the minister going along 
with this and we want to get on with item no. 5 in principle, that 
would apply to Bill 22. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people from the road builders of 
Saskatchewan have asked us to ask you if you would support in 
principle the concept, through an amendment that would go into 
this piece of legislation, the idea that the corporation be 
responsible directly to the legislature and not to any government 
body other than the Department of Highways. Would you agree 
to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Yes, to the member opposite. In 
principle we would certainly agree with the intent. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Well we're getting a 
little ways here. We now have some accountability; perhaps 
after the fact, but that's necessary. And you know as I know that 
the auditor has been asking for this kind of an approach to our 
accountability and we certainly are happy that we will start that 
process in this particular Bill, Bill No. 22. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there are many, many arguments that have to be 
made on behalf of the road builders of Saskatchewan. This Bill 
will directly affect the livelihoods of thousands of people. 
 
Not only will it affect the livelihoods of thousands of people in 
Saskatchewan, but the reality is that there is no quicker vehicle 
for getting employment started than through construction. You 
can get a lot of people working in a very short period of time 
and cost-effective monetary considerations. Cost-effective in 
terms, I believe were explained to me, along the lines of 35 per 
cent of the overall costs goes directly into labour in a 
construction project. 
 
Now by most industry standards, that's very high. Textiles, I 
understand, have a better ratio. But in Saskatchewan we 
basically deal with natural resources so our ratios are not as 
high as that in most areas. For example, one sustained job in the 
oil patch over the long haul requires a $16 million investment 
back in 1981 or '82. And so I imagine that that's probably 
escalated considerably since then. That was the closest figure I 
could get in my researches. 
 
So reality is that by having more highway construction we can  

generate an awful lot of jobs in a very short period of time. 
That's very important to the province not just in terms of having 
good roads to drive on, but in terms of correcting the 
tremendous problem that we have with unemployment and 
welfare numbers in our province. 
 
Certainly we could use this whole process here to greatly 
improve all of those very terrible problems that we're having in 
our economy in Saskatchewan. We've got far too many people 
on welfare and far too many people still unemployed. And in 
the construction industry we can turn that around. Not all of it 
all at once, obviously we can't cure the whole problem here, but 
we can do a great deal in terms of resolving all of those 
problems. 
 
Unfortunately, unfortunately, Minister, we — both of us, you 
and I — are now aware that the construction industry cannot 
operate unless there are monies spent in order to get the projects 
going. It's unfortunate, and I will deliberate for a minute on 
your point that you made about the federal government. 
 
It is unfortunate that you couldn't get that program going last 
fall with the federal government. It is even more than 
unfortunate — but I can't think of words that would explain my 
feelings of frustration with the federal government in 
parliamentary language at this moment — because it is a deep 
hurt to all of Saskatchewan that they would back out of such a 
very important project. 
 
You made very well the point, sir, that in the United States of 
America, years back, the government recognized that they 
needed an interstate highway program and that the federal 
government had a responsibility to pay for parts of that and 
even most of it. And that Canada had one time gone along with 
getting into that kind of a program when we started building the 
No. 1 Trans-Canada Highway through from one coast to the 
other. 
 
And it's really terribly unfortunate that our federal government 
does not pick up on their responsibility to this country, to tie it 
together with proper road facilities and proper transportation 
connections. If anything were going to divide our country and 
cause it to split up, it would have to be the lack of ability for 
people to communicate and transport from one jurisdiction to 
the other, to just become acquainted with one another and to get 
to know one another. 
 
Motor cars and trucks have become a way of life. And some of 
the best things that we've ever done is the student exchange 
programs where people get to know one another. That couldn't 
happen if we don't have ways of getting people from point A to 
point B and back and forth. 
 
Our road system is a disaster; it's falling apart. And the federal 
government should be kicked right in the shin, metaphorically, 
for not holding up their end of the bargains. 
 
Unfortunately there isn't very much that you and I can do except 
to protest, write letters, send telegrams, ask our  



March 30, 1995 

 
1262 

neighbours and friends to write to the government, and vote 
some other way maybe some other day, federally. But at this 
moment we're here  you and I, your government, and the road 
builders of Saskatchewan  and we've got a problem. 
 
We've got a problem in that we need some roads built. We've 
got a problem in that you have decided to allow that $20 million 
that you allocated in last year's budget to sit there. You decided 
to do that; that was your choice. 
 
Last November when the federal government reneged on their 
responsibilities to western Canada and opted out of that 
program, they certainly should get their lumps for that. But it 
happened. Now you should have taken the bull by the horns and 
provided a vehicle so that your $20 million already budgeted 
for would not in fact be lost on paper through a budgetary shift 
at the end of the fiscal year. 
 
That's your responsibility, sir. You should have taken care of 
that. You will say, we're doing that with this Bill. Reality is 
there were other vehicles you could have used without 
legislation. You could have found a way to do this. 
 
There's no need for what is happening here today. What you are 
basically doing is putting a carrot on the end of a stick for the 
people in the construction industry, a $20 million carrot, and 
saying: here, you can grab this carrot, but first of all you have to 
jump the hoops the way we tell you to. 
 
The truth of the matter is, Minister, that these are choices that 
you are making. You are pushing these people into a corner. 
You've boxed them up. On one hand, they can't say no to $20 
million because their industry needs the money in order to 
survive, to get some work to keep going. On the other hand, 
they cannot give away for the future those things that you are 
demanding of them to give away, because they can't survive in 
the future. 
 
Talk about a catch 22. How can they say no? They have to say 
yes. It's either destruction today or destruction in six months. 
Who wants to die today if you can manage to survive another 
six months? Obviously they'll let you do anything that will 
allow them the opportunity to continue for a little while longer, 
in the hopes that somehow you might fail in the next election or 
something might come as a thunderbolt and change all of this 
attitude. They have to buy what time they can. 
 
But, sir, the price is too high. The demand you make on these 
people is unfair; it is not proper. You cannot get away with this 
kind of thing in Saskatchewan without the people 
understanding it and knowing it, and we're here to tell you that 
we are going to tell the story. 
 
You challenged me a few minutes ago, saying that I would 
never be able to get out and tell the folks; that you would tell 
them it's our fault that you couldn't build No. 1 Highway. Well 
let me tell you we will do our homework. We will tell the 
people what you have perpetrated on them here this week and 
the way you tried to box them in with a two-day deadline on a  

piece of legislation that only does one thing for you and one 
thing only, and that is to get more of your union buddies onside 
for the next provincial election. 
 
You have absolutely done nothing to help the road builders and 
you've done nothing to help in the construction of roads or the 
repair of roads and you've done nothing for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You've played politics — blatant partisan politics — with this 
Bill right from the beginning. It's all it's about. We are the ones 
who are standing up against you and saying you will not get 
away with playing politics with people's money. You only have 
so much money and you're trying to make it appear as though 
you have twice as much by shifting it from one spot to the 
other. 
 
You're playing games. It's the old shell game, and you're playing 
that game and you're playing it badly, Minister, and we're not 
going to accept it without a challenge. We're challenging you 
here today to do the fair, the reasonable and proper thing, and 
that is to take one step back and consider the demands of the 
road builders of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I bring it to you once again. You said that you 
don't really plan on forcing these people all to join unions. But 
they don't trust you. They don't believe you. It's not you — it's 
all of us. They just don't believe politicians. They don't believe 
governments. That mistrust has been explained to you many 
times but it is reality and we must repeat ourselves. And you 
have a chance to correct that. 
 
You say you're not going to unionize these people and that 
you're not going to have this union preference policy turn into 
it. You know very well we will not accept your argument that 
because it is a Treasury corporation that this won't apply, 
because we know better. We won't accept that. You know it's 
not true. I know it's not true. And the people of Saskatchewan 
know it's not true. 
 
So stand in your place today and tell us that you will accept an 
amendment that will support the basic principle of saying that 
union preference tendering will not be allowed through this 
department and through this corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. I'm 
glad he realizes the importance of this Bill to the road building 
industry and to the people of Saskatchewan, and we certainly do 
here as well. 
 
I want to refer to one of the amendments that you are 
suggesting and I want to read it to you: where the corporation 
deems it inexpedient to let the work to the lowest bidder, then 
he has to obtain authority from the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. 
 
What this says is that you take low bid. It's in one of your 
amendments already. It's there and we . . . that's they way we do 
work now in the Department of Highways. And this says that  



March 30, 1995 

 
1263 

this Crown corporation is going to do work the same way and 
we are in agreement with that. 
 
And I want to say that we came to this House so that we could 
be open, so that people could debate this Bill, and we have had 
a good debate. We could have done it other ways likely, but no, 
we want to be open and accountable. And we came to this 
House, created the little Crown corporation that has four board 
members — the Minister of Highways, the deputy minister of 
Highways, the associate deputy minister of Highways, and the 
associate deputy minister of Highways — a policy so that it 
would not cost anything. No staff. It's just a vehicle that 
industry has asked for. 
 
And so we will create this little Crown corporation, we will 
provide additional work at less cost, in fact, to the taxpayer 
because there will be some partnerships from industry. And I 
think it's a very good idea; the people of Saskatchewan think it's 
a very good idea; I know the people in Maple Creek, especially 
along No. 1, think it's an excellent idea. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
I'm glad that you allude to my constituency with regards to this 
Bill because that's very important. 
 
So I will ask you the question: if we agree to allow this Bill to 
pass, with the now three amendments that you've agreed to take 
out of the five, if we were to do that, would you start releasing a 
tender to double-lane Highway No. 1 past Maple Creek 
tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member for his 
question. If we had the partnership, I suppose, ready to go, I 
would love to announce it tomorrow. We're certainly working 
on it. We're talking with trucking companies, and hopefully 
something can be done. But until there is a partnership 
agreement, we are unable to start. But industry seem very 
interested in discussing it. So hopefully, at some time in the 
future we'll be able to do that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, thank you for that rather 
vague answer because it proves my point. You really don't have 
any intentions to start any work tomorrow at all, even if we did 
pass this law today. 
 
The truth of the matter is that you don't have any agreements in 
place. Will you even be able to spend the $20 million that 
you're talking about? When will you start letting tenders out for 
that to be spent, and where will it go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Like I told the member earlier, we would 
love to announce No. 1 tomorrow. We are in negotiations. We 
are talking with industry. I would hope that we can come to 
some kind of partnership agreement and as soon as possible. I 
think the people from Gull Lake, for instance, the people from 
your area, have been calling asking for No. 1 to be upgraded. 
We realize the need. And so if we can in fact get a . . . the day 
we get a partnership agreement, we'll certainly be starting on 
that project. 

(1630) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I went 
and got the bible for highway construction — Highway Traffic 
Act — or all the information on the legislation. And I thought 
I'd just bring it in because I want to make sure that I have an 
understanding of what you're talking about when you talk about 
the contracting and the tendering process under this new 
Crown. And I believe that's covered under sections 11, 12, 13, 
and 14 of The Highways and Transportation Act. 
 
In here it mentions that: 
 
 The minister shall invite tenders by public advertisement 

or other public notice for the construction and repair of 
all public improvements to be undertaken by the 
department, except in cases where the minister, having 
regard to the nature of the work and the size of the 
undertaking, is of opinion that the work can be carried 
out more expeditiously and economically by order or 
commission or under the direction of the officers of the 
department. 

 
And then it goes on to mention: 
 
 Where a public improvement undertaken by the 

department is being carried out by contract, the minister 
may require that security be given to and in the name of 
Her Majesty for the due performance of the work within 
the time specified for its completion. 

 
And I believe no. 13 is what you just quoted a minute ago: 
 
 Where the minister deems it inexpedient to let the work 

to the lowest bidder, he shall report the matter to and 
obtain the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council before awarding the contract to any other than 
the lowest bidder. 

 
And no. 14, section 14: 
 
 No sum of money shall be paid to a contractor, nor shall 

a work be commenced on a contract, until the contract 
has been signed by all parties named therein and any 
security required has been given. 

 
Now I'm sure you can appreciate the fact that one of the major 
concerns that we're addressing or attempting to address this 
afternoon is the fact that there will be indeed a fair and open 
tender as section 11 basically indicates, that when this tender is 
given, that we're not going to end up where contractors, as they 
apply for any job opportunities as they see a tender let  
whether it's in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix or one of our local 
papers — and they apply for this job, they're not going to find 
that at the end of the day they've applied under the 
understanding that as minister responsible for the department 
you're calling for a tender to build a certain section of road. 
Let's say No. 1. 
 



March 30, 1995 

 
1264 

You're looking at 10 or 20 kilometres west of Gull Lake — I'm 
just throwing that out hypothetically — and you're calling for a 
tender to be let on this, and you're asking people to submit 
tenders. What they don't want to be stuck with is that all of a 
sudden the department's going to come back and indicate how 
many union people are involved in your contract or in your 
company, as that's a stipulation. 
 
From what you're telling us, Mr. Minister, are you indicating 
that basically yes, union and non-union contractors alike will be 
able to bid on these contracts, that indeed you will look at the 
qualifications and the ability of each individual contractor, and 
that you will look very seriously at the lowest tender, and if that 
lowest tender happens to be a non-union contractor, that that 
contractor then will indeed be given the job? Or are you still 
saying yes, it's an open tender, but the reality is we're still going 
to place the tenders or accept the tenders based on whether or 
not there's sufficient union involvement in that contract? 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us a clarification 
on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well, thank you to the member from 
Moosomin. Certainly union contractors can bid on highway 
work. Non-union contractors can bid on highway work. And as 
you mentioned, 13 of the Act: 
 
 (Only) where the minister deems it inexpedient to let the 

work to the lowest bidder, he shall report the matter to 
and obtain the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council before awarding the contract . . . 

 
So it stipulates very clearly that it would be low bidder; and if 
it's not low bidder, it has to go to the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. That means we run by low tender. And that's exactly 
what you say in your amendment to the Bill, and it's the same 
thing so that what Highways does now, the Crown corporation 
will do as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Have I heard you correctly, Mr. Minister? 
Basically you're saying that yes, this is a genuine open tender. 
And yes, there will be no hidden clauses indicating that union 
preference will be part of the tender process, that indeed the 
contractor who receives the job at the end of the day will be 
receiving the job, number one, on the amount of their bid in 
comparison to everyone else plus their ability to show that they 
are a reliable contractor. That once you let that bid out, that that 
job is going to be done as expeditiously as possible under the 
guidance of the contract and certainly to a standard that is 
acceptable or above the standard that you're accepting. 
 
And if what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is the case, then that is 
the major concern we want to raise. And we want the assurance, 
Mr. Minister, that we're not going to find a number of these 
contracts going to the Lieutenant Governor in Council because 
the argument may be at the end of the day when the contracts 
come in, well we basically cannot accept the lowest tender 
because that lowest tender doesn't happen to be a unionized or 
have unionized employees in his or her employment. 

And, Mr. Minister, that's the clarification we're looking for from 
you, that that doesn't become the criteria whereby any contract 
is let, that indeed a contract is as open as you have indicated to 
us today, and that you're not going to be going to the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council for changes or to let contracts simply 
because you're looking to satisfy some unionized buddy that 
may be working for the government of the day or for the party 
or any unionized contractor that's going to come and knock on 
your doorstep and say, I need a job; I need that contract out 
there. 
 
I trust that you're going to have . . . you will have the ability and 
you will be willing to stand up, Mr. Minister, and say, you can 
have the job, sir, but there are two or three other tenders out 
there that are substantially lower. We are trying to spread our 
dollars as evenly and as effectively as we can. And if you can 
come up with the same type of bid on that job, then you have 
the same opportunity and the same rights. 
 
And those are the very concerns that we want and many of the 
contractors  most of the contractors in this province are 
non-unionized  want to have the assurances that they indeed 
are playing on that level playing-field. Can you give us those 
assurances today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. I 
guess one of the proofs of our sincerity is that we have never 
used the clause. We have never gone to the Lieutenant 
Governor to change a bid. And so I guess you have to 
understand that we're sincere here. 
 
And I also want to say that Moosomin, I believe, is on No. 1 — 
in fact it is — and I'm sure the people of Moosomin will be very 
happy hopefully someday that they see No. 1 twinned. I know it 
would be a great boost to the community, and it would be a 
great feather in your cap, sir, because I know you've asked me 
many times if we in fact could look at No. 1. This is maybe one 
way of doing it. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank 
the member from Shaunavon for donating me his glass of 
water. 
 
Minister, we have got a bit of an impasse here obviously. The 
road builders of Saskatchewan want certain protections in order 
so that they can absolutely just survive. 
 
You have thrown out the potential to get some roads built, and 
everybody wants that. I want it; you want it. But we have to do 
something to save our road builders in this province as well. We 
can't just throw them away and abandon them. And I don't think 
you want to do that. So let's try to work out some way that we 
can resolve this impasse. 
 
Let me throw a possibility by you. Maybe sometimes we get 
hung up on words, but maybe sometimes if we use other words 
than what we have been using, we can soften their political 
blow or their sting and achieve the same goals. And so let me 
suggest to you that we go back to that list of five items that we  



March 30, 1995 

 
1265 

talked about before, the five conditions that our road builders 
feel it would be essential to have in order to survive. 
 
Now in the one situation you have explained to us that you have 
a philosophical problem and a political problem, and that we're 
going to try to work around. Suppose we considered bringing in 
an amendment that would in principle use words such as the 
following: that no special consideration would be allowed for 
special interest groups. Would that be something you might 
consider putting into the amendments in principle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. I'm going to read you the amendment that you passed to 
me earlier. In fact I believe it was maybe the first one. 
 
 Where the corporation deems it inexpedient to let the 

work to the lowest bidder, it shall report the matter to 
obtain the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. 

 
We are saying, it's going to be low bidder. We have affirmative 
action programs in the Department of Highways. I mean do you 
classify that as a special interest group? I don't know. You 
know I don't think that would be satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, sir, I noted some hesitation in your 
voice, and I take great . . . well I'm happy to hear that. I'm 
always an optimist, and I'm going to take that as a good sign, 
Mr. Chairman. I'm going to take that as an optimistic possibility 
that the minister is searching his mind on that issue, and 
perhaps he will want to talk to some of his officials about this 
possibility. 
 
So, Minister, in fairness to you, I won't press that point any 
further this day because I don't want you to stand in your place 
and get angry with me and say words that would tie you in to 
not being able to come here and accept what might be, in the 
end, a reasonable compromise. We're throwing out an olive leaf 
to you here, sir, and we're going to hope that you will pick it up 
or step on it or do whatever you do with olive leaves. And we 
will leave that issue for you to ponder for a little while longer 
until you have some time to talk about it with your officials. 
 
In that same spirit, a spirit of trying to find some kind of a 
compromise to the impasse that we seem to find ourselves in, I 
will throw a pass to you, another possibility — a possibility of 
bringing in a principle through an amendment using some of 
the following words that I will read to you and suggest to you. 
And it has to do with percentages of the fund, in that area where 
we're talking about the amount of money that you're going to 
have in the fund, and the amount of money that you would be 
able to borrow to put into that fund. 
 
Now you've made a good case that you may need to borrow 
some money. I think we've made a reasonably good case as well 
that there needs to be some brakes put on to how much money 
and for what purpose you would borrow that money, in order to 
protect the taxpayers of the province. 
 

So in the spirit of a compromise, let's use the figure that you 
have used which was $20 million that you would start with at 
the beginning of the fiscal year, and you would budget for that 
much. Now next year of course you might decide to use 300 
million or a billion. I don't care what figure we use as long as 
we know that this is the figure that is going to be budgeted for 
at the beginning of the fiscal year. Now could we, in principle, 
protect everybody by including an amendment which would 
state in principle something along the lines that the borrowing 
potential of this Crown corporation would not be in excess of 
the value of the fund as allocated through the budget each fiscal 
year? 
 
It seems to me that if you're planning to build roads or if you're 
planning on hiring people to do trucking and you've got $20 
million allocated that you're going to do that for the year, it 
would only be responsible that you . . . in your argument, where 
you say sometimes you have to borrow the money to pay for the 
work before you actually get the money put into the pot, if 
you're going to be fair about that and say you're not here to run 
up debts and deficits, then you shouldn't be considering doing 
more work than what you have physically got money to cover it 
with at the end of the day. In other words, we're talking about 
fiscal responsibility and a balanced budget. So would you then 
consider, Minister, allowing that principle to be applied through 
an amendment into this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — In principle, we certainly would look at 
that. And I would imagine in principle I think we can work 
within those guidelines. And if the member would accept, 
certainly the sincerity in regards to low bidder, it certainly 
would . . . we could maybe come to some kind of conclusion. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. I was sure, Mr. 
Chairman, that I had noted in the minister's tone of voice some 
optimistic reason to think that he was reconsidering his position 
and I think that's proof positive that the democratic process can 
work. If we really work at this, Minister, and if I give a little 
and you give a little and the folks outside negotiate in good 
faith, we may yet at the end of tomorrow find ourselves both 
smiling. However we do have a ways to go yet and we do have 
to debate some of the points that you have put forward because 
I think you need to think a little deeper about what you have 
said. 
 
When you talk about the tendering process through the 
Department of Highways that's in effect now — that's chapter 
11 to 14 — you say that in order not to take the lowest tender, 
you would in fact have to go to the Lieutenant Governor in 
order to get permission to take a different tender. That really, 
sir, has absolutely no comfort at all for those people who are 
worried about having to unionize their workers. 
 
Because the truth of the matter is that if your present policy on 
tendering happens to somehow seep out of the CIC into the 
other Crown corporations, if that should happen to work its way 
out — you know very well that it will eventually seep out if we  



March 30, 1995 

 
1266 

allow this thing to go on — then the way it's tendered and the 
ability to accept one tender or other has nothing to do with it 
because the tendering policy itself very clearly states that the 
lowest bidder does get the job even if he has no union workers 
— but he may not do the job unless he does in fact then hire 
three-quarters of his workforce as union workers. So he's 
caught. 
 
He may actually have gotten the lowest tender with no 
unionized workers, but as soon as, as soon as he gets that 
tender, if this policy seeps through to these Crowns, then they're 
caught. They have to have . . . so it's a catch-22. You've built 
that into the process. You understand that; I know you do. So 
realistically, Minister, I am able to explain that in my farmer's 
language and understand it and figure it out. Your government 
officials, of course, have got lawyers by the tons. They've 
manipulated things around and figured it all out. 
 
But the truth of the matter is that everybody knows that if I can 
figure it out, then the rest of the world will too because they're 
smarter than I am. So the contractors have figured it out. The 
people of Saskatchewan have figured it out. The folks along 
No. 1 Highway are soon going to figure it out when we go out 
and explain it to them. 
 
Everybody will know, sir, everybody will know that this 
explanation you have given about how the tendering process 
will protect non-unionized contractors is just simply not going 
to work. It simply won't be there. It won't happen that way. 
Everybody has that figured out. 
 
Your union friends have got that figured out; otherwise they'd 
be on the step of the legislature, 3,000 deep, yelling and 
screaming. You know very well that they understand that they're 
getting their toe in the door. They know very well that they're 
going to get what they want out of life. And you know very well 
that what you want from them is support in the next election in 
exchange. 
 
I'm going to tell you this quite frankly, Minister. If you believe 
your own polls as you advertised them last week, then you must 
already realize that your unions are supporting you and that you 
don't need to sell out the rest of the province in order to get 
re-elected. So why not do one thing right for the people of 
Saskatchewan? Because you don't need to buy any more 
support. You've got enough union support already. 
 
And realistically, the little bit of money that the unions are 
going to get from construction projects out in the wide 
expanses, furtherest way that you could get in the province of 
Saskatchewan, whether it be down south of Mankota or west of 
Maple Creek building No. 1 Highway, the few people that 
would work on a construction project out there is not going to 
make one little bit of difference to the big machine of union 
people that you've got in this province. So why are you trying to 
buy something that you've already got? You don't have to give 
any more. You've already got the union support, so leave the 
contractors alone. 
 

Allow us to help you to do one thing right while you're the 
Minister of Highways. Let's allow you the opportunity to go 
down in history as the Minister of Highways who listened to the 
people; who actually took their advice and did things right and 
do something fair. Instead of getting up and trying to confuse 
the issue by saying that union-preference tendering policies are 
covered off with the Department of Highways tendering 
policies for bidding on construction projects; instead of trying 
to say that those amount to the same things and the one cancels 
the other off, let's get the story straight now and let's let us help 
you to make this into a Bill that will truly work for the benefit 
of the people of Saskatchewan. You can do it. 
 
Your colleagues will allow you to away with this one because 
they know that the unions don't need to be appeased any more. 
They also understand, I'm sure, as you must, that if you 
continue on this path you will destroy the construction workers 
of this province. You will destroy the road builders as an entity 
in our province. They cannot exist with the rules that you are 
about to impose on them. 
 
Many of them have stood in their place and looked me straight 
in the eye and said, we will not be around if we get this all 
forced on us. You can be the man that goes down in history as 
recognizing that it's more important to serve the province than 
to play politics. 
 
You have this opportunity here today and tomorrow. I want 
you, Minister, to very seriously consider the wordings that I've 
given you as alternatives. Take a look at them, study them, think 
them over. I'm quite sure that when you talk to your officials 
and you get all of this partisan political mumbo-jumbo out of 
your mind and think only about what you can do that is right for 
the province and right for these people, I am sure that you will 
realize that you can do what needs to be done. 
 
And you don't have to worry about losing the election on this 
issue. This one is not big enough, Minister. This is not. This is 
not a campaign-trail issue. 
 
Now I've got a hundred questions that I need to ask you, 
Minister, about Highway No. 1 and when you're going to get it 
started and how many dollars it costs to build a mile of road in 
order for us to know how this fund is ever going to pay for all 
that stuff. We just don't know where you're going to get the 
money from to build and rebuild all of the roads that are in 
trouble in this province. 
 
And how this Bill is going to help you to do that is beyond me. 
If somehow this Crown corporation were built in such a way 
that it could manufacture money, then you might have a chance. 
But the reality is that you've got a budget. You've got a budget 
of so many million dollars in the Department of Highways. If 
you transfer that money out of the Department of Highways into 
a new Crown corporation, how, pray tell, is that going to build 
us more roads than we were already going to get built? 
 
You say that you're looking for federal money; somebody is 
going to start a new infrastructure program. Well I hope it  



March 30, 1995 

 
1267 

happens. But there is nothing, no guarantees by putting this into 
this Bill, by having another Crown corporation. That's not going 
to happen for sure. It will happen as easily without. 
 
And why do we know that? Because quite frankly we took the 
trouble to phone the federal minister's office and ask them if a 
Crown corporation was necessary in order to access any federal 
money for infrastructure programs. And they said absolutely not 
a chance; each province will get their money, each province 
will get their money to distribute in the way that they choose to 
do. Manitoba, Alberta, Saskatchewan, will all get their money, 
every province gets their money and how it is used in the 
province is up to the province. You do not need to have a new 
Crown corporation to access any federal monies that go to 
infrastructure programs whether it be old ones or new ones. 
 
So quite frankly, that is not an argument that holds water. You 
can't tell the people of Saskatchewan that we are going to 
achieve more road building by having a Crown corporation 
because we will get money from Ottawa. That's not on, in terms 
of a Crown corporation. If they give it to you, you can access it 
straight through the Department of Highways, the way you've 
got the structure set up right now. 
 
The next argument you use is that maybe the truck drivers of 
the western provinces might see fit to contribute some money to 
building highways. Well unless they get something in return, 
Minister, they absolutely ain't going to give you very much. 
They might give you $100, $1,000, as every citizen might. But 
big-time bucks, the kind of money it costs to build highways, it 
isn't in the cards unless you're giving something back. What are 
you going to give back? Longer loads and heavier loads. 
 
One of the people I talked to earlier today said, well isn't that 
dandy. Our roads are all going from breaking up and busting up 
and going to pieces now; what are we going to do when we start 
overloading all these loads and lengthening all of these trucks 
out some more, in terms of safety and in terms of saving the 
roadbeds that we presently have? 
 
Nothing is going to happen here, except to have a whole lot of 
people say well, hold it now, we're going to finance this thing 
by throwing another carrot out here. We're going to allow the 
truckers all to overload, we're going to allow them all to buy a, 
b, and c and d trains now; maybe we will have trains running 
down the roads with great big diesel trucks and have 40 or 50 of 
them. Where is Joe Q. Public supposed to drive his Datsun? 
Underneath the wheels? 
 
We've already got some serious, serious problems with safety 
on our highways. We've got very serious problems here, 
Minister, and this Crown corporation is not going to resolve one 
of those problems. And realistically then your argument that 
you're going to get money does not hold water because you're 
not getting it unless you trade something off and what you're 
trading off the general public may not allow you to accept. It's 
as simple as that. 
 
So there, we've shot down both of your sources of funding  

other than the number three one, which is the provincial 
government money. And you can spend that right now quite 
nicely, thank you, out of the Department of Highways. Don't 
need another Crown corporation to do it. So you're selling us 
pie in the sky today — pure, plain, simple pie in the sky. We 
don't need this, we can live without it. But if we have to have it, 
and if you insist on pushing it through, we're willing to talk 
some kind of a deal that'll make it work so that it doesn't destroy 
the road builders and the people and the taxpayers — the people 
involved. 
 
So let's work at it, Minister. Tonight I think we'll burn the 
midnight oil. And you work on your amendments and your 
ideas; think about the things that I've said. I request that of you, 
sir. In good faith, we will do the same. Will you work at that, 
Minister? That is my final question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, to the member opposite. I 
want to mention the importance of twinning of No. 1 to the 
constituency of Maple Creek and the community. I know that 
they've been telling me for a long time that the traffic is heavy, 
especially in tourism season; it should be twinned. There's some 
possibility of obtaining a partnership. Certainly we are 
negotiating with some companies now. We're negotiating with 
other companies in other areas that are interested perhaps in 
partnershipping with the Government of Saskatchewan to 
improve our infrastructure. 
 
It will not only save the industry money, that particular industry, 
but it will give better roads for tourism and for people that live 
near that road, also economic development. So there's lots of 
benefits. 
 
And so we have agreed to many of your suggestions, and being 
that it is a Treasury Board Crown and being that it is low 
tender, we are ready to proceed at any time. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


