






















































April 4, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 4, 1995 

 

 
1343 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from the Gull Lake, 
Shaunavon, and Hazlet, also Eastend area of the south-west. I'll 
read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these for the people today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the prayer for my petition 
reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31 — An Act 
to amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights) which will benefit all property owners 
in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Carlyle, Arcola, White Bear area 
in the south-east corner of my constituency. Mr. Speaker, I so 
present. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 
amend The Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards Act 
(Negative-options strategies). 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to draw 
to your attention and that of the members, a group of students 
who have come to visit us today from St. Augustine School in 
the constituency of Regina Victoria. It's a group of 15 grade 3 
students; they're accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Melinda 
Redman and by Mrs. Heather Kurz. 
 
And I look forward to meeting with them after the question 
period, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all members to make them feel 
very welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I'm delighted today to introduce to you and to the members of 
the Assembly, some guests that are visiting us from my end of 
the world, up at Tisdale. Today in your Speaker's gallery we 
have 16 young people from the Tisdale Composite High School 
and they are accompanied by Shirley Burtman, their teacher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like the members of the Assembly to wish 
these grade 12 students success in this year and best wishes as 
they go out next year into the world. And we would like to 
welcome you to the Assembly today and I'll meet you later for 
questions. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Cancer Month 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across Canada, April 
is Cancer Month. This is a very important month for the 
Canadian Cancer Society. It concentrates its fund-raising 
activities in April for donations to cancer research. We all hope 
some day research will lead to the end of this scourge of 
modern society. 
 
Cancer as a disease has always been with us, but today it is a 
plague. It blossoms from many biological, chemical, 
environmental, nutritional, and heredical conditions of modern 
life. It is a plague that will infect one in three of us during our 
lifetime. 
 
We appreciate the efforts of the Cancer Society and the 
thousands of individuals, schools, and groups who volunteer 
their time, money, and effort this month. It is a necessary 
month, and for those of us whose lives have been diminished by 
cancer, a difficult one. 
 



April 4, 1995 

 
1344 

Cancer victims have families, they have friends, and we suffer 
as well. We grieve from our loss and from our helplessness in 
the face of the slow suffering that is the most pernicious fact of 
cancer. Too often in the past cancer victims and their families 
have had to suffer alone, but we are finally making some 
progress here. It is good that Saskatchewan now has improved 
home care services. It is good and compassionate that palliative 
care is now designated a core service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a cure. Until then we need continued 
compassionate care. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Palliative Care Week 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is Palliative 
Care Week in Saskatchewan, a week in which we honour all 
those care-givers in our province who are giving the sensitive 
and necessary core services to the dying and their families in 
our health districts. 
 
The Saskatchewan Palliative Care Association has helped to 
make Saskatchewan a leader in this kind of compassionate care 
for the terminally ill. I would like to pay tribute to 
Saskatchewan palliative care workers and read from a bill of 
rights for palliative care workers as a means of honouring those 
committed to this service in our province. 
 
 I have the right to try and ease the fears of the dying, 

even though deep within myself lie those very same 
fears. 

 
 I have the right to feel relief when someone's death 

means the end of their pain and to be angry when 
someone is taken too soon, while they still have much to 
give the world. 

 
 I have the right to have pity for the afraid and 

unfulfilled, and to be in awe of the courageous. 
 
 I have the right to be mystified by the miracle and 

wonder of life, and to be resigned to the finality and 
reality of death. 

 
 I have the right to my own religious beliefs and a faith 

that whoever the true God is, they would approve of my 
work. 

 
 (And finally) I have the right to be realistic about my 

own mortality. 
 
So on behalf of all members, I offer my humble respect for 
these workers and all of our sincere appreciation for their 
efforts. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Saskatoon Law Students Win Gale Moot Cup 
 

Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the House to recognize 
four U of S (University of Saskatchewan) students who have 
won top national honours. 
 
I'm referring to Crystal Baron, Ian Wagner, Bronwyn Eyre, and 
Eva Weclaw, who recently won the Gale Moot Cup, which is a 
prestigious national competition involving 18 law schools from 
across the country. By winning this competition, it means that 
these four individuals are the best student advocates in Canada. 
 
The teams competed in a moot, which means that they were 
divided up into pairs, with one pair arguing for the defence and 
the other taking the Crown's position. 
 
The issue involved in the moot was one surrounding extreme 
drunkenness as a defence, which as members will know, 
actually reached the Supreme Court as an issue recently. 
 
The competition gave the students the opportunity to practise 
on their feet and answer questions posed by the judges. 
 
The victory is especially satisfying because the Saskatchewan 
team, which was coached by Saskatoon criminal lawyer Mark 
Brayford, won in a region of the country where there are six 
highly competitive law schools. 
 
I'd ask members to join with me in extending congratulations to 
the Saskatchewan team and their coach for displaying such 
superior oral advocacy skills at the competition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shuttle Craft International Manufactures 100th Boat 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to rise 
today to announce more positive economic news in my riding. 
Last Friday I had the pleasure of attending an open house at 
Shuttle Craft International, a business that manufactures 
fibreglass boats. 
 
This business, located just north-west of Prince Albert, 
celebrated the manufacturing of its 100th boat. That in itself is 
good news; but, Mr. Speaker, this business plans on expanding 
its production to 2,000 boats this year and then in the following 
year increasing to 5,000 boats. 
 
These boats with their U-shape are unique, as they are powered 
by jet skis. There is only one other company in the world that 
manufactures a similar fibreglass boat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is enormous potential for this business and 
that is why the company plans on increasing its hours and 
eventually will manufacture boats 24 hours a day and additional 
staff will be hired. 
 
I would like to congratulate manager Wayne Washington, and 
his business, for making a significant contribution to the  



April 4, 1995 

 
1345 

economy of Saskatchewan and for providing jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rafferty-Alameda Update 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we were 
informed by the member from Estevan about all the water in the 
Moose Mountain Creek and Alameda dam. Well we all know 
that the purpose of the Alameda dam is to provide water for the 
Americans when they need it. 
 
Not much mention was made of the Rafferty reservoir and all 
the water that is not there. The water has not yet reached the 
base of the dam. After eight years of impounding water, the 
famous Rafferty reservoir is about 15 per cent full. This is in 
spite of above-average spring run-offs and heavy summer rains 
in the area in recent years. The great promises about extensive 
recreation, irrigation of 250,000 acres of farm land, water for 
industrial purposes, are far from being realized. 
 
On a more positive note though, the renowned Rafferty dam 
and multimillion dollar Mainprize Regional Park have become 
popular tourist attractions, with people coming from near and 
far to see these man-made wonders, including the famous boat 
ramp and the half-completed parking lots. 
 
One book has been written about the controversial 
Rafferty-Alameda project which achieved national and 
international attention. A second book about this project is in 
the works. The Rafferty-Alameda dam projects stand as a stark 
reminder of how not to build a project. Hopefully all future 
governments will have learned from this costly experience that 
a full evaluation of all economic, social, and environmental 
concerns must be satisfied before any more major developments 
are contemplated. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Could I have leave to introduce guests, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — Only if there are no further members for 
private members' statements. Does the member have leave? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to introduce 
three guests from the St. Joan of Arc School here in Regina. We 
have, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, Brandon Watson and Lance 
Sauer, who are grade 4 students. They are in an enrichment 
program, Mr. Speaker, and they're along with Mrs. Carol Paton, 
consultant for the program. They are here to learn about our 
democratic processes in the legislature and ask a few questions, 
Mr. Speaker, so let's give them a warm welcome. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, as is our custom on 
Tuesday, the opposition would like to again bring forward some 
questions submitted to us by the general public. We've 
undertaken to these people that one way or another we will get 
the government to answer their questions on the record, and 
preferably in Hansard. It's our intention, Mr. Speaker, to see 
that we accomplish this before the end of the session. 
 
My question today to the Premier comes from Ron Skoropat 
from Prince Albert. Mr. Premier, I want to know why your 
government won't eliminate the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) and former premier's pension plan 
retroactively and replace it with the same plan as regular public 
service employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I know that this is an 
interesting political piece of politics that is being played by the 
members of the Conservative and the Liberal Party. Failing 
being able to make an issue of any substantive issues, they 
pursue this particular topic, which may get them a good news 
story, but there is a lot of inconsistencies in their pursuit 
because it is far from them to advise this government about cost 
controls, about setting examples, when we have ministers here 
who have taken 5 per cent cuts in their salaries, whereas a 
certain member opposite has taken a 37 per cent increase in her 
salary. 
 
So I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, simply, I think members should 
have pensions. I think public servants should have pensions. I 
think everyone should have pensions. And we, in order to make 
those pensions fair, in 1979 changed the pension system in 
Saskatchewan so that as the independent commission said when 
it dealt with MLAs’ indemnities and other matters, it is the best 
pension plan anywhere in Canada and should be a model for 
other provinces to follow as they repair theirs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Referendum on Gaming Expansion 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So says the member 
who has a $1.7 million pension at taxpayers' expense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question comes from Tim Bella from Regina. 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why you are so against any public 
citizen input on the question of casinos and gaming houses, be 
they on reserves or in the city. Where is our citizens' 
referendum? In your zeal to buy votes ahead of the expected 
election, you have trodden over the real backbone of this 
province, namely the taxpayers. 
 
No wonder legal action committees like CAGE (Committee 
Against Gambling Expansion) were set up. They represent  



April 4, 1995 

 
1346 

voices that you refuse to acknowledge. Where is our 
referendum? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
thank the member from Rosthern for his question. 
 
I think we've discussed before, and you might agree, that 
Saskatchewan is not an island. And if the goal of a plebiscite is 
to solve the problem, you don't solve the problem unless you 
. . . if your goal is prohibition, you'd have to deal with solving 
the problem in the gaming areas adjacent to Saskatchewan. 
 
You'd have to talk about having a plebiscite in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Montana, the Dakotas, perhaps asking the federal 
government to change the Criminal Code so that we could have 
a level playing-field in Canada on this subject. 
 
On the issue of on-reserve gaming, in the instance that that 
would happen, you know well, having received a copy of the 
agreement, that in order for any gaming to proceed that involves 
the federation, it has to be approved by the municipality in 
which the gaming is located, by the band, if in fact it's on 
reserve, and by the municipality impacted by the activity. And 
you know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Secretary Budget 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question for 
the Premier comes from Barry Anderson from Watrous, 
Saskatchewan: in the past four years the provincial government 
has raised taxes by 28 per cent. In the past four years, I've 
received raises of 2 per cent; some people have not done as well 
as I have. In light of the above, I want to know what the 
Provincial Secretary does for the people of Saskatchewan and 
why it has received an incredible raise in funding of 209 per 
cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — In response to the gentleman from 
Watrous, I think that's a very legitimate question. I think it 
deserves an answer which is factual, and the factual answer is 
this: there has been essentially no increase in the Department of 
the Provincial Secretary. What has happened is some of the 
responsibilities that used to exist in other departments, such as 
Intergovernmental Affairs for example, has been transferred to 
the Provincial Secretary. 
 
There is no change in the amount of expenditures on that 
particular responsibility. It simply has moved from one agency 
to the Provincial Secretary, and therefore there is no net 
increase in expenditures. 
 
It's simply one of the ways in which this government has 
reorganized the affairs of government and the administration of 
government to make it more efficient, more effective, and has 
resulted, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
Government of Saskatchewan, spending $276 million less in 
this fiscal year on operating expenses than was spent in  

1990-91 under the former administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Size of Premier’s Staff 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is as well 
for the Premier, and it comes from Bill Steckler from Imperial. 
And his question is as follows. Mr. Premier, I want to know 
why the Premier of Saskatchewan needs a staff of 88 people at 
a cost of $7 per person per year, when the Premier of Alberta 
only needs a staff of 47 at a cost of $1 per person per year in 
Alberta. Is Saskatchewan really seven times larger than Alberta, 
or just its government? Who are these 88 people and what do 
they do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I also am pleased to 
be able to respond to Mr. Steckler and tell him that in 
Saskatchewan we have a far smaller government than they have 
in the province of Alberta. For example, in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, the government operations that are delivered cost 
$4,200 per person. In Alberta they cost $4,450 per person. 
Hardly a good comparison to make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also think it's important for Mr. Steckler to know that in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I also think, Mr. Speaker . . . thank 
you. I also think, Mr. Speaker, it's important for Mr. Steckler to 
know — and I know he would want to know — that the staff 
that the member opposite refers to are not the Premier's 
personal staff. The Premier has in his office a total of four 
people — two secretaries and two executive assistants. Most of 
those people are part of the Department of Executive Council. 
They are part of policy and planning, just like any other 
department in government, and are not the Premier's personal 
staff. And it's unfortunate that the members opposite would try 
to misinterpret this particular case and put a different picture on 
it than that. 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 
comes from Millicent Leppa from Macrorie. Mr. Premier, I 
want to know why you are kissing up to the labour unions. All 
government construction should be open to all Saskatchewan 
people, not just unions. There are many people who are just as 
qualified to do a job. Some are even more qualified than union 
workers. These people can get the job done right, and usually 
for less money. Do not force us to hire unionized labour. It is 
not fair and in the long run it will hurt the Saskatchewan 
common, non-unionized people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We appreciate the question that's been  



April 4, 1995 

 
1347 

written in to the official opposition. It does give the government 
now an opportunity, through answering that question, to 
indicate quite clearly today in this House that tendering in the 
province of Saskatchewan is open to all contractors. 
 
The new Crown construction tendering policy does exactly 
what the person is calling for, and I commend the minister in 
charge of the Crown Investments Corporation for putting into 
place a policy that is fair, not to non-union or union contractors, 
but fair to all contractors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

VLT Revenues 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
substantive question to ask the government this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of gambling. 
Madam Minister, your government's helter-skelter gambling 
policy continues to spin out of control. Now you're taking VLTs 
(video lottery terminal) out of Regina and Saskatoon Exhibition 
casinos and moving them to other locations in the province so 
you can beat even more people out of money. This is all very ad 
hoc, Madam Minister. So we want to know exactly what your 
policies are with regard to VLT revenue and placement. 
 
First of all, Madam Minister, the Saskatoon casino is going to 
lose about 7,000 . . . between 7 and $8,000 a week because it 
gets 15 per cent of the VLT revenues, yet the Buffalo Buck 
Casino doesn't get any VLT revenue. 
 
Why is the policy different in Saskatoon from Regina? What 
exactly is your policy in VLT revenues in exhibition casinos? 
Could you tell us? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for the question. Mr. 
Speaker, I'd like to let you know that it seems that the member 
opposite wants to have it both ways. He wants more VLTs, less 
VLTs. 
 
Now in January we made a commitment to set a cap at 3,600 
machines. The exhibition associations have known that the 
particular VLTs in question were in there on an interim basis 
pending the construction of the casino. They know that. 
 
And we also made a commitment to them to keep their revenues 
whole. Now they know that. We made that commitment. We 
stand by that commitment, and we will be carefully monitoring 
with them if there are impacts. And if there are, we will honour 
the commitment we made to them to keep their revenue whole. 
 
In the meantime, with a cap of 3,600, there needs to be a 
reallocation within the system, to be fair to the site contractors 
that are eligible to apply for this program. And so this is a  

question of fairness in the province in distribution and 
allocation of a capped level of machines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
you've also said that you're going to reduce the number of VLTs 
in the province. But when you take into account the additional 
slot machines that are going into government and FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) casinos, that 
number will actually increase. We see that today in the paper 
here. Now we have learned that slot machines will be replacing 
some of the VLTs in the Buffalo Buck Casino. 
 
Madam Minister, what exactly is your policy in regard to these 
new slot machines? Who else will be getting slot machines 
beside the Buffalo Buck Casino? How many slot machines will 
there be? Where are you getting these slot machines from? And 
where exactly will these slot machines be going? Could you tell 
us that, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now although I wasn't the minister at 
the time, I do recall the previous minister, only one minister 
ago, announcing one year ago that the allocation of VLTs was 
separate and distinct from the allocation of machines for the 
purposes of the casino. 
 
There always were two separate allocations, and the total for 
Regina is 500. The total, as you'll recall from reading the 
agreement, is 500 for all of the possible development by the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. And I think if you add that 
up, it still adds up to the same numbers we announced a year 
ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I 
can't follow you. One minister ago, one year ago, what had said 
what under what kind of circumstances, it's very confusing. 
 
Madam Minister, when you want to be particularly funny . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Will the members please 
come to order. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Madam 
Minister, when you want to be particularly funny, you keep 
telling us that you have a well-developed gambling expansion 
plan. Well quite frankly, I think you're bluffing. You've been 
dealing from the bottom of the deck too long, I would suggest 
to you. And I would say it's about time that you lay all the cards 
on the table for the people of the province to see. 
 
Madam Minister, will you lay out your entire long-term 
gambling strategy? How far does the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) plan to take this gambling expansion? How many VLTs 
do you plan to have in the final analysis? How many slot  



April 4, 1995 

 
1348 

machines do you plan to have? And how much gambling 
money do you expect to be taking away from Saskatchewan 
people? 
 
Madam Minister, will you lay out your entire gambling plan? 
You do have one, don't you? Madam Minister, will you lay out 
your entire gambling plan and then let voters pass judgement in 
a province-wide referendum? Will you do that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think, Mr. Speaker, at some point I 
would be honoured with the title of the patient minister because 
we have sat now through three meetings of estimates and have 
gone over and over the gaming policy. I don't think my answers 
have ever changed to any of these questions. 
 
Our goal is to control and regulate; to limit, as much as is 
possible in today's society, the expansion of gaming; to make 
sure that treatment services exist; to make sure that there's fair 
distribution of revenues amongst the various players. 
 
This is really no different than exists in the alcohol industry 
where over time new products come in, like brew pubs, etc., 
new players come in. And industry has to adapt. And for you to 
suggest that it would be frozen at some space in time I think 
would be something that might go into a museum but does not 
belong in a modern society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
week the government tried to duck a motion that would have 
had a vote on the pension pals in this Assembly, and rolling 
back their pensions. They tried to manipulate the system to hide 
behind teachers and many MLAs who retired with very meagre 
pension incomes, Mr. Speaker. They tried to lump themselves 
in with innocent workers who negotiated in good faith — as if 
these pension pals cannot even realize that the pension scheme 
to which they contribute is seen as privileged and unaffordable 
for Saskatchewan taxpayers to support. 
 
My question is to the Premier this afternoon. Mr. Premier, will 
you today support the Bill being introduced which will offer 
you the opportunity to voluntarily rewrite your pension, to 
voluntarily reduce the taxpayers' commitment of 24 per cent to 
your pension plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I want 
to begin my answer by saying that that particular motion which 
the member from Greystone speaks about is one of those few 
motions in this Assembly which vote she did not duck when it 
came before the House. 
 
And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, because it and what she is 
speaking here today are the continuing saga of inconsistency,  

contradiction, flip-flop, from flip-flop to flip-flop, because 
there is no consistent policy on the part of the Liberal Party. 
 
The other day, and I think it was last Tuesday, the Liberal leader 
voted for the motion which said: reaffirm the province's 
commitment to honour its pension obligations to all those who 
contributed in good faith to the formula-based pension plan. 
And it went on to itemize some people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 when the Liberal leader was 
complaining about the changes in the severance packages for 
people who were going to get in excess of half a million dollars 
in severance, said: I don't believe this is a question of numbers, 
this is a question of decency and ethics. She still believes 
Saskatchewan will have difficulty attracting top candidates for 
executive positions. She opposed that too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let's really get to the nub of what this is all about. This is about 
the failure of the Liberal leader and the Liberal Party to be able 
to come to grips and make an issue of any substantive issue in 
the province of Saskatchewan, whether it's the Crow rate or 
transportation or taxation policy, and it's her attempt to try to 
play simple, simple, oldest style politics in order to try to get 
some gain . . . gain ground which she has lost in the polls in the 
last several months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's 
very interesting, the Deputy Premier and his group, they 
definitely try to run but they cannot hide from the people. This 
morning, Mr. Speaker, I had hundreds and hundreds of cards 
from people from one constituency in Regina on this issue, on 
this issue. And people feel very strongly about the unfairness of 
this. And I am most interested in the unwillingness of this 
particular minister to show any leadership whatsoever on this 
issue. 
 
There is not a person in Saskatchewan who believes that some 
members of this Assembly deserve to pad their pensions at the 
expense of taxpayers. And today we are offering the members 
of this Assembly an opportunity to reflect the wishes of their 
constituents on this issue, an opportunity to go on the record in 
support of bringing the pensions of all of the people in this 
Assembly on par. 
 
Now my question to the Deputy Premier, the consummate 
person of playing politics: if you are unwilling to voluntarily 
reduce your pension, will you at the very least allow for a free 
vote this afternoon from everyone else in this Assembly on this 
issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me talk about . . . 
let me respond to the member's comment about setting 
examples, which she has referred to in the past, and double 
standards. Because here is the epitome of double standard. 
 
The member from Greystone talks about the changes to the 
pension plan which in fact happened in 1979. What her real  



April 4, 1995 

 
1349 

motive is, Mr. Speaker, is to . . . because she says you have to 
set an example. Well to set an example for what purpose? It's to 
set an example so that it then, if there happens to be the Liberal 
government on this side, will set the example so they deal with 
what she has called an unfunded pension liability of teachers 
and public servants and others. 
 
But here is the contradiction, Mr. Speaker. This is the only 
person in this Legislative Assembly who personally took a 30 
per cent . . . 37 per cent increase in her personal salary while 
cabinet ministers took a 5 per cent cut in their salaries. This is 
the only person in the legislature who got a 352 per cent 
increase in her caucus grant and never blinked an eye. 
 
If she was really serious about setting an example, Mr. Speaker, 
she would have dealt with this. And she can't say, the rules 
made me do it, because she sits on the Board of Internal 
Economy and has never once suggested that that massive 
increase which she personally received should have not been 
accepted by herself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Perhaps we should actually deal with some 
reality, Mr. Speaker. I did voluntarily take pay cuts. I indeed did 
voluntarily deal with cost of living freezes, just like, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, every member of this Legislative Assembly. 
But it is you and the Premier, sir, who are the privileged elite in 
this particular Assembly. 
 
This government retroactively cancelled contracts, Mr. Speaker, 
with senior civil servants and they said that severance packages 
were too rich and that taxpayers simply couldn't afford them. 
Well it seems a different set of rules apply to themselves when 
they refuse to budge in what is seen as unaffordable pension 
plans as well. 
 
In fact referring to the severance packages of the past, the 
member from Regina Hillsdale said, and I quote: "Many 
Saskatchewan working families find it unconscionable that such 
a provision exists." The same unconscionable situation exists 
now with these members' pensions. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier: if you had the power to 
make moral and financial judgements about what other people 
are worth, what was affordable for taxpayers in those situations, 
sir, why now do you refuse to see the unfairness in your own 
pension plan? Why don't you lead by example and reduce these 
pensions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, we see here in the 
House today the display of a floundering political leader who is 
concerned about the fact that within her party, and more 
importantly within the public mind, there is a disillusionment 
with the inability of the Liberal Party to come forward with any 
policy on anything on which the public can have some interest. 
So the member from Greystone resorts to dealing with this. 

Now I say to the member from Greystone, if you really are 
interested in setting an example, will you today roll back your 
37 per cent increase in your personal salary, which you have 
had an opportunity to do? 
 
You talk about setting an example. You're the only person who 
has had an increase in your personal pay. Will you do 
something about your increase in your caucus grant, and will 
you answer why you only apply your legislation to present 
members? 
 
Is it because you're trying to protect former Liberal MLAs who 
are receiving the old pension plan, like the former senator, 
Davey Steuart, who's also getting the Senate pension plan; Mr. 
Roy Nelson, who's very active on your executive provincially in 
the province of Saskatchewan, certainly active in the Liberal 
Party; Mr. Cliff McIsaac, and the list goes on and on. 
 
You can see, Mr. Speaker, the politics that's being played here, 
because if the member was really serious she would have 
included these individuals as well. But because they are good 
Liberals, she has decided not to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Road Conditions 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier or his designate. While the Premier 
has been flying all over the province, I've spent the last several 
weeks driving in rural Saskatchewan. And while you have no 
idea what the grid road situation is like in rural Saskatchewan, I 
can tell you it isn't very good, Mr. Premier. 
 
Many vehicles, including school buses, have recently been 
trapped in muddy grid roads. The president of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) has said it's 
the worst — the worst — he's ever seen. Mr. Premier, given that 
you have an extra $20 million from last week's budget, which 
was rescued from union hands, would it not be sensible to 
allocate some of those funds towards fixing the roads before a 
serious problem occurs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite like to place the blame for every 
misfortune in the province on the government, and I think this 
just shows how far they reach in order to find a topic. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is not responsible for the 
weather, and I want to point out that the weather the last couple 
of weeks has been very difficult. We had a rain a couple of 
weeks ago and it was followed by the cold weather and our 
roads are in terrible shape — we understand that. In fact we 
have been discussing this situation with the SARM for the last 
week. 
 
At this point in time, the Department of Highways and our  



April 4, 1995 

 
1350 

department and the SARM are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I think I'll call it quits for today. I want to, I 
simply want to . . . and I'm not blaming the minister, but the 
opposition just didn't want to hear your answer and I couldn't 
hear your answer either . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well she 
had gone on for 40 seconds already. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Extension of Partnerships '95 Application Date 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform the House 
that the Government of Saskatchewan will extend the 
application date for employment program for students, called 
Partnerships '95, to April 25, 1995. Requests for applications 
are still high. We want to ensure that we realize the full 
potential of this highly popular program. 
 
We are prepared to consider enhanced funding if the demand 
warrants it. 
 
An additional consideration was that the federal government 
was late in announcing its summer program. Employers have 
told us that they need more time to consider their options. The 
program helps students earn money to continue their studies 
and also provides them with work experience and skills 
training. 
 
The Department of Education, Training and Employment 
provide a wage subsidy to employers who create a summer job 
for students. Businesses, farms, municipal governments, and 
non-profit organizations will have the opportunity to apply. 
Priority is given to those employers who hire students with a 
disability or students of aboriginal ancestry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to providing job 
opportunities for young people of Saskatchewan. This $897,000 
summer employment program is only part of our 11.2 million 
commitment towards improving job and training opportunities 
for youth this year. Together with employers and communities, 
we are taking steps to ensure these students can make a social 
and economic contribution to this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This summer 
employment program for students is a good program, Mr. 
Speaker, that has been going on for a number of years. But the 
last two years there seems to have been some problems 
developing in the system to allow both students and employers 
to know that the program in ongoing. I know I've had 
complaints from my own constituency about it. How do we ever 
find out if it's still there or not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What they have asked, and what I have passed on to the 
government, the Education department, is that they notify the 
previous businesses that have used this program that it 
continues to be available, where the forms are at, and what are  

the procedures to go through. 
 
The students need to know that this is available, Mr. Speaker, 
so that they can go perhaps to their local business that has 
employed them in the past, to again carry on with the same 
program. And that seems to be a failure, Mr. Speaker, in the 
government department, in handling this situation and letting 
people know that it currently is available. 
 
It is a good program. It does provide employment for students 
to carry on with their education. It provides help for business 
which may not be providing that kind of assistance to students 
during the summer months because of the financial constraints. 
With the assistance through the Education department they can 
provide that kind of an employment opportunity to those 
students. 
 
So while I commend the government for carrying on with the 
program developed by the previous administration, they are 
missing the boat a bit, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to letting the 
public know that it's available. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move first reading of a Bill, An Act to amend The Members of 
the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1415) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
question no. 59, I table the response. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to no. 59 is tabled. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I would move: 
 
 That the Estimates subvotes LG01 to LG06, the 

Supplementary Estimates subvotes LG03 and LG04, for 
the Legislative Assembly being vote 21, and the 
estimates for the Provincial Auditor being vote 28, be  



April 4, 1995 

 
1351 

 withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Finance. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Churchill Downs. 
 
I just add a comment, Mr. Speaker. This is a traditional motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to the fact that this is 
private members' day, by leave, I would move: 
 
 That we now go to private members' public Bills and 

orders, to the Committee of the Whole, item 1, Bill No. 
33, An Act respecting the Donation of Food. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Plebiscite on Gaming 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
certainly will stand on this one and we'll stand on this one for a 
long time, Mr. Speaker, the motion that I am proposing today. 
And I will be reading that into the record at this time, and then 
making this motion pursuant to my comments. 
 
And I think it quite appropriate, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, 
that my comments are going to be following another exhibition 
in this legislature of the latest minister for gambling in this 
province, and her machination and dipsy-doodling in trying to 
avoid the real issue. 
 
And the motion that I want to discuss is simply this: 
 
 That this Assembly, in accordance with Section 6 of The 

Referendum and Plebiscite Act, approve the following 
questions to be put to the electorate on a plebiscite: (1) 
Do you approve of the government's plan to operate 
casinos in Saskatchewan? (2) Do you approve of 
government-operated video lottery terminals (VLTs) in 
Saskatchewan? And further, that this Assembly direct 
that the plebiscite putting these questions to the 
electorate be conducted in accordance with The 
Referendum and Plebiscite Act in conjunction with the 
next provincial general election. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, what is prompting us to do this is the 
scenario of a government that has taken the bit in its mouth and 
is totally oblivious to the pulling on the reins of the various 
sectors in our society — the various groups of people in our 
society who are simply saying this, Mr. Speaker: this 
government does not have a mandate for what it is doing. 
 

This government, during the last election, never talked about 
embarking in a new direction in this province where there 
would be fundamental changes in the fabric, in the social 
structure, in this province. And yet that is precisely what this 
government is doing in a helter-skelter, flying-by-the-seats-of-
the-pants approach, with no knowledge really of where they 
have been or where they are going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are hearing it on a continual basis from people 
in society who are saying, if this is what is going to be 
happening in Saskatchewan then we want to be part of that 
process: then we want to have a say. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
logical route for accomplishing that objective is for the 
government to say, all right, we are listening; we hear you and 
we will respond. And we will respond in a positive fashion. 
Because yes, you will get a vote; the people of Saskatchewan 
will get a vote as to whether or not they agree. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, what the people want is for this 
government to commit to putting these questions on a plebiscite 
or a binding referendum perhaps, in the upcoming election, and 
do it in conjunction with that election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is only a fair assessment that the people 
of Saskatchewan are making when they say, because of this 
fundamental change in direction, we want a say in that 
direction. And they are speaking to us, Mr. Speaker, in a loud, 
unequivocal way. 
 
And we find, Mr. Speaker, on a continual basis I guess, that this 
expanded gambling is a gamble of the highest stakes, a gamble 
of the highest order that this government is taking in its mad 
scramble to try to get a hold of the deficit. 
 
And they're gambling on the future of this province. And quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, they are gambling on their own future as a 
government. Because it looks right now as if people are 
rejecting it in sound numbers, unequivocally, wherever they 
have that opportunity. And that's what you folks over there are 
afraid of — the results of such a plebiscite, or such a 
referendum if they chose to go that route. 
 
The people want a say. They want a say as you have this mad 
scramble to be able to achieve your particular goals. Because I 
reiterate, Mr. Speaker, you, during the 1991 election, said a lot 
of things. You said that we were going to have a reduction . . . 
actually not a reduction. You said that there would be the 
removal of the PST (provincial sales tax). Folks thought that 
that 7 per cent would be gone. Folks thought that there would 
be no such tax increases, no such utility increases as they have 
been experiencing. 
 
Now instead of that we have a host of tax increases unparalleled 
in the history of Saskatchewan. Instead of 7 per cent PST, we 
have 9 per cent PST. And we have a whole row and a whole list 
of fee increases in every imaginable way. 
 
And so the deficit, Mr. Speaker, has been tackled, and it has 
been largely tackled on the backs of the Saskatchewan  



April 4, 1995 

 
1352 

taxpayers. And now, to increase the problem manifold, they are 
prepared to tax the people in what I consider to be an 
illegitimate fashion, a tax on the poor — a tax on the poor. 
Because precisely that is what gambling is, generally speaking, 
an attempt by the downtrodden, it's an attempt by those who are 
having trouble paying their bills, to find and to grasp that pot at 
the end of the rainbow, that sudden riches, that sudden dream of 
going to the Bahamas and Barbados and having this wonderful 
life. 
 
Unfortunately it is, generally speaking, those who are not all 
that well off in our society that are putting a huge proportion of 
their incomes into that search for that illusive pot at the end of 
the rainbow, that search for the illusive dream. 
 
And you people over there are building on that. The 
susceptibility of people is being exploited by this government. 
You're counting on that. You're counting on the fact that by the 
proliferation of gambling opportunities in this province, you 
will be able to reap the benefit. 
 
And you're taking the money out of the pockets of the poor, in 
general terminology. Because quite frankly, those that have a 
pretty good roll in their pockets will go to Nevada, they will go 
to Vegas, they will go to Reno, they will go to the more exotic 
places to do their gambling. And it's the people here who are 
going to be using their pay cheques, who are going to be using 
their family allowance, who are going to be using their milk 
money, that they will put it into this gambling proliferation of 
experiences. 
 
Speaking of about experiences, they will get an experience all 
right. The minister of Gaming has told us that. 
 
Well it's unfortunate that we have such things as addiction, for 
example, Mr. Speaker, and that addiction . . . Pathological 
gamblers, they are called. People who are easily susceptible to 
the lure of that pot at the end of the rainbow. 
 
And you know what research will tell us, Mr. Speaker, research 
tells us that this pot at the end of the rainbow is most alluring to 
the young people, teenagers. Now if adults can get hooked on 
this business of getting quick and sudden riches, what impact is 
that going to have on teenagers when they get that habit early in 
life? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can have bingos, we can have charity 
lotteries, we can buy break-opens; all of these things, Mr. 
Speaker, are able to absorb a lot of money out of people. But I 
don't think that we have addicts sitting in bingo halls spending 
the last amount of money that they have. But when you take a 
look at how those folks over there are planning to reap the 
biggest windfall, this megaproject . . . they say they are opposed 
to megaprojects. This is the biggest megaproject ever 
undertaken in the province of Saskatchewan. And you're 
hinging your hopes on nothing less than the VLTs, than the 
VLTs, video lottery terminals. 
 
And we have spoken to many people who have become  

addicted to this process. And it is, by all accounts, one of the 
most vicious, one of the most insidious kinds of addictions that 
are possible, because it's got all the elements that are necessary 
to become addicted: the excitement, the fervour, the flashing 
lights, the pay-out. All of a sudden there's that win. 
 
And then there's always the potential to hit the big jackpot, Mr. 
Speaker. That's what makes it so exciting for many people. And 
the pathological gambler does not have control over his 
faculties when it comes to this form of gambling. 
 
Now we can argue whether it's 1.7 per cent or .9 per cent of the 
population that is automatically . . . we know they are going to 
become addicted like that. So what happens to these? Why 
would a government, in its right sense, go about advertising, 
exploiting, proliferising — if there is such a word — increasing 
the numbers of gambling opportunities in this province, 
knowing full well that they are going to create a miserable life 
for many of the people of Saskatchewan; knowing full well that 
there are going to be people that will need medication, doctors, 
and counsellors to pull back a resemblance of sanity in their 
lives because they have been gripped with this gambling bug? 
 
And you know that because originally you thought that it was 
only going to be $500,000. That would cover enough of the 
expense necessary to do this addiction counselling. I've been 
told that when you have one person coming for addiction 
counselling, to do a proper job with follow-up is going to cost 
$50,000 a shot. Well you thought — to show again that the 
seat-of-the-pants approach that you folks are taking — you 
thought $500,000 should be enough. But you've already 
admitted in this budget that we have before us right now that 
you've already allocated $1.5 million for addiction counselling. 
So the problems are greater than you thought they would be. 
 
And yet what are you doing? Again in question period today, 
Mr. Speaker, I raised the question of: well you said you would 
only have so-and-so many VLTs in this province. And you're 
taking some of them out of the Buffalo Buck days in Regina 
here, some of the machines. You removed them; scattered them 
around the province. And now when we talk to the manager of 
the Regina Exhibition here, he says . . . this is what he said and 
I just happened to find it; I didn't think I was going to find this 
piece of paper. 
 
(1430) 
 
But I can quote directly now, Mr. Speaker, instead of just 
summarizing on his behalf: 
 
 "In . . . peak periods (he says), we clearly won't have 

enough machines to satisfy the demand." 
 
Now that the so-called extra machines have been removed. But: 
 
 That may not be very long, since Buffalo Buck will 

replace its VLTs with slot machines when the new 
casino planed for Union . . . 

 



April 4, 1995 

 
1353 

And the members opposite say, right on. Mr. Speaker, that is 
what we're concerned about. Is a slot machine a VLT? Well a 
slot machine in my estimation and what I know about them is 
even more insidious. And probably would even be more 
addictiveness . . . create more addictiveness and readiness to be 
addicted than the VLTs. You have the clamour of the coins 
coming out; you have the pulling of that big, one-armed bandit 
arm that it has. 
 
So besides that, so now we have a definitive number, and I 
don't know what that definitive number is any more, Mr. 
Speaker. Quite frankly I lost track whether it's 3,600 now plus a 
1,000 to be added, 500 in the native-run ones, and 500 in 
Regina — or what it is. 
 
But if that is the cap that they are planning to maintain, where 
do the slot machines fit in? Is this a new gamut that they've 
come up with? And quite candidly, Mr. Speaker, I will admit 
that the slot machines were mentioned in that FSIN agreement; 
they're in there. 
 
But for whatever reason, and I guess I'm not a legalistic type of 
an individual, I did not pick that out until recently — that 
there's another avenue for them to expand even further, and that 
is to add slot machines to the other opportunities that these 
folks are planning for people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very, very obvious to the people of 
Saskatchewan that this is not a well-thought-out approach by 
the government. I think, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, that it was a 
knee-jerk reaction, a knee-jerk reaction by this government 
when they realized what we had been saying all along: that this 
Government of Saskatchewan in the '80s, late '80s and early 
'90s, didn't have enough money to do what was supposed to be 
done. 
 
And when they finally took the reins of power and realized that 
what we had been saying all along was true, they said well, let's 
cook the books and see what we can do with a huge deficit 
which we can rectify over a relatively short period of time, 
enough to be re-elected, enough to take the minds of the people 
of Saskatchewan off of the promise that they had made in '91. 
And perhaps we can regain the confidence for the upcoming 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that I believe is rather the darker side of their 
motivation. And the darker side of their motivation was to get 
in as much money out of the people of Saskatchewan as 
possible. 
 
And the way to do that is through video machines, expanded 
gambling, and now we recognize the potential of slot machines 
being added to this whole scenario. It's the greedy eyes of 
government; that's the fundamental motivator, where principles, 
where the social fabric of this province are willing to be . . . 
they are willing to sacrifice them in the name of the almighty 
buck. 
 
And whoever happens to fall by the wayside in the agenda that  

this government has set up, well so be it. We'll set up a little bit 
of fun. We'll hire a few counsellors, and that should take care of 
that problem, as long as the dollar signs reflecting from the 
greedy eyes of this government . . . that is the justification. That 
is the justification because the end is the deficit, and whatever 
means have to be accomplished, at whatever cost it may happen 
to be, that is not significant. 
 
So members across the way, I think . . . and I think that's why 
the minister is so sensitive. I think that's why the Premier is so 
sensitive. I think that that's why we've had five ministers of 
gambling, trying to get a hold on this, because I think you 
people are beginning to realize that the gambling adventure that 
you embarked upon is your Achilles' heel. It's your Achilles' 
heel. 
 
You've done a lot of mean things to the people of this province. 
And I don't want to get into the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) and the farmers and the judges and the breaking of 
contracts and all that kind of stuff. 
 
But I do think that you have broken another contract with the 
people of this province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to go so far 
as to say, you've never had a contract with the people of this 
province when it comes to gambling. 
 
You never talked about it. And you're ashamed of it. I can see 
that in your eyes as I'm talking to you. Many of you are not 
looking me in the eye; you're looking at my belt. Because you 
are ashamed — you are ashamed, sir — of this process. I know 
that you are. You are ashamed of what you are doing, and you 
are not wholeheartedly supporting this process. 
 
Why am I so confident? Well let's take a look at the throne 
speech. We spent seven days debating the throne speech. Right? 
We spent seven days debating the throne speech. And here you 
are, embarked on a major new direction for this province. You 
didn't have the nerve to tell the people about this in the '91 
election. You didn't have the nerve to mention it. Not one 
mention of it. 
 
The seven days that we talked in this latest throne speech didn't 
make one mention of gambling — even now, Mr. Speaker. 
Even now, currently, this session, not a mention. Not a word. 
You're hoping it would go away. You're hoping that we won't 
talk about it. 
 
In Public Accounts this morning, Mr. Speaker . . . I'm not a 
member of Public Accounts, but I am the Gaming critic, and 
our members in Public Accounts asked me to come into that 
committee to question the officials of the Gaming Commission 
so that we could get some idea of the direction — where have 
you been, where are we, and where are we going? And the 
government members on that committee tried their best to 
prevent me from being able to speak today. 
 
Those members did. That member over there — I will resist; I 
don't want to embarrass him — made the comment that I really 
didn't have any right to be the first speaker in that committee  



April 4, 1995 

 
1354 

because I was not a regular member. I was not a regular 
member. 
 
And I object to that because I do not like being muzzled. I do 
not like being intimidated. Because we have a message, Mr. 
Speaker, and the message is to that government, that your 
policy that you're embarked upon is your Achilles' heel. It's 
going to pull you down. 
 
Because people object to being used. People object to being 
used. And that's exactly what you're doing. And people are 
telling us in no uncertain terms, try to talk some sense into this 
government so that they will listen and give us a say. You know 
we could . . . if I got a commitment from the minister that yes, 
we believe that people should have a say, if she would say that 
I'd sit down and this would be the end of the road. 
 
Give that commitment that you'll have that plebiscite question 
or that referendum question in conjunction with the next 
election, and people would be satisfied. And then, democracy 
having taken its course, that would be the end of it. Democracy 
rules. 
 
If people told you folks, yes, we want that, then you'll have it. 
No more arguments from me. I'm not doing this from a 
moralistic point of view or whatever. I'm just objecting in the 
manner in which it is being presented to the people of this 
province and their inability to have their voice heard. 
 
And that's what I'm trying to do during this debate this 
afternoon, is to make my voice heard or the people's voices 
heard through me. And maybe some of you members, maybe 
some of you back-benchers that I know for a fact do not agree 
with this process, will have the courage as the member from 
Rosemont, for example, has done in this Assembly. He said, 
these are my standards. You are not fulfilling those and so 
therefore I cannot support you. And that's the proper thing to 
do. I still don't agree with him, but he stood up and said no, I 
can't go along with this government. And that's to be 
commended, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You folks are out of touch; the minister is out of touch; the 
Premier is out of touch. He's out of touch because he says, if I 
had my druthers, if I could have the scenario that I would want, 
I wouldn't have gambling. The minister herself, the fifth 
minister of gambling now, Mr. Speaker, has gotten up in this 
House and essentially said and expressed the same emotions. 
 
Well if you don't believe in something, then don't do it. What's 
forcing you to do it? She says, well we can't be an economic 
island unto ourselves. If the rest of the province have it, I guess 
we'll have to have it. The Premier says, well boy, we've got to 
do it because if we don't the FSIN is going to be down on our 
back and we can't have that. 
 
And so they succumb, they succumb to the threats that are in 
direct . . . the antithesis of what their principles are all about, 
Mr. Speaker. And that does not speak well for this government, 
or for any government for that matter. 

And so what do you do? Well then you light up your blame 
thrower and say, well don't blame us; don't blame us. We 
wouldn't really want to do this if we didn't have to. But we have 
to because the Indians made us do it. The Indians made us do it. 
That was the first excuse that was given. 
 
Then we're given the excuse . . . well which one do you want 
next? Then we were given the excuse, well the businessmen 
want us to do it. And we've talked to businessmen. We've had 
some good meetings with businessmen in this place, in Regina. 
And they give some powerful arguments on a business side, 
why it should be done. But is business right when they say that 
the economic spin-offs are good enough, are large enough, to 
make up for the downsides on this experiment? 
 
Well I'll give you my idea on that. I don't think it is. And this is 
a personal philosophy that I have. I do not think that the 
business community in Saskatchewan in the long run is going to 
gain by a proliferation of gambling opportunities. 
 
Why? Because the jobs that are created, Mr. Speaker, are not 
real jobs. And I hasten to add that for the people who are going 
to be working in the casinos, for the people who are going to be 
given a pay cheque, for them it will be meaningful. Absolutely 
no doubt about it. For some of them it will be the first pay 
cheque that they have received in a long, long time — perhaps 
the first one in their life other than perhaps hand-outs from the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
But these are not meaningful jobs in the sense that no wealth is 
being created, nothing new is being made. There's nothing that 
you can put your hand on and say, look, Mr. Speaker, this is 
what I got for this effort; this is what I got for this money. There 
is no wealth being created, and we all know that. You members 
across the way know that the only thing that is happening is that 
you're shifting from one pocket into another pocket. 
 
And do you know what I object to? Is that it's coming out of the 
pocket of the poor, those people who are least able to afford it, 
and it's going into the pocket of the government. 
 
That's your motivation, ladies and gentlemen. That's your 
motivation. There's no wealth created by this. 
 
Well when I say no, I tended, Mr. Speaker, to exaggerate it 
sometimes. And I know my mom used to tell me that I've told 
you a million times not to exaggerate. And then I still go ahead 
and do it, I guess. Because there may be the slight income, and I 
have to give recognition to the fact that there may be travellers 
passing through who will leave a few bucks at this place and at 
that place as they're travelling through. And of course that's 
money that is being brought into the province. That may be 
wealth creation. Or the few people that are not going to go to 
Vegas because we have the opportunity here. 
 
(1445) 
 
But the amount, the proportion, of that type of influx of money  



April 4, 1995 

 
1355 

is very minimal when you compare it to the negative impact that 
this gaming is going to have throughout the province. 
 
So that was point number one under the heading that I'm using 
here as the blame thrower. Because the Premier, the minister of 
gambling, have said that if we had our druthers we wouldn't do 
gambling. But we have to do it. We're being forced to do it 
against our will. And we're being forced to do that by the FSIN, 
we're being forced to do that by the business community, and 
we're being forced to do that by the churches, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess I could roll the next one into that same category — 
the churches and the charities. They are the ones that are to 
blame, said the minister of gambling, because they are the ones 
that started it. They are the ones that created this mental image 
in pictures, minds, that buying tickets, buying raffle tickets, and 
playing bingo is okay, that that is a good form of entertainment. 
And they were causing so much hassle about it that we were 
just forced to expand the gaming possibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that type of an assessment and that type of 
blame-throwing is a cop-out — that's all it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had people that have felt the pain, the 
human cost, the human toll, where we have — and I have the 
articles here somewhere — where we have at least three 
individuals — maybe four, maybe more by now, I may not be 
aware of all of these individuals — who have stolen money, 
large sums of money, Mr. Speaker, in the teens of thousands of 
dollars from churches, from charitable organizations like 
SARCAN where they worked. They stole money. 
 
Why did they steal money? Because they were so caught up, 
they were so caught up in the addiction to this gambling, that 
they were prepared to take the risk of stealing money, and they 
put it into the machines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who got 85 per cent of that money that was 
stolen? Who got 85 per cent of that money? This government 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — People did. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And the member says ironically, people did. 
The people did. 
 
These folks who are addicted to their addiction stole money — 
thousands, tens of thousands of dollars — and stuck it into 
those slot machines, and the Premier stuck it into his 
government's pocket. That's the scenario that is being played out 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, and that is why I tend to become 
just a little bit miffed when I see what is really happening here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the epitome of this whole exercise and 
the government's responsibility and how the people of this 
province are viewing this government came out in the 
Star-Phoenix on Saturday, April 1. Mr. Speaker, Saturday, 
April 1 was rather a memorial day to me because that was the  

day in the Rosthern constituency when the good folks of 
Rosthern decided who their next MLA was going to be. As you 
know, I've already announced that I won't be here to harangue 
members opposite in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — From the thunderous applause given so 
boisterously and so on, I must be making my point here today. 
 
But during that period of time, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday night 
when they chose the new MLA for the constituency of Rosthern 
that will be representing Rosthern after the next election, some 
of the people — and that's no April Fool's statement either — 
some of the people came up to me, Mr. Speaker, and said, have 
you read the Star-Phoenix today? Have you read the 
Star-Phoenix? 
 
Well I said, I seldom read it to begin with and I certainly don't 
read it on Saturdays. But anyway what's the problem? And this 
individual came up and other people came up and said, well on 
the a.m. update in the Star-Phoenix, there's an article in there. 
You've got to do something about it. 
 
I said, well what's this? Well the government is involved in the 
gambling industry now and they're taking our dollars and they're 
gambling on the gambling and then they're losing. And yet . . . 
You've got to do something about it. 
 
So I said, oh sure. This sounds terrible. We got to look into that. 
So we drove home. About 45 minutes later, we got home. And 
then on my answering machine, the lady apologized, and the 
other people said, tell him that we're sorry that we brought this 
to his attention. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this is what they were concerned about. And 
they said, on the local update it says: "'Ten thousand quick 
picks, please.'" This is out of the Star-Phoenix, headline, front 
page. 
 
 The provincial government thinks taxpayers are willing 

to gamble to reduce the accumulated $14-billion 
accumulated debt . . . (the Gaming minister said, and I'm 
leaving out a couple of words,) . . . announced Friday 
the province has taken out a $10,000 weekly 
subscription to Lotto 6-49 in the hope of hitting the 
jackpot. "We see it as a good tradeoff . . . (the minister 
said.) If we win, the province wins big-time, and if we 
don't, the money — or much of it anyway — (85 per 
cent) still comes back to Saskatchewan in support for 
sports and cultural organizations. So we really can't 
lose. And what's a lousy $10,000 a week? 

 
Front page, Star-Phoenix. Well were people some upset, Mr. 
Speaker. And these folks were particularly upset when they 
found out later on that when it tells you to go to D15, there is 
no D15 because obviously this was an April Fool's Day joke 
that the Star-Phoenix ran. 
 



April 4, 1995 

 
1356 

Mr. Speaker, that's funny in a sense, but I didn't laugh at it. Not 
too many people have laughed at it because I think maybe even 
the Star-Phoenix fails to appreciate the depth to which this 
government has sunk in the eyes of many people in 
Saskatchewan. I think that's what this tells me. That's what this 
tells me. 
 
You know it was an implication of you folks in the eyes of 
many. People are willing to believe . . . and this is nonsense, I'm 
glad to say. This was nonsense, but the interesting thing is and 
the telling thing and what should be imprinted on your minds, 
people, is that the folks of Saskatchewan are willing to believe 
something like that. They are actually willing to believe that you 
would stoop to something like that. And that's the scary thing. 
 
And I think that is the thing that you folks should be very, very 
aware of. You haven't got the mandate. The people didn't know 
that you were going to embark the province on this new 
direction in gambling, and they are simply saying before you do 
that we want to say we have a grave misgiving about the 
direction that you are taking this government. 
 
And I say to members opposite, you are going to be, you are 
going to be responsible for your own downfall. The Roman 
Empire . . . and I don't want to get into that because that's a 
favourite topic of mine, as a history teacher, but the Roman 
Empire did not fall from without. The Roman Empire was not 
overrun by barbarians insomuch as the Roman Empire fell 
because of a weakness from within. The decay from within is 
what caused the fall of the Roman Empire. And I'm just now 
reminding you of that in a very gentle way, members opposite, 
that what you are doing now is eroding, pardon me, eroding the 
base of your support. 
 
The people out there are looking at you and saying, well if 
they're capable of that, then what else are they capable of? And 
the trust factor is eroded. And I'm saying that to you in a most 
sincere way, in a most sincere way, members opposite. 
 
The motion that I was making, Mr. Speaker, or going to make 
. . . In the flurry of activity over the last half hour, Mr. Speaker, 
I have found it here. This is the motion that I would like all 
members of this Assembly to vote in favour of. And it states 
thus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 That this Assembly, in accordance with section 6 of The 

Referendum and Plebiscite Act, approve the following 
questions to be put to the electorate on a plebiscite: (1) 
Do you approve of the government's plan to operate 
casinos in Saskatchewan? (2) Do you approve of 
government-operated video lottery terminals in 
Saskatchewan? And further, that this Assembly direct 
that the plebiscite putting these questions to the 
electorate be conducted in accordance with The 
Referendum and Plebiscite Act in conjunction with the 
next provincial general election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by my colleague from  

Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
make a few comments and to present a few arguments in 
support of the motion brought forward by my colleague, the 
member from Rosthern  a motion that I think, when most 
people across this province have an opportunity to review it and 
they review the facts, I think you will find that in general people 
in Saskatchewan would say, yes we would like to have a vote. 
 
In fact just the example of Saskatoon is a good example to 
follow and to take the lead on. The fact that Saskatoon did give 
their electorate a chance last fall during civic elections to decide 
whether or not they should have, or allow, a casino in their city, 
and it was an overwhelming vote against. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to begin by reading from an article from 
Canadian Living of 1993. The headline is: 
 
 Wanna bet we've gone too far? Gambling creates jobs, 

tax revenue, and tourism. It also ruins lives. Marcia Kay 
explores the pros and cons of video lottery terminals in 
Atlantic Canada, Ontario's casino projects, and bingo on 
native reserves. 

 
And I'd like to read a few comments out of this article, and I 
have a few other articles I would like to lay out before the 
Assembly on some of the arguments. Certainly the government 
will appreciate arguments for, but I believe there are more 
arguments against the expansion, or even the enhancement of 
gambling in our province. 
 
The article begins in this manner: 
 
 Step right up, ladies and gentlemen. Place your bets. 

Here at this great gambling emporium that we call 
Canada, we've got games of chance for everyone. 
Bingo, Monte Carlo nights, horse racing, casinos, 
raffles, lotteries — how about a Lotto 6/49 ticket? As 
the ads say, imagine the freedom. 

 
And that's one of the things that we are all bombarded with as 
we happen to be viewing our TVs — every once in a while 
these ads come on and that comment about imagine the 
freedom, although it doesn't indicate that the odds of winning 
are probably 14 million:1 for the jackpot. And you'll need a 
heck of an imagination to imagine that freedom. You'd better 
have a good imagination. 
 
 Or try your luck on our special regional games. Over by 

the Eastern wall we've got the latest Atlantic-style video 
lottery terminals, considered one of the most addictive 
forms of gambling. It can take less than 10 seconds to 
play a whole game — want to bet you can stop after just 
one? 

 
 At the center table, get ready to check out Ontario's first 

government-run casino, opening soon in Windsor. Lay  



April 4, 1995 

 
1357 

your wagers on Windsor's chances of avoiding the crime, 
poverty, and violence that Atlantic City couldn't. 

 
 And be sure to visit the Western section, where natives 

are battling the provinces for the right to run casinos on 
reserves. Will casinos represent the return of the buffalo 
for natives, or a cash cow for governments? Roll the 
dice and see. 

 
 If you're like an estimated 95 per cent of adult 

Canadians, you've gambled at least once. And 
governments are finding out what organized crime has 
known for a long time: there's big money in gambling. 
In 1991, Canadians spent more than $10 billion in this 
country on legal bets and wagers and up to four times 
that amount on illegal ones. As governments fall over 
themselves in their haste to get a piece of the action, 
they attempt to come across as wise, cautious regulators, 
but sometimes sound more like cheap carnival 
hucksters. 

 
(1500) 
 
 There's no question that legalized gambling is on a roll 

in Canada. But to what end? It's like a roulette wheel: 
round she goes; where she stops, nobody knows. 

 
 BANDITS ON THE COAST? 
 "I feel like taking an axe to them," says a Halifax single 

mother who stole from her boss to finance her addiction 
to electronic slot machines, also called video lottery 
terminals or VLTs. Another pathological gambler, 
Michael Slaunwhite, an unemployed cook in Halifax, 
lost $40,000 and was close to suicide when he quit 
playing VLTs last December. He warns, "Stay away 
from them, or you'll end up like me. Three years ago, a 
few months after VLTs came on the scene, there were 
only three members in the Halifax chapter of Gamblers 
Anonymous. Now as many as 300 people have attended 
at least one of the group's meetings. 

 
 Since December 1990, thousands of VLTs have 

appeared throughout the entire Atlantic region. Similar 
to the traditional one-arm bandits, you simply touch the 
screen to try for three cherries or lemons in a row, or to 
play poker or blackjack against the machine. If you win, 
you get a credit for up to $500 cash. The illusion is that 
you have choice and control; the reality is that a 
randomly programmed microchip decides when you win 
or lose. 

 
 VLTs represent a transition in Canada from what's 

called the softcore, passive gambling of lotteries and 
bingo to a more hard-core, interactive process. But 
unlike casino table games which draw an audience, 
VLTs allow players to be alone and anonymous, which 
appeals to new gamblers, especially women. And their 
high-tech, colourful appearance and instant gratification 
attract the young. "There's no question VLTs will  

increase the number of pathological gamblers," says Tibor 
Barsony, executive director of the Ontario chapter of the 
Canadian Foundation on Compulsive Gambling. 

 
 But here's the flip side: VLTs generate huge profits. In 

the tiny province of Prince Edward Island, total VLT 
revenues after prize payouts for the year ending March 
1993 rang in at more than $12.7 million, or almost $100 
per person. The provincial government's take rose in 
June from 35 to 50 per cent. (It's as high as 65 per cent 
in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, where there's no 
private-sector involvement.) 

 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague's motion reads, many people 
across this province I'm sure have seen articles such as this one, 
and many people are quite well aware of the problems that have 
already been associated, some of the problems that have already 
come so close to home because of possibly a close friend or a 
loved one who's become addicted to this form of gambling. 
 
And due to that addiction, as we've seen across this province, a 
number of people have already been charged with fraud for 
having stolen from employers, stolen from SARCAN, stolen 
from their place of business to enhance or feed the addiction 
and this gambling habit that has already got them caught. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's interesting to note . . . And I've 
personally gone into hotels where you go past the bar and you 
used to go into the coffee shop area and you'd see a number of 
people sitting around having coffee. And what I found very 
interesting one day, shortly after the VLTs moved into this 
particular community, and I'm sure it's no different in any other 
community, walking into the coffee shop at about the same 
hour to find how many fewer people were sitting in the coffee 
shop having a cup of coffee; that having sat in a position and 
not intentionally doing it but I happened to be looking out the 
doorway and noticing the traffic that was flowing into the bar 
section. 
 
I went around the corner just to see what the attraction was. 
And the individuals that I used to go and sit and have coffee 
with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were not in the coffee shop having 
coffee; they were now sitting in front of a VLT terminal. 
 
And one would wonder how much money was wagered in that 
time period where they may have taken 15 or 20 minutes for 
coffee, spent 75 cents or 85 cents for a cup of coffee, had a 
good visit. They were now sitting in front of a VLT machine, 
and one can only guess what may have gone into that machine. 
 
To enhance, if you will, it just was a proof positive to myself 
and I'm sure to many others, that this is a very addictive form of 
gambling and people can get caught up in it. And as the article 
said, if you want to bet that you can play one game and walk 
away from the machine, I don't know of anyone has. 
 
I'm sure if we took a survey around this province of people who 
have begun to, and gone and made use of the VLT machines 
and played their hand at trying to take on these VLT one-arm  



April 4, 1995 

 
1358 

bandits or the VLT bandits across this province, we'd find that 
many people thought, well I'm going in and I'll play one game; 
that's all I'll play. 
 
But you know, one game goes by so fast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that next thing you know, well it's only a loonie; I'll put in 
another loonie. Next thing you know they've gone through five 
or a dozen loonies. Or people may go into the bar with, say, 10 
loonies in their pocket, and they're going to stop after they put 
10 loonies in the machine, whether they've won or not. But the 
reality is it seems to me, just having observed some of the 
individuals as they've played the machine, there's an allurement 
to those machines such that you've come so close, one more 
loonie, and next time I'm going to win. And so another loonie 
goes in. 
 
And it's unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people become 
swallowed up with the machines. And rather than the $10 that 
they had originally intended of wagering, they've moved into 
20, 25, and $50, to the point, as I indicated earlier, we have 
sums of money where people have actually been charged with 
fraud, of stealing from their employers in the neighbourhood of 
from 9 to 25 to $50,000, and that's a substantial sum of money. 
 
In fact in some cases homes are being literally torn apart 
because of one member's addiction to these machines. Or an 
individual has run their line of credit to the limit or taken all the 
money out of the general account or else run the charge cards to 
the limit so that the collectors are at the door, and the other 
partner is wondering what's going to happen. How are they 
going to meet the needs of the home because the money's been 
depleted, and there's no credit available because they've lost this 
money? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I see, and I think what most people 
across this province see, we see that we've got a government 
running with a gaming policy that as one headline reads: lacks 
direction and lacks leadership. We've got a gaming policy . . . In 
an article in October 22, 1994, the headline was "Gambling 
bomb ready to explode." And I quote: "The Roy Romanow 
government is sitting on a bombshell and desperately trying to 
figure how to defuse it." 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not sure if they're looking at how 
to really try and defuse it as much as they're looking at the fact 
that the greed for the money and the injection, cash injection 
into the treasury of this province, is more important than the 
well-being, the social well-being of this province. Here’s the 
next headline, reading: gambling, greed and government. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's interesting to hear the comments 
from members opposite, and we trust that these members will 
indeed take the time to stand and address some of these 
concerns, their concerns vocally and address the public in this 
Assembly as they have an opportunity later in the afternoon to 
address the motion that's in front of us because certainly the 
motion that is laid out before us is a motion that is available for 
everyone to take part in. 
 

I'm sure there are members in this Assembly that have differing 
views and differing opinions. Maybe many members are caught 
up with the idea that we need the revenue that will be 
generated. And to think that the revenue that casinos will 
generate is going to be additional revenue in this province, and 
to the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a fallacy. You talk to 
any jurisdiction, any jurisdiction that has expanded or 
introduced gambling, or expanded gambling into their 
communities or into their province or into their jurisdiction, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and what do you find? 
 
They will indicate to you that they did not indeed see the 
expansion in revenue. Yes, the casino or the VLTs was a new 
form of revenue. The unfortunate part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that it may have been a new form of revenue but it took revenue 
out of other forms that used to come into the province or into 
that jurisdiction or into the city. It took revenue out of 
businesses that would have been spent in local businesses. And 
so the reality was, it wasn't new money, it just came in a 
different avenue. 
 
And I guess if there's one thing a person could look at and 
governments will be looking at, the fact is there's probably 
fewer complaints about revenue generated through gambling 
than revenue generated through taxation. And yet I think most 
people at the end of the day would prefer to see that the revenue 
they are putting into government coffers for expenditure comes 
directly from them, where they know where it is; it's an upfront 
. . . an upfront form of revenue such as taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the member 
from Moose Jaw just wondering what tax increases. I don't 
think we have to go too far to talk about tax increases. We've 
had all kinds of tax increases. And I'm not sure if it's the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow or the other riding in 
Moose Jaw, but I would indicate that we have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Palliser. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Moose Jaw Palliser, I believe. 
 
The fact is that we have, in this province, we have seen other 
forms of taxation. Well the members opposite would suggest 
we haven't increased taxes. I don't know if you can go to anyone 
on the street and suggest they haven't had tax increases when 
they pull their power bill out and they see the increases they've 
seen in their power rates, the increases they've seen in their 
telephone rates, the increases in their natural gas rates. And 
while the government did give a reduction a couple of weeks 
ago in natural gas, I understand Alberta has reduced it even 
further. 
 
So I'm wondering if the government today is willing to 
stimulate industry in this province and stimulate the economy of 
this province by even reducing the natural gas rates in this 
province a further 2 or 3 or 4 per cent, following the lead of 
Alberta. 
 
And what I also find interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is how  



April 4, 1995 

 
1359 

the government has the types . . . or the forms the government 
has chosen to try and calm people and to try and lead people to 
believe that expanded gambling and casinos are the answer to 
this province. 
 
And I'd like to read from an article that came out of one of our 
local papers, and it was actually in the Carlyle Observer, and I'd 
like to read this article to you. This article was printed prior to 
the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention. And it reads this way, "Gambling with our future" 
is the a headline: 
 
 This week, mayors and aldermen from Saskatchewan 

villages, towns, and cities will meet at SUMA. They 
will hear from many speakers and discuss things that 
pertain to running the province's urban governments. 
Resolutions will be presented and delegates will vote. 
Recommendations will be made. Others will be rejected. 

 
 Always high on the list of discussion is the subject of 

how much money the communities will receive from the 
provincial government. This has a big effect on the local 
government's budget and therefore on its people and 
how it will affect the mill rate. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 
 It is interesting that just prior to the SUMA convention, 

the government announced that communities will be 
getting some VLT cash. This is interesting, first, 
because the discussion is still hot and heavy on the use 
of these machines. There are both pro and con sides on 
the debate and both sides are being more and more 
vocal. 

 
 The amount of money a community gets from the VLT 

option will depend on how much is spent in that 
community. In other words, the government is 
encouraging people to use the machines to gamble to 
put more money into the community. 

 
 On one hand, the people are asked to gamble away their 

hard-earned cash, so the community will have more 
money. Money spent in a VLT does not go into the 
community as much as it would if it was spent in the 
purchase of goods at a community business. It is not 
supporting as many families or creating as many jobs. 
By encouraging the use of VLT machines, the 
government is on very dangerous ground with people's 
spending habits and the welfare of the community as a 
whole. 

 
 What will be the reaction of the government if they 

implement a scheme that will put gambling money into 
the community? They're talking about 10 per cent right 
now. When they implement this resolution, will they cut 
the government funding by 10 per cent? Ten per cent of 
VLT revenue would probably not match 10 per cent of 
government funding. 

 It is a huge gamble for communities, or more like a huge 
risk. It will look good on the provincial government side 
of the ledger but would more than likely set the 
communities up for tax increases for the locals. The 
locals' option is then pay higher taxes or gamble more. 

 
 The whole situation is one big gamble, and as usual the 

house will be the big winner. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this article basically lays 
out many of the questions and the arguments that are taking 
place across this province. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, when the government in the House made 
their announcement of their willingness to share 10 per cent of 
the revenues from VLTs, I'm sure a lot of communities thought 
that sounds good. And a lot of communities looked at this 
revenue as being an additional source of revenue, revenue that 
would be needed in view of the fact that the government has 
offloaded, as far as provincial funding to local governments, for 
the past number of years. 
 
But as the editorial also pointed out, does that mean if the 
government gives you 10 per cent of the VLT revenue, that they 
won't, on the other hand, turn around and take 10 per cent from 
the upfront, matching contributions, government funding? 
 
(1515) 
 
And as the article again stated, if they do that, then it's a 
substantial reduction to local government expenditures. Plus, as 
we saw earlier in the article, putting money into VLTs really 
doesn't do a lot for a community. But I find it interesting that 
the government would attempt to buy off local government 
employees by offering them 10 per cent. 
 
However it's interesting to note the Liberal leader is no 
different. Happened to attend SARM — and I must take a 
moment to mention this — listening to the Liberal leader. And 
she wasn't to be outdone by the Premier in his announcement. 
She suggested to SARM that she'd be willing to share 50 per 
cent of the revenue from VLT machines — 50 per cent of the 
VLT revenue. And yet while she stood in this House, she 
argued against gambling. 
 
One has to wonder where the Liberals are on this question. On 
one hand they argue against it; on the other hand they're ready 
to share more money. The flip-flop of the Liberals is certainly 
coming into play again. They're doing very well. And the 
member from Shaunavon would like to respond, and he'll have 
the same opportunity as any other member in this Assembly. 
And we'll certainly give him that opportunity when I have 
finished my comments regarding this issue and regarding this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's been a number of articles, and I have one 
here from the Reader's Digest, and again it brings out a number 
of the concerns that I raised a little earlier, that Canadian Living  



April 4, 1995 

 
1360 

had raised regarding VLTs and gambling expansion in our 
country. 
 
And it brings out the fact that when you look at it, the amount 
of revenue by population, it looks fairly high per individual. But 
the reality is, how many people actually spend their time in 
front of these VLT machines? So what does it really boil down 
to? Rather than a hundred dollars, in most cases it's 2,000 to 
$2,500 or more — or even higher, depending on the 
jurisdiction. So what it's saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this 
becomes a real annoyance in our society. It raises havoc in 
homes. 
 
I'd like to just read an article from or make a few comments 
from an article that appeared in the Calgary Herald in February 
1995 about a small community that did a study: "Bonnyville 
study offers interesting gambling facts." 
 
 Bonnyville has 5,000 residents, with another 10,000 in 

the surrounding area, yet the folks in this rural blip 
managed to gamble $4.1 million in one year. 

 
  . . . (or) $275 for every man, woman, and child — but 

it's still only a tiny part of the story. 
 
 Nine per cent of the population — fewer than 1,500 

people — gambled away 69 per cent of that total, or 
about $2.8 million. To unload so much money, the 
hard-core gamblers had to throw away nearly $2,000 (in 
cash) each. 

 
As I indicated, it sounds good when you use the total 
population, but how many people actually spend time gambling 
or spend time in casinos or in front of these VLT machines? 
The fortunate part is that number is still relatively low. 
 
But the realization, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated earlier 
from the earlier article I read from Canadian Living, the fact is 
that VLTs create a greater opportunity, or enhanced opportunity 
if you will, for individuals who may feel they're not gamblers in 
part. But because they are individual machines, you're really not 
out in the public. It's much easier to start playing and start 
gambling through the use of VLT machines. The next thing you 
know, the person who said they would never gamble finds 
themselves in an addictive position. 
 
This study also indicated: 
 
 The study identified over four per cent of the population 

as either "pathological" or "problem" gamblers, but also 
found an equal number who were on the edge of 
becoming problem bettors. 

 
So rather than 4, it was basically looking at 8 per cent. And 
suggesting that "the hooked population can (easily) rise to 10 
per cent." 
 
And the article also indicated that: 
 

 More than 90 per cent wanted either less gambling or no 
more. Only 4.3 per cent, almost exactly the total of 
addicted gamblers, wanted more (gambling). 

 
So while the government would argue that the reason they must 
go ahead and proceed with gambling casinos in this province, 
the reason they must proceed with the delivery of VLT 
machines around this province and making them available is 
that people are asking for it. 
 
Yet the only people who are really asking for it are the 
individuals who are tied up — the problem, the addictive 
gamblers, those individuals who would spend time in front of 
the machines which at this time are a low number in view of the 
average population. But one has to wonder what it would grow 
to in the future as the access to gambling becomes more 
accessible. 
 
There's one other point I want to bring out of this article as well, 
but other . . . What we're talking about . . . and the government 
has talked about revenues, and governments right across this 
country have talked about additional revenues. This article 
mentions that. It says: 
 
 The casinos bring in plenty of money. But other 

businesses suffer, and experts agree that no new wealth 
is created unless 50 per cent of the bets come from 
outside the region. 

 
So one would have to ask, what real revenue generation are we 
going to see in this province? Can we expect more than 50 per 
cent of the individuals who would go into the bars around this 
province to place their bets at a VLT machine or that would go 
to the Buffalo Buck Casino downtown or to the new casino 
planned? Can we expect that more than 50 per cent of the 
patrons will come from outside of the province? 
 
I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, or, Deputy Speaker, if people are 
willing to come up from the southern states to gamble in 
Saskatchewan when they can go to Las Vegas. There's more of 
the glitter of Las Vegas I think has been a long-time attraction. 
So I'm not exactly sure that we will have people coming from 
the South to the North. We may have the odd person travelling 
through in the summertime. And I trust, Mr. Speaker, that we 
can portray our province as a beautiful province to come and 
spend some time and some of your tourist dollars and tour 
through because we do have a lot of beautiful sights in this 
province outside of the bars and the VLT machines. 
 
But on the other hand maybe if we're looking at gambling in 
this province, maybe the government is looking at trying to 
draw people from the North. Now I'm not sure where they're 
going to draw people from the North. Certainly residents of the 
southern part of the province of Saskatchewan might think you 
want to, you would go to Las Vegas because it's a little nicer in 
the wintertime, so someone coming  say  in the northern 
parts of the province or might want to come to the southern part 
to enjoy the beautiful weather. I don't know what the 
government's looking at. 



April 4, 1995 

 
1361 

But the reality is, if we're going to see any substantial increase, 
we need to receive it from people outside the jurisdiction. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, no matter where you go, every 
other jurisdiction has enhanced gambling, so we will not have a 
large influx of people to gamble here because they're already 
gambling in their own jurisdictions. And I guess that's one of 
the reasons the government is suggesting we need gambling 
machines because we want to keep people at home; we want 
them to gamble at home, not away from home. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, basically what 
Saskatchewan people are saying, let's be different. Do we 
always have to follow everyone else? The Premier has argued 
that he's against gambling. Well someone would say and people 
have said to me, if the Premier's against gambling, then why 
doesn't he give some real leadership? How many other members 
have said one thing outside of this Assembly that they're against 
this policy or they're against that policy, but when it comes to 
voting on an issue or when it comes to standing up for what the 
electorate thinks, in this Assembly they may be against on the 
outside, but they tend to stand and support the government on 
the inside. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has argued that by expanding 
gambling, by bringing in VLTs, it will not create a social 
problem in this province. Well I think the facts, the figures are 
now starting to point to the reality that gambling does create a 
major problem. More people with gambling problems are 
looking for help, say the people involved in helping services. 
Business is also growing for the operators of Saskatchewan's 
gambling hotline, as one article says. Gamblers Anonymous is 
booming. 
 
That tells me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people themselves 
thought they could try the game just once, thought they'd just 
spend $10 at the machines, but before long they found 
themselves hooked. And as we've been trying to warn the 
government for the last eight months to a year that if you 
enhance gambling in this province, you will find that you will 
need more money to help with the addiction services. 
 
And the government has certainly indicated that they realize 
now that there's more money needed than they originally had 
targeted. I believe they had originally thrown out something like 
$500 million. Now they've got $1.5 million targeted to 
Gamblers Anonymous. It's an indication, Mr. Speaker, that it is 
becoming . . . or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is becoming a 
major problem. 
 
There again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at that 
funding, there are many people across this province would 
suggest to you that that money could be more properly . . . and 
become more beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan if it 
were targeted to the areas like health and education, rather than 
having to put it into a health program that helps gamblers to 
overcome their addiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government as well has indicated that 
communities really do not have a choice whether they get VLT  

machines or not. And we've had two communities in the last 
month or so that have been in the news, where they wanted to 
outlaw VLTs or the expansion of VLTs in their communities. 
 
Punnichy was one of the communities that asked for and 
wanted to opt out of a program that would expand the VLTs to 
their community. And what they were saying: 
 
 "We are after the right of our citizens to be able to vote 

within our village to accept or reject VLTs," says 
Punnichy's mayor, Brian Nagy, following a meeting 
between . . . Punnichy's Council and Lynda Haverstock. 

 
 Punnichy has been trying to get the same option that has 

allowed northern towns — for the people of the 
community to decide whether or not to opt out of VLTs. 

 
Now it's interesting to note the government on one hand is 
saying, the community of Punnichy doesn't really have that 
opportunity. The community of Punnichy really doesn't have 
that ability. It's the businesses determine whether or not they 
want the VLTs. 
 
Well I can guarantee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if you're going 
to receive some revenue from these machines, I don't know of 
any business that would refuse them, especially the businesses 
where the VLTs are being placed and they're being placed in 
local bars. And many of these businesses, in some communities, 
are very run-down facilities that have had a hard time trying to 
exist and were looking for another avenue of generating 
revenue, and so of course, of course they would like the VLTs 
in their community. They would like the VLTs in their places of 
business. 
 
I'd like to read a letter from a citizen of Punnichy speaking out 
and her letter is entitled, Gambling: socially responsible? 
 
 Dear Editor: 
 
 Enclosed is a copy of a letter I sent to Eldon 

Lautermilch today. Congratulations to Brian Nagy and 
the Punnichy Council to Rev. Beaudoin and the pastoral 
group for standing up for what is right and just. 

 
 Eldon Lautermilch, Minister Sask. Liquor and Gaming 
 
 Mr. Lautermilch, I do not agree with the policy your 

government has taken in regard to the introduction of 
V.L.T.'s across the province. I am particularly alarmed 
that a town like Punnichy of which I am a former 
resident, has no choice about accepting V.L.T.'s into 
their community. A democratic country should allow its 
people to have a choice. I know several individuals who 
have gambling addictions and fear that the cost to 
society and to these people and their families will far 
outweigh the financial benefits the government hopes to 
achieve. I do not believe that gaming can ever be a 
"socially responsible" industry as you state in your letter 
to Punnichy. I agree whole heartedly with the local  



April 4, 1995 

 
1362 

pastoral group who assert that gambling will "victimize the 
most economically vulnerable". It is my strong feeling 
that if the people of Saskatchewan . . . (were) polled on 
this topic, the vast majority would say no to the 
introduction of VLT's. Please wake up and realize that 
you can't push these destructive things down our throats. 
You must find other ways to raise revenue for 
government services that will not destroy the social 
fabric of this province. 

 
And that's one resident of the town of Punnichy, one resident of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have another community, the community of La Ronge. 
When Mayor Morris Gabrush searches for a symbol of what he 
sees as the provincial government's greed and arrogance, he 
doesn't look further than the video lottery terminal. Mr. Gabrush 
said: 
 
 If we had a plebiscite, I'm 99 per cent sure they would 

never have been allowed. These machines bring down 
the standard of living of those who can least afford it." 

 
 Gabrush and several other businesses and political 

leaders in this community are fuming over the 
government's gambling policy. They claim the 36 VLTs 
operating in three different establishments are 
victimizing the poor, draining thousands of dollars out 
of the local economy and contributing to a sharp 
increase in crime (there were 493 property crimes 
reported in the town last year, an increase of more than 
50 per cent from the year before). 

 
 What's more, they claim the government doesn't care. 
 
 "We've gone to the government and told them our 

concerns," said Gabrush. 
 
 "They've told us it's none of our business." 
 
 Gaming Minister Joanne Crofford, a La Ronge resident 

for 14 years, said VLT operators in the town would have 
to agree if the machines were to be removed. 

 
 She said the social and business impact of the slot 

machines probably is being "hyped" by La Ronge 
community leaders. 

 
 "I can't believe there is a totally major new problem 

having lived in La Ronge and knowing the people also 
spend money on liquor and bingo," said Crofford. 

 
 "At the end of the day, when you have a limited income, 

if you spend it in one day or four days, it still doesn't 
last forever." 

 
(1530) 
 
I think that's very unfortunate that a minister would speak so  

flippantly at the problems that many people have run into 
because of the VLTs. 
 
And the interesting point is, I believe, another argument the 
minister has indicated was that the people in La Ronge are 
arguing that they need the VLT machines and they indeed asked 
for it. Well yes, who asked for the machines? 
 
As I indicated earlier, and the same case with Punnichy and 
many other communities, the individuals who argued for it and 
will continue to argue for it are the hoteliers across this 
province who do have the machines in their business. Why 
would they argue for them? Because they are a means of 
drawing people into their establishment and causing people to 
spend money in that establishment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many reasons why this 
government should rethink its position on gambling. And if this 
government is not willing to rethink, maybe they should indeed 
adhere to the principle that they continually argue about. 
 
They call themselves New Democrats, or New Democratic 
Party, because they're supposedly a democratic form of 
government or a democratic party operating on the basis of 
democracy. It would seem to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if 
that were the truth, that the members opposite would indeed 
apply a form of democracy that would allow the residents of 
this province the opportunity to indeed give them a voice . . . or 
give a voice to speak to this government through a plebiscite or 
through a public vote. 
 
And I would encourage the minister of Gaming in this province 
and her colleagues and the Premier to indeed take the time to 
put forward this question that has been raised through this 
motion. To put forward these two questions: do you approve of 
the government's plan to operate casinos in Saskatchewan; and 
number two, do you approve of the government-operated VLT, 
video lottery terminals, in Saskatchewan? And that, I would 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the members would indeed put 
these questions to the people, the people would respond. 
 
And I believe people would speak out as overwhelmingly as 
they did in the three plebiscite questions placed in the last 
provincial election. And I believe the government would then 
have the mandate that they have basically been looking for to 
operate under whereby they would have the approval of the 
people. 
 
The unfortunate part is I'm not exactly sure the government 
would want a mandate that the population of this province 
basically would give them, and that mandate would be to 
dismantle VLT terminals and not allow any more casinos or 
expanded gambling in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, I think it's 
important that we sit down and we'll review the facts. We take 
the time to look at this question of gambling in this province 
somewhat more seriously; that we sit down and rationalize 
whether or not in the long run it is socially, morally acceptable;  



April 4, 1995 

 
1363 

whether the people of this province are really going to benefit; 
or whether we sit back and deal with a number of the issues and 
raise some of the revenue needed, as people have indicated to 
me, in the area of health — health care and health reform, the 
possibly of a premium. 
 
One could argue, well that's a tax. Yes it is a tax, but everyone 
is contributing to their well-being rather than just trying to draw 
it from a few. You will find many people, Mr. Speaker, who 
would suggest, well if some people are silly enough to go and 
gamble and pay for my health reform or pay for my education, 
fine. I can accept that. 
 
But I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that we do give people a 
real opportunity, an open opportunity, an honest opportunity, to 
speak out, to voice their concerns and not just . . . I'm sure the 
members opposite have received many letters but I don't know 
if they've really been listening. 
 
I'm sure they've received many letters against enhanced 
gambling, as well as they possibly have received some letters in 
favour of gambling, but I'm almost positive they've received 
more based on what we've received. And if the members 
opposite are willing to really allow the people an opportunity to 
vote, I would challenge the Premier and his colleagues to 
indeed pan the people of Saskatchewan, give them the 
opportunity to vote in a plebiscite, place these questions, and 
seek the guidance of the people in this province who have 
worked so diligently and so hard to build this province into 
what it is today. 
 
I thank you for the opportunity to speak to this motion today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
remarks, I will be moving an amendment to the motion along 
the following lines: 
 
 That the Assembly endorse the government's plan to 

operate gaming in the province with a well-thought-out 
plan for controlled expansion which includes the 
support of hoteliers, exhibition associations, chambers 
of commerce, the FSIN, its tribal councils and 74 bands, 
and the tourism industry; commend the government for 
ensuring that new forms of gaming are introduced in a 
reasonable manner so they are sustainable; endorse the 
first program in the history of the province to address 
the social impacts of gaming; and ensure that all 
participants in the gaming industry and the general 
public will continue to be treated fairly and will benefit 
through consistent regulation and consumer protection. 

 
I wish, Mr. Speaker, as we all do sometimes, that there were 
simple solutions to all of life's complicated problems. But most 
of us know that that's not the case. 
 
The opposition says that they don't like gambling very much, to 
which I say, well who does? The fact is we have alcohol abuse 
in our society. We have abuse of tobacco products in our  

society. Sometimes we have abuse of the proclivity to gamble. 
These are problems that we have. 
 
But I think we know from experience that gambling has been 
around for a long time, as has alcohol, as has tobacco. And I 
think we know from experience that we can't snap our fingers 
and prohibit certain activities and expect that our problems will 
disappear. We can't wish our problems away. 
 
I think it's easy for people in opposition to wish problems away 
and to be all things to all people and to say that if only they 
were the government, we wouldn't have these problems that we 
have, and we wouldn't have to deal with them. But in 
government you have to deal with these problems. And I think 
that that's what the government is trying to do. 
 
I was a bit amused, Mr. Speaker, to hear the member from 
Rosthern talk about how when he was trying to ask questions 
about gambling this morning in the Public Accounts 
Committee, there was an attempt to stifle him. I think we all 
know, Mr. Speaker — and I can reassure the voters of Rosthern 
— that the member from Rosthern isn't easily stifled. I don't 
think the member from Rosthern has ever been stifled, and 
certainly he's not stifled when he tries to raise questions about 
the gaming policy of government. 
 
I want to comment, Mr. Speaker, on the idea that every time 
you have a difficult problem to deal with, that as politicians and 
legislators it's okay just to duck the problem by saying, well 
we'll have a plebiscite. We'll have a vote of the people. And it 
sounds very democratic. The member from Moosomin said this 
was consistent with democracy. 
 
It sounds fine, but I would say, Mr. Speaker, that when people 
take that approach, when they take the approach that you should 
have a vote province-wide on a difficult question rather than 
deal with that question here, as we are elected to do, it actually 
is a very cowardly approach to me because what it says to me is 
that instead of making decisions and accepting responsibility 
for those decisions and grappling with tough issues, that we just 
defer those questions to the public. That even though we're 
elected by the public and we're sent here to sit in this Chamber 
for weeks at a time and look at issues, that if we come up with a 
difficult problem, we're not going to deal with it, we're just 
going to have a province-wide vote in the next election. 
 
And I have to say, with due respect to those who believe that 
that is how a democracy ought to work, that that simply is not 
my view of how a democracy should work. I think that it's the 
responsibility of the government of the day to make decisions 
on difficult issues, including gaming policy, and to accept 
responsibility for those decisions. And that is something that 
I'm prepared to do, and I think every member of the legislature 
should be prepared to do. 
 
Now the members opposite, of course, talk about the evils of 
gambling, and any reasonable person would agree that 
gambling is not the most positive thing in society. But most  



April 4, 1995 

 
1364 

reasonable people would also agree that gambling is an activity 
that should be regulated by government, that that is one of 
government's jobs. 
 
Now the members opposite were, as we all know, the 
government of this province from 1981 . . . or 1982, I'm sorry, 
to 1991, for nine years. And throughout those years, despite the 
fact that the members opposite say they don't like casinos and 
somehow if they were in charge we wouldn't have casinos, the 
fact of the matter is, as needs to be pointed out to the opposition 
from time to time, that throughout the time they were in 
government we had two major casinos in Saskatchewan, 
namely one in Regina at the exhibition and one in Saskatoon. 
And as well of course there are part-time casinos that operate 
from time to time. 
 
Now the Government of Saskatchewan made a decision a few 
years ago, after the matter was examined by people who are 
knowledgeable about the gaming industry, to limit casino 
development in Saskatchewan to two locations. 
 
Now the opposition has treated that decision somehow as a 
decision to introduce casino gaming into the province of 
Saskatchewan, to which I say that casino gaming originated in 
the province of Saskatchewan in the 1960s under a Liberal 
government, continued in the 1970s under a New Democratic 
government, continued in the 1980s under the government with 
which the member from Rosthern was associated and the 
member from Moosomin was associated. 
 
And the Government of Saskatchewan currently has decided 
that, in partnership with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations and in an effort to properly regulate the industry, we 
should have two casino locations in Saskatchewan — Regina 
and Saskatoon. 
 
Now that policy has changed somewhat out of respect for the 
voters of Saskatoon who have indicated in a civic referendum, 
which is their right, that they're not enthusiastic about the policy 
of having a casino. The government has responded to that, as 
the government properly should, and has revisited the question 
with the FSIN. 
 
But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to inject a note of reality 
into this debate, is that if the members opposite were in 
government, the members opposite would not be able to snap 
their fingers and make this problem go away as they pretend 
they could. 
 
The members opposite were in power in this province until 
1991 and they did not abolish casino gambling in 
Saskatchewan, and nor, if the members opposite replaced this 
government, would they abolish VLTs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And no one ought to think that if any of the . . . 
or if either of the opposition parties were in power, that casinos 
would somehow disappear from our lives forever or that VLTs 
would. That is not what would happen. 
 
Because any government of Saskatchewan has to deal with  

certain realities, Mr. Speaker. One of the realities is that the 
casinos we have, which have been operating for close to 30 
years, employ hundreds of people in our province. Their 
revenues support the exhibition associations and other 
worthwhile activities. I know in Saskatoon, 4-H is supported by 
the casino there. 
 
(1545) 
 
And the casinos appeal to people who wish to go to casinos and 
engage in gaming activities. And I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that 
people sticking their heads in the sand and making 
self-righteous speeches about the evils of gaming are going to 
be successful in wishing gambling away. I just don't think it's 
going to be wished away. It's been in our society and part of our 
society for a long time and it will be with us for a long time. 
 
And you may wish it were not so, but that doesn't do you much 
good. And to me therefore the question really is: if there's going 
to be any gambling in our society, who should regulate it? And 
I believe that it should be regulated and controlled, and 
expansion controlled, by the province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this seems to be the one area where 
the opposition doesn't point to the province of Alberta as having 
all the answers. Usually we're told that anything that goes on in 
Alberta we should emulate in Saskatchewan. But when it comes 
to gambling, it's okay for Alberta and Manitoba and the United 
States but not okay for Saskatchewan. 
 
But what I do want to say about what is different in 
Saskatchewan is this. That the province of Saskatchewan is 
making a much bigger effort to deal with the problem of 
problem gambling than the other provinces. We are spending 
more money per capita than the other western provinces. 
 
For example, in the province of Alberta, the government spends 
55 cents per capita on problem gambling; in Saskatchewan the 
government spends $2.04 per capita, which is close to four 
times as much. And yet the rate of problem gambling in 
Saskatchewan is not higher than in the other provinces, but the 
efforts of the provincial government to fund programs to deal 
with problem gamblers are much more significant. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, 21 communities across Saskatchewan 
that have gambling counsellors available to the public at no 
charge, and trained by Saskatchewan Health. The approach of 
the government has been a proactive one, to try to deal with any 
problems that may arise from gambling. 
 
I said a few minutes ago that this area was not a completely new 
area, Mr. Speaker. In the '60s, the province legalized full-time 
pari-mutuel betting on horse-racing. Casinos were licensed. By 
1972 Sask Sport was established. In 1974, lotteries were 
licensed. In 1983 commercial bingo was licensed by members 
of the then Conservative government. 
 
And of course bingo was expanded in a big way in the 1980s, 
Mr. Speaker, under the government of the members opposite,  



April 4, 1995 

 
1365 

who now get up and say that gambling is a terrible problem; 
and elect us and we'll do away with it. 
 
With respect to the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 
their approach has been somewhat interesting from this point of 
view  that when I was first elected to this House in 1991, and 
for the first few years thereafter, the Leader of the Liberal Party 
would say to the government, hurry up and get going. You're 
not going fast enough and you're losing money. Because she 
wanted rapid expansion of the VLTs, which the hotel industry 
was calling for, and expansion of the casino industry at that 
time. 
 
Then as she discovered that not everyone agrees with that 
approach, she changed her tune somewhat and started 
questioning whether we should have VLTs and casinos. 
Although as recently as last month, she wondered why the 
government wasn't putting more VLTs in restaurants. And I 
have to say, Mr. Speaker, that you can't have it both ways. 
 
You can't on the one hand call for expansion of VLTs to assist 
the hotels and expansion of casino development, and on the 
other hand criticize the government when that's what happens. 
The policy of the government, Mr. Speaker, is not without its 
supporters; it's not without its detractors, either. 
 
But as I said before, there are groups like the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, its tribal councils and 74 bands; 
the Regina Exhibition Association; the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce; the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce; the 
Regina Economic Development Authority; the tourism industry 
of Saskatchewan; Tourism Regina; Regina Restaurant 
Association; Regina Hotels Association; Regina Hospital 
Foundation; Saskatchewan Architectural Heritage Society; 
Regina Market Square; Re/Max Crown Real Estate; Mind's Eye 
Pictures; Saskatchewan Provincial Pipe Trades Association; 
RWDSU (Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union), who 
support the policy of the provincial government. And not to 
mention, Mr. Speaker, the Alberta Liberal Party, which recently 
said to the Government of Alberta that they should look to 
Saskatchewan for a realistic and controlled approach to the 
regulation of gaming in that province. 
 
On February 8 of this year, as the member from Moosomin said, 
the Health minister announced that 1.5 million would be 
provided in 1995 and 1996 for programs and services to help 
prevent gambling addiction and to help problem gamblers. And 
there are a range of services, Mr. Speaker, from public 
education to actual prevention and treatment about the impacts 
of gaming. 
 
And it's true, as the member from Moosomin said, that the 
budget to deal with problem gambling was actually tripled this 
year. But as I said before, the rate of problem gambling in 
Saskatchewan is not higher than elsewhere. What is different in 
Saskatchewan is simply that the government has made a 
commitment to dealing with the problem. And as I said before, I 
think dealing with the problem, and having the courage to have 
a policy that regulates gambling, is more responsible than  

trying to run away from the problem and pretending that if you 
have a plebiscite on the issue that all of society's problems will 
disappear. 
 
There is a gambling help line that can be reached — toll-free 
number — open 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It provides 
referrals to counsellors and general information. It will provide 
literature to anyone needing literature on problem gambling. 
There are community-development projects, 250 community 
workshops and seminars throughout the province; lots of public 
education activities; treatment services; prevention programs — 
that's probably key  and counsellor training and professional 
development programs. 
 
And I think that's the way to approach the matter, Mr. Speaker 
— to try to deal with the matter in a responsible way. And I 
think that that's what the government is doing. The approach 
being taken is community based. It has the cooperation of the 
Palliser Alcohol & Drug Abuse Council of Swift Current, the 
Canadian Mental Health Association, the Moose Jaw Family 
Life Education Centre, the Saul Cohen Centre in Melville, 
Parkland Alcohol & Drug Abuse Society, and the Metis 
Addictions Council of Saskatchewan. All of those organizations 
are receiving funding to help deliver community-based 
treatment. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that although the opposition 
members in speaking refer to the fact that VLTs had been 
expanding in the province, they didn't make reference to the fact 
that as of January 27 of this year the number of VLTs approved 
for installation in the province was actually reduced, from 4,000 
to 3,600, which of course is a 10 per cent reduction. 
 
And effective April 1, 10 per cent of the government's net VLT 
revenues will be designated for local communities. And of 
course effective that date, programs to prevent problem 
gambling were greatly expanded in our province and we've 
become a leader in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say too that I believe that the government's policy 
in trying to work with the Indian people in our province through 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations is the most 
responsible policy that one can have to regulate gaming, and in 
particular, casinos, in a responsible manner. 
 
And I think that it's well-known that the FSIN has wanted to . . . 
has seen casinos as a potential economic development strategy 
for their people, who most people know are facing high 
unemployment and unacceptable levels of poverty. 
 
And we had the White Bear situation which is familiar to the 
members and to the public, and the government's approach is 
that we should work in partnership with the Indian community 
rather than at odds with the Indian community. 
 
And I support that. I think that that is a good thing. I don't 
believe that it's an answer to all of the problems faced by Indian 
people in our province, or a panacea for their economic 
development, but I think it's an area where the government  



April 4, 1995 

 
1366 

should work in partnership with the Indian bands rather than in 
opposition to them. 
 
I find it sometimes a bit strange, Mr. Speaker, that people will 
get up in this legislature and in a very self-righteous manner 
express moral outrage about casinos and VLTs, even though the 
FSIN wishes to embark on some employment initiatives for 
their people through casinos. 
 
And they get up and express great outrage at the unacceptability 
of casinos in our society and gambling in our society. But what 
I didn't hear anybody say today was this: I didn't hear anybody 
express any moral outrage at the level of poverty and 
unemployment on Indian reservations, or some Indian 
reservations, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
And when the FSIN and the chiefs and the bands want to work 
in partnership with government to . . . not to solve all their 
problems but to get some jobs for their people, and there's an 
expression of outrage about that, I wish that people would as 
often express some moral outrage at the poverty and 
hopelessness that exists disproportionately for Indian people. 
Because as far as I'm concerned, Mr. Speaker, that is a far 
bigger outrage than the fact that we have a few casinos in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is a far bigger outrage than the fact that we have video 
lottery terminals in the province of Saskatchewan. And if I'm 
outraged about anything as I take part in this debate, I'm 
outraged about the position of many Indian people living in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the government, as people know, entered into a new 
agreement with the FSIN this spring which is a revenue-sharing 
agreement which would see 25 per cent of casino profits go to 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 25 per cent to 
Metis and exhibition boards, and 50 per cent to the government 
— which, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is the people. The 
government is the people. 
 
When the members opposite get up and say that the Premier and 
Minister of Finance is taking money and putting it in their own 
pocket or the pocket of the government, it's not true. 
 
When a properly honest and accountable and open government 
takes revenue from gaming or taxation or any other source, that 
money is used for health and education and roads and hospitals 
and schools in the province of Saskatchewan, not to mention 
servicing the debt run up by the Progressive Conservative Party 
when they were in office. 
 
I want to refer to an article in the Leader-Post by Doug Cuthand 
which appeared on March 13, 1995 where he says — and I 
agree with him — that the agreement with the Indian people 
will not solve all the problems of the Indian people, and there 
are many, many more things that should be done. But he says: 

 The results are with us to the present day. We have been 
excluded from the economy and are blamed for our own 
misfortune. We have been accused of unfair competition 
and our opportunity to compete has been taken away. 

 
 We are now too large a population to ignore or place on 

the sidelines. Our future lies in the mainstream 
economy. The gaming industry is only one step toward 
that goal. 

 
I think that's true, Mr. Speaker. And like I said before, it's not 
some kind of panacea, but it's one step, and just like every 
journey consists of several steps, improving the situation of 
Indian people in the province of Saskatchewan will consist of 
many, many steps, and I believe that this is one of them. 
 
I want to say too, Mr. Speaker, that government is not an 
exercise where one snaps one's fingers and solves problems or 
pretends problems don't exist or hides behind them by calling 
for a plebiscite. Government is an exercise where there are 
competing interests in society, and voices are heard calling for 
various measures. 
 
And I remember that before there were VLTs, the opposition 
and others screaming that VLTs should be placed in 
Saskatchewan hotels because people were going across the 
border to Manitoba and Alberta and the United States to play 
VLTs. 
 
There was an article, June 21, 1994 in the Leader-Post by Dale 
Eisler, which deals with the Melville Hotel. And it outlines that 
for 13 years, the owners Brian and Helen Hicke fought a losing 
battle. They worked very hard, like most small-business people 
do, 16-hour days, 7 days a week, trying to make a go of it in the 
Waverley Hotel. But no matter how hard they worked or what 
ideas they tried in a bid to attract customers, it never seemed to 
be enough. And — listen to this, Mr. Speaker — they brought 
in bands, stand-up comics, female impersonators, staged dinner 
theatre, and one night even offered patrons a chance to bowl 
with frozen chickens. 
 
Likely the most desperate effort was the goose dump. A pen 
was set up in the middle of the bar with the floor divided into 
100 squares, numbered 1 to 100. People bet on a square and 
two geese were put into the pen. When one of the geese 
dumped on a square, the person with that number would win. 
And Helen says, you wouldn't believe how excited people got 
when the goose's hind end was over their square. Now that is 
desperation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the article goes on to say that after 13 years in business, the 
one bright light that saved them was the VLT program. Brian 
Hicke is quoted as saying: the VLT program has saved our 
livelihood — he is a past president of the Hotels Association of 
Sask — not just the hotel and our business, but us. We were on 
the verge of personal bankruptcy. 
 
Well I said a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, that I don't think 
gambling or casinos are the panacea for the problems of  



April 4, 1995 

 
1367 

society. Nor do I think they're the cause of all the problems in 
society. We have to be realistic. And they're not a complete 
answer for the problems faced by Indian people in our province 
either. 
 
I also don't think that VLTs are a solution to everybody's 
problems, but nevertheless it's generally agreed that they have 
been beneficial for hotel owners in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And there are many, many hotel owners that will 
testify to that; and certainly the Hotels Association of Sask will 
testify to that. It doesn't mean that there aren't problems with 
gambling, but there are things about VLTs and casinos that can 
have a positive impact in society. 
 
Terry Verbeke of Saskatoon, who is president of the Hotels 
Association of Saskatchewan, has said that his organization 
fought long and hard for VLTs because people were leaving 
Saskatchewan to gamble and shop in adjacent provinces and 
states. 
 
I think that's true. I think that when people go across the border 
just because they want to play VLTs, as happens close to the 
borders, that they also shop elsewhere and take other business 
there. 
 
I want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that casino revenues have 
supported exhibition associations for a long time. I'm looking at 
an article from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald of December 9 of 
last year which says that profits from video lottery terminals 
bailed out the Moose Jaw Exhibition Co. this year. And it goes 
on to say that revenues from the VLTs accounted for two-thirds 
of the exhibition company's $278,000 profit for the fiscal year 
that ended October 31, 1994. 
 
I see also in the Prince Albert Daily Herald an article that says 
that the Prince Albert exhibition casino has turned the corner 
because the casino they operated ran a profit. 
 
Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that when people say that casinos are 
bad, VLTs are bad, we should just somehow prohibit them or 
maybe instead of making a decision have a plebiscite, they have 
to also address the questions of the hotel owners who say no, 
no, we need the VLTs to do a bit of business in Saskatchewan; 
and they have to answer the questions of the exhibition 
associations that rely on casino profits, and other charitable and 
worthwhile activities that are supported by gaming revenue in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a motion, which 
will be seconded by the member from Yorkton, and it is to: 
 
 Delete all the words after "That this Assembly" and 

replace them with the following: 
 
 endorse the government's plan to operate gaming in the 

province with a well-thought-out plan for controlled 
expansion which includes the support of hoteliers, 
exhibition associations, chambers of commerce, the 
FSIN, its tribal councils and 74 bands, and the tourism  

industry; commend the government for ensuring that new 
forms of gaming are introduced in a reasonable manner 
so they are sustainable; endorse the first program in the 
history of the province to address the social impacts of 
gaming; and ensure that all participants in the gaming 
industry and the general public will continue to be 
treated fairly and will benefit through consistent 
regulation and consumer protection. 

 
I so move. 
 
(1615) 
 
The Speaker: — I respect the patience that the members have 
had with me on considering this amendment, but I will have to 
rule the amendment out of order for several reasons. 
 
Number one, if members look at the motion that is before the 
Assembly, the motion before the Assembly is on a plebiscite to 
be held. It's a very narrow motion, and the amendment goes 
much beyond what the main motion deals with. In fact the 
amendment doesn't deal with the motion at all, and that is that a 
plebiscite should be held. 
 
And I think Beauchesne's is . . . not Beauchesne's . . . Yes, 
Beauchesne's is very clear. If you go to page 176 on the 6th 
Edition of Beauchesne's, he states very clearly: 
 
 An amendment setting forth a proposition dealing with a 

matter which is foreign to the proposition involved in 
the main motion is not relevant and cannot be moved. 

 
And the member's motion from Saskatoon Idylwyld deals with 
everything but what is contained in the main motion. So I have 
to rule the amendment out of order and the debate will continue 
on the main motion. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
issue before us today of a plebiscite is an important one to 
consider. And when we take a look at some of the facts that 
have happened in the past here, the New Democrats have 
brought forward the most convoluted, ill-planned, and 
constantly changing policy with respect to gaming that anyone 
could have ever imagined. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — It is difficult to imagine, Mr. Speaker, that 
they could have done a worse job of this had they tried. There is 
an example after example of how the people of Saskatchewan 
have been shut out of the process, Mr. Speaker. Changes have 
been made to bingo, to Nevada ticket sales, to the casino 
market-place, to horse-racing, and there have been arbitrary 
decisions which ignored the minimal consultation that was 
done. 
 
There have been financial and economic and social impacts 
imposed upon Saskatchewan with little thought for the future 
consequences. This government has been unthinking and  



April 4, 1995 

 
1368 

certainly unfeeling in its approach. 
 
The concept of going to the people for a plebiscite is certainly a 
simple sounding solution. The difficulty with plebiscites and 
referendums is that they force a basic yes or no to a decision. 
That may have been acceptable before all these changes had 
been introduced, but now what faces the Saskatchewan people 
with their changes of policies, it's simply unacceptable to say 
we can backtrack and pretend that some of these positions are 
answered with a simple yes or no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier tried the simplistic approach to the question at the 
NDP convention when he said, and I quote: if it is no to 
casinos, then it must be no to lotteries and no to bingos and no 
to the Children's Wish foundation. End of quote. 
 
Now that's a ridiculous statement, certainly not worthy of a 
Premier in a province which relies so heavily on the benefits of 
the volunteer organizations which rely on these gaming 
revenues. 
 
So the all or nothing approach, Mr. Speaker, that the Tories 
advocate, is not uncharacteristic of them — very much a 
solution for the past. Gambling is here and it is no doubt here to 
stay in some form or another. 
 
The question that needs to be answered, and answered I think 
through open public dialogue and process, the question needing 
an answer is one of how the Saskatchewan people want to 
shape their communities. 
 
The difficulty with the plebiscite is that the question being 
proposed has not emerged from public discussion. It is not a 
question that reflects all the concerns that are wrapped up in the 
gaming debate. We cannot simply ask people to pass judgement 
in a vacuum. The people do deserve a right to have input into 
the future direction of gaming policies, but they do not deserve 
to be backed into a corner on a yes or no question which only 
the party deals with this issue. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that a plebiscite would be more useful 
to the government if it included questions on a much broader 
range of issues. While we support the plebiscite proposal, we 
caution that it is by no means a substitute for a carefully thought 
out gaming policy based on careful research and consultation, 
which should be put before the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I listen, Mr. Speaker, as the member from I think it's 
Saskatoon Idylwyld, made some statements about the 
government shouldn't be hiding behind plebiscites. Well when 
we take a look at this government and what they've been hiding 
behind, I'll tell you this is a government that I say and the 
people say shouldn't have proceeded with a lot of the things that 
they've gotten into — gaming policy being one. But they've got 
so many poorly thought out ideas and not knowing where they 
are going. 
 
And I say he's right; the government should be honest with the  

people up front, and in fact campaign on it. If you want to do 
something, campaign on it. 
 
I'll tell you, when this government got into the radical changes 
they brought about in health care, why didn't they hold some 
sort of plebiscite? Why didn't you go out to the people and tell 
them what you had in mind as far as radically changing health 
care, the direction of health care in this province, the delivery of 
it? Now there's a question that you should have asked the 
people before the 1991 election. 
 
If you really thought that you were doing things rights for the 
people, as in the gaming policy, why didn't you campaign on it? 
You didn't have the nerve because you knew then it wasn't 
right. You knew it wasn't right. You know the gaming policies 
that you're . . . you don't have a policy. You know the gaming 
decisions, the hotchpotch of decisions that you're coming 
forward with, aren't correct and the people wouldn't have 
accepted them. 
 
Same as your changing the farming programs, farm programs in 
the province, the radical changes you made — once again you 
should have went to the people. You should have asked the 
people what they thought. 
 
You should have went around rural Saskatchewan and said, 
listen, here's what our plans are. We're going to actually take 
away your farm programs, or take away your hospitals; or in 
fact we're going to take some of your paved roads, revert them 
to gravel; or we're going to close down your highway depots — 
just some of the issues that you have put before the people of 
this province. 
 
Why didn't you go around the province and ask people, if we 
campaign on this, are you with us? If you really think it's better 
for the province, are you with us? You know very well the 
people aren't with you, and they're not with you on the gaming, 
especially on gaming. 
 
When we take a look at some of the harmful effects, Mr. 
Speaker, of what's happened — and it's in just about every 
paper you open up all across the province. You go through and 
you start to get a real clear indication of the devastation that's 
being caused by some of the policies, but especially in gaming. 
This has destroyed families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I mean that's why I think it's appropriate, maybe not to go 
exactly the route that the Conservatives are suggesting, but 
there should be a mechanism where you could have went to the 
people and says, well here's what we believe in or here's what 
we want to do. What do you think? Are you with us? You 
know, let the people decide. 
 
And I'll tell you, at the end of the day you would have been 
better for it because the people wouldn't be rallying on the steps 
of the legislature like they were for the first two or three years 
of your administration. 
 
When I see the reasons, I guess, and the people are seeing this  



April 4, 1995 

 
1369 

also, why are you getting into some of the things you do, such 
as gaming? You know, I think there were some $5 million that 
came from gaming, a pre-decision that your government made 
to really expand it. And now you're into, I don't know, some 
$150 million? 
 
Well the very reason you're doing it is to try and satisfy this lust 
for revenues that you have. But I tell you, you're never going to 
satisfy that lust for revenues until you can get a little bit of a 
handle on the . . . control the spending. 
 
So, I mean, here you've put the Saskatchewan people in a 
terrible situation. You're imposing upon them something that, 
truthfully, you know in your heart of hearts they don't want. 
And you're doing it because you want to have a lot of bucks at 
election time, is really where it's going. Balance the books on 
the farmers' money from GRIP, on the closing of hospitals and 
on gaming. Now that doesn't sound like a real good government 
policy, something that's clear it's going to take us well into and 
past the year 2000. 
 
Well this is of course going to come around to haunt. I listened 
a while ago, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Moosomin 
was talking about the government's policies, and in fact tried to 
draw some comparisons between the Liberals and the New 
Democrats as far as . . . in some sort of a bidding war. I just 
want to make it very clear to the member from Moosomin what 
a bidding war would look like when you're talking about 
political parties. 
 
And he would think perhaps back to the 1986 election, when 
the Conservative government of the day were giving out 
interest-free loans and low interest loans in an effort to get 
people to upgrade their basements or do up their dens, etc., 
build hot tubs. Well a real, true bidding war was when the New 
Democrats came out with their program to try and outbid them, 
and that was the 7-7-7 program where you had, I think it was 
$7,000 at 7 per cent interest over 7 years. And I think they were 
probably prepared to make it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I'm very interested in what the 
member has to say, but maybe on another day. But today I think 
he should stay on the motion that is before us. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact I 
thought I was on the motion because we were talking about 
putting some of these concerns to the people, and not being 
involved in a bidding war that the member from Moosomin was 
referring to earlier. That's all I was doing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at some of the other 
provinces and what they're doing on this same issue as far as the 
gaming, it was even as early as this morning that the New 
Democrat Party boss in Manitoba made some statements that in 
fact they would . . . if he were given the reins of power in 
Manitoba, he would expand casinos out of Winnipeg and 
whatever major centres they are considering or have casinos in. 
And he too would want casinos out in rural Manitoba. 
 

But, you know, before you start making those kind of 
statements or doing the kind of actions that the government of 
the day is into, why on earth wouldn't he, you know, go to the 
people? At least he's made this statement during an election and 
people can . . . you know, if they've heard this through the 
news, they can I guess read between the lines of what they can 
expect of Gary Doer if he is elected. 
 
But the government here in Saskatchewan, they didn't even 
make any mention of this to the people in this province before 
an election. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think that's why it was so 
important for the Liberal Party last November 30, last fall, when 
we decided, you know, we've got to go to the people and find 
out exactly what's in their hearts and minds. What do the people 
want on this gaming issue? 
 
Because of course the Conservatives weren't out there asking 
the people nor would they, I think, get a fair answer because the 
people don't . . . well they pretty much ruled out the 
Conservative Party. I don't think they trust them. 
 
But the government of the day, I mean the government of the 
day should have been out there with all those members. They've 
only got half the members in here at any given time; why 
wouldn't they be out there asking the people exactly what are 
the harmful effects and what could we do to make this thing a 
little bit better? 
 
Well as I said, last November 30, the Liberal caucus released 
the Liberal gaming policy, Mr. Speaker, and this was done after 
our leader was out and consulted with the people all throughout 
the province. Day after day after day we were in different 
communities, Mr. Speaker, talking with organizations and 
groups and town councils and the RMs (rural municipalities) 
and finding out exactly what it was they wanted from 
government in gaming policy, number one, but actually in a lot 
of other fields as well. 
 
(1630) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk just a moment on what 
some of these people had to say. 
 
In meeting and speaking with various groups and individuals 
over the past several months — I'm quoting from our Liberal 
gaming policy, Mr. Speaker — we have heard many criticisms 
of how the NDP is handling gaming in this province. Groups 
and individuals have told us . . . and then there's several points 
here. 
 
They want to know how much the government is taking in from 
their communities through VLTs. They had to have some idea, 
Mr. Speaker, they had to have some idea . . . Mr. Speaker, it's 
hard to carry on with the heckling. They wanted to have some 
idea, Mr. Speaker, with how much money was leaving their 
communities and get some appreciation of how serious this is 
when they are watching their own businesses and families  



April 4, 1995 

 
1370 

going into bankruptcy in their communities. 
 
They wanted to know how serious the problem was, Mr. 
Speaker, so that if they were to take action or if they were to try 
and find out how much revenue they could expect or would 
need from gaming revenues to perhaps correct some of these 
problems. 
 
Secondly, they stated the government should only be involved 
in gaming as a regulator. And that's a very good point, I mean, 
because this government has went far beyond being just a 
regulator in gaming. As you could see in the last couple days, 
they've really been regulating. 
 
You watch the newscasts of yesterday and probably today 
where they've got semi-trailer units backed up to some of our 
now operating casinos and loading up what? . . . I think was a 
hundred machines out of the . . . I think it was the Buffalo Buck 
Casino here in Regina because they want to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — In Saskatoon too. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And Saskatoon also. Because they want to 
disperse them throughout the province. I guess they probably 
have other establishments or perhaps friends of theirs have 
opened up establishments where they would like to get some of 
these casinos installed . . . or VLT machines installed. 
 
Third point. The government has failed in its responsibility to 
provide adequate services for problem gamblers. And isn't that 
the truth, Mr. Speaker. If you think back to the hot lines that 
were put in, and in fact I guess it was the Conservative Party 
that had to phone up the gambling hot line, and it hadn't even 
been hooked up. I mean there was nobody sitting there at a 
telephone. And yet they're already making ministerial 
statements trying to let on they're doing something good. It 
didn't even have a phone number yet, up and going, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They had a number. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Oh they had a number; they just didn't 
have anyone to answer the phone. 
 
Fourth point, Mr. Speaker. Fairness and consistency are lacking 
in the current enforcement of gaming regulations. And we have 
seen that day after day, in fact especially in question period, 
because it's been up so many times. 
 
And it doesn't matter whether you're in the Crown Corps or 
Public Accounts or in question period, I don't know if I've ever 
heard the same answer twice from the government as far as why 
they're doing some of the things . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They haven't had the same minister 
twice. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well that's a very good point. They haven't 
had the same minister long enough to make the same  

answer more than twice. 
 
The fifth point, Mr. Speaker, gaming stakeholders have no idea 
what to expect since the government constantly initiates policy 
on a retroactive basis. Well, and in fact if you travel around 
rural Saskatchewan you'll know that this government is known 
as the party of retroactivity. I mean they've taken on farmers and 
judges and civil servants. They do everything in a retroactive 
basis. That one really shouldn't have surprised anybody. 
 
The next point, Mr. Speaker, some gaming stakeholders feared 
that the government would penalize or punish their organization 
if they discussed a problem and concerns openly. And I guess 
this is really coming to light in the last few days. I think there 
was a concern up in the Lac La Ronge area where I think it was 
the mayor was afraid. I know that they've put some of these 
concerns to their own people. They would just as soon have 
gambling out of their community because they've seen the 
harmful effects of gaming on the citizens that they represent. 
But in fact they have these concerns, Mr. Speaker, that in fact 
the government would make them pay, so to speak, for not 
being part of their policy. 
 
The next point, constant changes to policy and regulation in 
gaming have convinced people that the government has no 
strategic plan and has only responded to concerns for political 
reasons. And these are, what, seven or eight points here that I've 
made. And you know every day after day after day, these same 
points — even though these were the points that we were 
hearing prior to November 30 when we released our gaming 
policy — but these same points are coming up. I mean it's, you 
know, fill in a different community name and different people 
but it's the same points that are coming up continuously. 
 
So the people, the people recognized this months ago, that a lot 
of these problems were coming up. And the government, well 
they didn't go out and ask the people at that time, when they 
should have been, like we did, to find out what some of the 
concerns they could expect were going to come up or what were 
coming up. They didn't do that, Mr. Speaker. So why does one 
wonder why they are in so much trouble today? We really 
shouldn't. 
 
But in fact after our leader attended several meetings 
throughout the province, all corners of the province, thousands 
of miles, Mr. Speaker, to find out exactly what is on the minds 
of the people, and we ended up coming up with some response. 
And I'm just going to quote some of this right out of our 
document, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 The Liberal policy would ensure that local residents 

would have a choice as to what level of gaming activity 
would be allowed in their communities. 

 
Well the mayor from La Ronge would certainly fit well into 
that, wouldn't he? 
 
 The Liberal policy would ensure that the government  



April 4, 1995 

 
1371 

 would not control the purse-strings in doling out gaming 
revenue. 

 
 A Liberal policy would share the control in the 

decision-making process with local communities. 
 
 A Liberal government would use its share of revenues to 

assume its responsibilities for the social consequences 
of gambling activity. 

 
I'll tell you, a lot of things that the government of the day 
should have been doing, had no intention. Just not fulfilling that 
for the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'll go on, and I quote: 
 
 Under (and this is a quote, Mr. Speaker) under a 

Haverstock Liberal government the following policy 
would be implemented: we would first of all restrict the 
government role to regulation; secondly, the government 
to earmark revenue to administer adequate programs for 
problem gambling, meaning a percentage of VLT 
revenue proportionate to the addiction rate; third point, 
a minimum of 50 per cent of VLT revenue would 
remain in the local community. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this was an important one to the people, 
because as I stated earlier, these people, they're the ones that are 
suffering from the effects of gaming when you take a look at 
some of these communities where I think it's a thousand dollars 
per machine per week that are coming out into the government 
coffers from some of these communities, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know that some of these communities, like the community of 
Assiniboia in my riding, I think it's three-quarters of a million 
dollars coming out of the community of Assiniboia alone. 
 
So in fact why shouldn't they, why shouldn't . . . They're the 
ones that are going to suffer with a lot of the problems because 
of that government not having a clear direction on their gaming 
policy, Mr. Speaker. So why shouldn't they enjoy the revenues 
from the VLTs? Of course they should. They're the ones that 
have to put up with the problems. 
 
The fourth point, Mr. Speaker, a minimum of 20 per cent of 
VLT revenue would remain with the site owner. And this would 
be to I guess reflect the added costs of staffing and accounting 
and a reduction in sales experienced by some operators. 
 
Because I guess they're either going to sell the product they 
were selling or . . . People only have so much money to spend. 
If you go into an establishment with a $20 bill or two $20 bills, 
you're still only going to spend that amount of money, or most 
people will only spend that amount of money. So they have to 
be compensated for some of the losses they're going to take on 
other products. 
 
The fifth point, Mr. Speaker, an annual VLT income would be 
made public on a community-by-community basis. And we 
have asked for this time and time again, Mr. Speaker, as far as  

trying to get some understanding as to how much revenue is 
coming out of some of these communities so that these people 
can make decisions. 
 
You know perhaps if they could see in one community that they 
have an excessively high amount of money being taken out of 
their community and going into the government coffers, then 
that would be a good indicator as to whether or not there really 
is addiction problems and people are spending inheritances and 
in fact all their hard-earned monies, which probably should be 
going, in many cases, to pay for things that are needed right in 
their own home. 
 
But I mean if you had it by a community-by-community basis, 
and you're looking at it in a population sense, you would know 
that there are problems in a specific community where in fact 
perhaps special attention would have to be paid to that 
particular community. 
 
What is it? — I think it is the sixth point here. Strict licence 
approval process would require extensive economic and 
social impact studies to be undertaken at the expense of the 
advocate, but conducted according to government criteria 
by an approved research firm. 
 
The seventh point is that: no new casinos would be built 
without a public hearing process and local approval. 
 
And this is so important. And it doesn't matter, Mr. Speaker, 
whether we're talking about health care or we're talking about 
so many of the things that are affecting people, especially out in 
the rural communities. We've got to get some of the control 
down to the local people. We've got to get it out of the hands of 
those who are obviously, obviously always in trouble. Why are 
you always in trouble? It's because you're not in touch with 
those local people. 
 
I'll tell you, local people, and it doesn't matter whether they're 
talking about ingenious ways of delivering and providing health 
care services or ingenious ways of raising funds to help things 
throughout the community — I'll tell you, they'll go a long 
ways. They're the people . . . it's the local people that are out in 
those communities that built this province. And I'll tell you, 
they don't need some 50 members to tell them what's best for 
them. Put the control back into their hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is really what this motion is all about — letting the 
people have the say once again in fact in what's so important in 
their own lives. 
 
Point number . . . I think it's point number eight, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation would be 
disbanded. Any casino operations would be subject to strict 
licensing and control by the Gaming Commission. 
 
Next point is regulatory framework for all charitable licences 
would be reviewed to ensure fairness; next point is stiff 
penalties would be imposed for contravention of rules and 
regulations. 



April 4, 1995 

 
1372 

And the last point, licensing criteria would be revised after 
consultation with charities and non-profit groups to better 
define the charitable purposes for which gaming revenue could 
be used. 
 
And I won't go into it much more than that, Mr. Speaker, 
because I know some other members want to speak and, in fact, 
should speak on this issue. They're the ones that should actually 
be owning up or 'fessing up to all of the problems that they have 
created. So of course the people would like to hear from them 
now. They should have heard from them about a year ago. 
 
But in fact now . . . And why is it that one of the opposition 
parties of three members can come up with a very clear and 
defined and comprehensive plan on gaming? Go around the 
province, find out what's important to the people, and actually 
respond to that. 
 
And yet a government of 50-some members, cabinet ministers 
— you've got airplanes, you've got government vehicles at your 
fingertips — and you couldn't go out and find out from the 
people. Everything you were doing was for political reasons. 
You were in touch with groups. You were trying to buy people 
off. That's the name of the game for you people. 
 
And I'll tell you it's not going to work well — it's not going to 
work well because there are people out there that are suffering 
because of the consequences of your policies, and it doesn't 
matter in which field we talked about. 
 
So yes, I'm going to take my chair, Mr. Speaker, because I, like 
others here, want to hear why it is, why it is that the government 
members have sat back and done nothing for so long. It's about 
time they were heard. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is with 
pleasure today that I rise to enter into the debate. And upon the 
conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be making the 
following motion: 
 
 Deleting after the words, "That this Assembly" and 

replace them with: 
 
 endorse the government's plan to operate gaming in the 

province with a well-thought-out plan for controlled 
expansion which includes the support of hoteliers, 
exhibition associations, chambers of commerce, the 
FSIN, its tribal councils and 74 bands, and the tourism 
industry; and in lieu of a plebiscite, endorse the 
government's current program of monitoring public 
opinion and addressing the social impacts of gaming 
where they occur. 

 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past couple of years I have been very much 
involved in this process of looking at how we establish a 
gaming policy in Saskatchewan, and of course, along with all of 
my colleagues, have agonized around the decisions that we're  

currently proposing and making. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that gaming is not new in 
Saskatchewan. And of course when you look at the history of 
the expansion of gaming in this province, it takes us through 
several decades. And I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 
year 1969, we see first sort of the legitimization of full-time 
pari-mutuel betting and horse-racing in Saskatchewan, the 
beginning of gambling. 
 
And as we proceed through the years, Mr. Speaker, we see 
1971, the licensing of casinos; and in 1972, Sask Sport 
established, representative of interests in provincial sporting 
governing bodies; in 1974, licensing of lotteries. And then of 
course we get to the 1980s, and we see in 1983 the licensing of 
commercial bingos, and proceed on of course into the '90s 
where we are today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as you and I debate the issue, we ask ourselves, I'm sure, 
Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis, many questions. And we hear in 
this Assembly and across the communities of Saskatchewan 
questions such as: is there good gambling or is there bad 
gambling in this province? And I've heard it many times over. 
 
And when we take a look at something that we've had a good 
deal of experience with — which is the bingo industry — or 
have been around it in all of our communities, we know that 
church organizations and service clubs and charities all over 
Saskatchewan fund-raise through this particular event. 
 
And on many fronts bingos are viewed, in my opinion, as being 
a way of investing money back into the community. And we see 
it from the point of view of enriched minor sports programs, 
equipment or supplies that we see in many of our medical 
health centres in Saskatchewan, and we see support for 
individuals or groups on an individual basis. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, we also see on the other side, a 
number of issues that come as social problems around the bingo 
issue. And I heard, as I listened to the member from Rosthern 
speak today, who in the 1980s of course was responsible for the 
portfolio of Social Services, and he said that people who sit in 
bingo halls, Mr. Speaker, are there and there aren't any incidents 
to addiction. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that is hardly the case. 
 
On many occasions I've heard, as other members in this 
Assembly have heard and people in communities have heard, 
that children are left alone while parents are busy playing in the 
bingo halls. Now the member from Rosthern would know that 
because as he was the minister of Social Services of course, 
those reports would have come to him in 1984, and he would 
have been responsible, I expect, Mr. Speaker, to address some 
of those issues. 
 
How many times has he heard that children go hungry because 
there may be family members who in fact have spent their food 
money at a bingo establishment? So for the member from 
Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, to suggest for a moment that aren't any  



April 4, 1995 

 
1373 

incidents around the social issues around bingos is hardly true. 
 
But we can legitimize, Mr. Speaker. Then the other side of that, 
bingo provides a great many benefits to communities. And I 
support that . . . provides a great many supports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't think that the debate here today is about 
whether or not we have gambling in Saskatchewan or we don't 
have gambling in Saskatchewan. The truth of the matter is, is 
that we have gambling in Saskatchewan. We've had gambling in 
Saskatchewan, as I've suggested to you, since 1969, in 
legislation, but far before that in many other venues. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the government's involvement in 
how we address the issue of gambling is we ask ourselves the 
question . . . and difficult questions they were, gut-wrenching 
questions because this government believes that we were 
elected to make decisions that we believe are in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Not like our Liberal friends who would be on this side of the 
issue today and be on this side of the issue tomorrow. And they 
would want to leave that, Mr. Speaker. They would want to 
leave that, Mr. Speaker, to the decision . . . without decision. 
They would leave that without decision. They call it the old 
flip-flop . . . is the one that they speak about . . . deal, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But our government has said something somewhat different 
than that. We've said, how do we manage and regulate 
gambling in Saskatchewan? That's the question that we asked, 
Mr. Speaker, being one, so that it's responsible in a coordinated 
fashion across the province. 
 
We asked the question of how can gambling or gaming provide 
some economic benefits to the people of Saskatchewan? And so 
we established some policies that would address those 
particular issues. And we also said, Mr. Speaker, how do we 
mitigate . . . as best we can, how do we mitigate the problems 
that are associated with addiction? Those are the three issues. 
 
And I hear the members opposite speak for the last couple of 
hours about the fact that we don't have a plan around gambling, 
and we don't have a plan around gaming. And we say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have a coordinated plan around gaming. And 
we've witnessed and you've witnessed it across the province. 
 
And let me tell you that in the fall of 1993 my community said 
. . . the community of south-east central Saskatchewan said 
we're interested in having VLTs as a pilot project in our part of 
the world  in the same region that the member from 
Moosomin comes from. And they said, would you please pilot, 
in our area, VLTs? 
 
And who said that? And who promoted it, Mr. Speaker? The 
hoteliers of Saskatchewan promoted that. And the person who 
is responsible for the transportation system in my community 
said that. They came forward and said on a daily basis, on a 
weekly basis, what happens is that people are getting in my bus,  

and we're transporting them across the border to the south, to 
the United States, to Minot. And we're taking them to Roblin, 
and we're taking them to Brandon, where they are in fact 
spending Saskatchewan money. And they say it's important for 
us to keep our jobs here in Saskatchewan. It's important for us 
that they spend their money in our community. 
 
And that's what happened, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the first 
initiative, in terms of developing VLTs in Saskatchewan. In a 
planned way, we have a pilot project. And the pilot project 
demonstrates in Saskatchewan, in east-central Saskatchewan, 
that we should have VLTs across the province because they're 
well accepted, and people are promoting it. 
 
As the individual, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, states in a 
newspaper article: the VLT program has saved our livelihood . . 
. Mr. Bryant points out, who is the president at that time of the 
hotel associations. And that's true, Mr. Speaker. Our 
communities where VLTs are currently in have flourished to 
some degree in terms of providing better opportunities for 
employment and certainly have provided better opportunities in 
the communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second example that I want to point out in terms 
of how the government has planned to develop the gaming 
policy in Saskatchewan . . . not more than two years ago 
members from my community came forward — which was the 
local tribal council, the chamber of commerce, the exhibition 
board association — and they said, we want to have a casino in 
Yorkton, or we want to have a casino in the region. 
 
And so they petitioned the minister at that point, making the 
point that they want to have a casino in our community. And 
what did we do? We had a public meeting, Mr. Speaker. We 
had a public meeting in our community . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Because the member from Rosthern wants to 
know what the people are saying. That's a good question. And 
what did we do? We have a meeting in our community, and we 
say to the people that we're interested in having a casino in 
Yorkton, in spite of the fact that Regina's interested and 
Saskatoon is interested and Prince Albert is interested and 
North Battleford has submitted a report. 
 
And what we say, Mr. Speaker, is that we're interested; we're 
interested in having a casino in our community. And as a result 
of that, we've now moved to a new level, Mr. Speaker, where 
we have today in Saskatchewan one recognized casino, 
Regina's, and we have the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians 
now developing three others or four others in Saskatchewan. 
And they've come back to our community again, only this time, 
Mr. Speaker, in a broader partnership . . . Because that's how 
this government makes decisions. They make decisions in 
partnership and in cooperation with their communities, with 
their friends and their neighbours. That's what we do. 
 
And the chief of the Saskatchewan Federation of Indians said to 
us a couple of days ago when he was in our community . . . is 
that what this is about. This is about ensuring that we have 
opportunities for our people. And we want to have a casino in  



April 4, 1995 

 
1374 

Yorkton, Saskatchewan and work with our friends, which are 
the chamber of commerces, which are, Mr. Speaker, the 
economic development commissions, which are the local 
politicians, the local government, the municipal governments. 
That's the kind of work that our government has done in 
promoting casinos in Saskatchewan. That's the kind of work 
that our government has done in promoting gaming in 
Saskatchewan as a comprehensive policy — as a 
comprehensive policy, Mr. Speaker, that includes everyone. It 
includes everyone. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to conclude my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, by moving this amendment, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 That we endorse the government's plan to operate 

gaming in the province with a well-thought out plan for 
controlled expansion which includes the support of 
hoteliers, exhibition associations, chambers of 
commerce, the FSIN, its tribal councils and 74 bands, 
and the tourism industry; and, in lieu of a plebiscite, 
endorse the government's current program of monitoring 
public opinion and addressing the social impacts of 
gaming where they occur. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have listened to the debate this afternoon, and I can just say one 
or two things about the debate that I've listened to, and what 
I've heard is a complete flip-flop  flip-flop after flip-flop 
mentioned by members of the opposition. 
 
And I think it can be summed up in one sentence. About a year 
and a half ago, they were urging the government to move into 
all sorts of gambling when there wasn't any, and they just 
couldn't urge the government to get into it fast enough. And 
now once it's been implemented slowly and carefully and 
thoughtfully and monitored continually, they are taking the 
position, oh you're going too fast and you shouldn't do this. And 
they're finding themselves contradicted on this to the extent that 
now they don't know which way to go, and they're asking for a 
plebiscite; they want to put it to the people. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that's not a responsible position. We will 
continue with our position. I think we could talk on end with 
this, but I do move that the debate on this motion now adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 
 


