






















































February 21, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 21, 1995 

 

 
313 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
from the Gull Lake area to present this morning. I notice that 
the mayor of Gull Lake has signed this one and some other 
good folks from around the area — Swift Current, Medicine 
Hat even, and some of the other small towns. I'll read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'll be happy to table these today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from Tribune, Goodwater, Weyburn area. 
Mr. Speaker, I table them now. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition from many of the constituents in my constituency, and 
the prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
  

 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, many of these constituents are from the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many of these 
constituents are from the Glentworth-Mankota area of the 
constituency. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate funding toward the maintenance 
and capital costs of Saskatchewan roads. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have two 
notices I'd like to present today. I give notice that I shall on day 
17 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Health: how many 

employees within the department have been severed, 
laid off, or otherwise displaced due to government 
restructuring of health districts in the fiscal year of '94-
95? 

 
And I also give notice that I shall on day 17 ask the government 
the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Pipestone District Health Board: what 

was the total amount spent on board members' 
remuneration for the '94-95 fiscal year; how many 
employees were on staff working directly for the health 
board, i.e., support services, administration, 
communications, etc. for the last fiscal year; what was 
the total spent on communications and advertising for 
the last fiscal year; (4) what was the total expended on 
severance packages for the '94-95 fiscal year; and (5) 
were any employees severed by the health board rehired, 
and if yes, provide names and severance package 
details. 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have two 
separate questions today. I give notice that I shall on day 17 ask 
the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Commission: what is the revenue from video lottery  



February 21, 1995 

 
314 

 terminals in the fiscal year to date on a community-by-
community basis for each community in which there are 
three or more site contractors? 

 
And I shall give notice, on day 17, ask the government the 
following question regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Commission: 
 
 Who are all of the site contractors for video lottery 

terminals in the province; how many terminals do they 
have; and in what community are they located? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would draw 
your attention to a visitor in the west gallery. A few months ago 
I had the pleasure to participate in the opening ceremonies of a 
new branch library of the Regina Public Library. The library 
was named in honour of a long-time trustee who's active not 
only in the local library board but also Saskatchewan libraries 
and Canadian library trustees. And I would ask the members to 
join with me to welcome and recognize George Bothwell. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it's an honour and a privilege to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the Legislative Assembly two 
distinguished visitors from the Free State province of South 
Africa. 
 
In your gallery we have the Hon. Tate Makgoe, Minister of 
Finance; Doctor Bethuel Setai, director general to the Premier 
of the Free State province. 
 
Minister Makgoe has been a member of the African National 
Congress since 1984, and like many of his fellow citizens spent 
time in prison in pursuit of the goal of equality and freedom for 
all South Africans. 
 
Doctor Setai holds a number of degrees from New York 
University and Columbia University. He is the senior public 
servant in the state government and the senior adviser to the 
Premier. He also serves as cabinet secretary. 
 
As you will recall, the Government of Saskatchewan has over 
the past two years hosted similar visits by other South African 
officials. These visits are part of an ongoing familiarization 
program called the public service policy project, established 
two years ago in South Africa. 
 
The program was developed by the Canadian International 
Development Agency and the International Development 
Research Centre in collaboration with members of South 
Africa's democratic movement. 
 
Both Minister Makgoe and Doctor Setai will spend the next few  

days meeting the senior government officials to get a hands-on 
view and perspective of the workings of our provincial 
government through briefings, meetings, and other 
opportunities to see government in action on a daily basis. 
 
It is particularly interesting to note that Minister Makgoe and 
Doctor Setai represent the political and bureaucratic sides of 
their governments respectively. Indeed their distinct but 
complementary responsibilities will serve to provide them with 
a well-rounded corporate perspective of government upon their 
return to South Africa. 
 
Let me close by saying, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is once 
again honoured to have been selected to participate in this 
program. Saskatchewan is in an excellent position to assist in 
the structuring and functioning of provincial governments in 
South Africa. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I believe this recognition of 
Saskatchewan's experience and expertise in this area speaks 
very highly of the competence and professionalism of our own 
public service. I believe our government can provide Minister 
Makgoe and Dr. Setai with valuable insights into the workings 
of government through the various meetings and activities 
planned for them over the next few days. And, as in any 
exchange program, Mr. Speaker, our own government officials 
will also benefit and learn from the time shared with Minister 
Makgoe and Dr. Setai. 
 
I would also ask the minister to extend our warmest greetings to 
his Premier, Patrick Lekota. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to 
warmly welcome our very special quests from South Africa. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the hon. Finance minister in welcoming our 
two distinguished guests from South Africa, the Hon. Tate 
Makgoe and Dr. Bethuel Setai. My colleagues and I are 
honoured that you've come to Saskatchewan to further your 
efforts in bringing about democratic and responsible 
government to the people you represent. 
 
Our province has a long history of being a leader in government 
and democratic reform. But as with many worthwhile 
endeavours, it takes a great deal of hard work and perseverance. 
Often progress is made through a series of compromises, 
adjustments, and concessions. There's a great deal we can learn 
from each other. And as such, I congratulate you and your 
government for taking the initiative. 
 
Again, on behalf of the official opposition, welcome to Canada, 
to Saskatchewan, and to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join 
with the Minister of Finance and the Leader of the Official 
Opposition in welcoming these two distinguished gentlemen to  



February 21, 1995 

 
315 

our Assembly today. To our guests, the Hon. Makgoe and Dr. 
Setai, welcome to the province of Saskatchewan on behalf of 
the Liberal caucus. 
 
I am pleased to see the public service policy project continuing 
in this manner with their visit to our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And like the minister and the Leader of the Opposition, I 
believe that Saskatchewan has had a highly competent and 
professional public service. I know that their visit will be 
valuable, not only to them but to us as well. 
 
And I hope that you enjoy your stay here and that our balmy 
February weather continues throughout your visit. I trust that 
your time in our province will be a memorable and valuable one 
and that you have a very safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, sitting in the west gallery, a long-time friend 
and community worker in Vibank, Mr. Tony Deck, who 
frequently drops in to observe the proceedings here in the 
Chamber. And I ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
Tony here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House a very good and long-time friend of mine, Mr. Jim Feley, 
who is seated in your west gallery. Accompanying Jim here 
today is his son, Jeff, who is a third-year education student in 
the University of Regina. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they're taking — both of them, Jim and Jeff 
— are taking some time out of a busy schedule to come down 
to the legislature today and to view the proceedings of the 
House, and I'd like to ask all of the members to offer them a 
very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure . . . 
first of all I wanted to say hello to a good friend, Tony Deck, 
who I've known for many, many years. 
 
But I would really appreciate the opportunity to introduce to the 
Assembly my daughter Sacha, who is seated in the west gallery 
with her friend Jeff. Sacha obviously, since the time she was six 
years old, has had to put up with a politician in the house, and I 
say that because I think oftentimes we forget about the other 
side of the formula; that's our families and what they have to 
put up with on a day-to-day basis. 
 
So welcome to the Assembly, Sacha. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

TransGas Pipeline 
 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The town of 
Goodsoil in my constituency is where I grew up, and it is also 
the gateway to the Meadow Lake Provincial Park, the loveliest 
park in our province which I'm sure you've heard me say many 
times before. 
 
That should be enough for any town, but there is more good 
news from Goodsoil and for other communities between 
Goodsoil and Rosetown. Local economies and the 
Saskatchewan economy in general are about to get a major 
boost. TransGas Limited has announced a 350-kilometre 
expansion to its high-pressure pipeline system. This $114 
million project will run from Goodsoil to Rosetown and result 
in 350 person-years of employment. That's jobs for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. As well, TransGas will use 
Saskatchewan suppliers where possible, providing a further 
boost to the provincial economy. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there will be rural and local spin-offs 
to this project. RMs (rural municipality) and farmers will be 
compensated for land use, and local businesses such as hotels 
and restaurants and grocery stores will benefit from the 
construction crews working along that route. 
 
Mr. Speaker, natural gas producers have invested more than 
$260 million in development in the past year, and they are 
lining up for the transportation services provided by TransGas. 
This project will allow TransGas to transport an additional 189 
million cubic feet of natural gas per day through its system, 
increasing capacity by 18 per cent. 
 
This is good news, Mr. Speaker. It is good news for a 
Saskatchewan project, in Saskatchewan, providing jobs and 
investment in Saskatchewan while strengthening the 
infrastructure necessary to transport and export Saskatchewan 
resources. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture Seminars in Yorkton 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I am 
very pleased to rise and report to the people of Saskatchewan 
exciting work that's being offered and promoted by the 
extension department of Agriculture and Food in Yorkton. 
 
Regional extension staff were completing a series of seminars 
which were held this winter in Yorkton. The focus of the 
seminars are to promote awareness and enhance agri-business 
in the region. These seminars included market outlook and farm 
management, forage and grazing, beef cattle seminars, and 
traditional crop production meetings. 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
316 

The highlight of the winter series was a recent seminar on 
herbs, spices, and horticultural crops, which drew 
approximately 250 people from as far away as Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon, Weyburn, and Dauphin. This seminar focused on 
market potential for herbs, spices, small fruits, and horticultural 
crops, and at the same time encouraging producers to explore 
new opportunities. 
 
Crop considerations ranged from seed potatoes, choke-cherries, 
saskatoons, dill, mint, and coriander. Mr. Speaker, research 
indicates that our favourable climate and potential free 
environment offers Saskatchewan producers a natural 
competitive edge to produce these crops in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan producers are looking to new and innovative 
ways of expanding and diversifying their farming operations. 
 
I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to commend and 
congratulate our extension service Department of Agriculture 
and Food in Yorkton for the work they are doing in providing 
producers with the latest and the best information on the wide 
variety of crops and topics, as Saskatchewan farmers look to 
diversify their farming operations. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Artists in Residence Program 
 
Mr. Roy — M. le président, vendredi, février 10, j'ai eu 
l'occasion d'assister à l'ouverture officielle du'un programme 
d'artiste en résidence dans la petite communauté fransaskoise de 
Bellevue, 60 kilomètres au sud de Prince Albert. 
 
Ce programme, parrainé par le Conseil des arts de la 
Saskatchewan, en collaboration avec le Saskatchewan Council 
of Cultural Organizations, la Commission culturelle 
fransaskoise et l'Association culturelle de Bellevue, est un autre 
excellent exemple du dynamisme de cette petite communauté 
rurale qui, au fil des années, a développé d'excellent artistes 
visuelles. 
 
Le programme d'artiste en résidence permettra à Mme. Anita 
Rocamora de Meacham, Saskatchewan, d'offrir des ateliers de 
sculpture en argile et porcelaine, de dessin et de peinture 
pendant la prochaine année à des élèves, des enseignants et des 
adultes dans la communauté de Bellevue et des environs qui 
comprend aussi les villages de Domrémy, Hoey, Saint-Louis, 
Batoche et Duck Lake. 
 
M. le président, ce programme d'artiste en résidence à Bellevue 
est un autre bon exemple de fonds des loteries de la 
Saskatchewan qui sont utilisés pour la promotion et le 
développement des arts et de la culture dans la province de 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Friday, February 10, I attended the official 
opening of an artists in residence program in the small French 
Canadian community of Bellevue, 60 kilometres south of 
Prince Albert. 
 

This program, sponsored by the Saskatchewan Arts Board in 
partnership with Saskatchewan Council of Cultural 
Organizations, la Commission culturelle fransaskoise, and 
Cultural Association of Bellevue, is another fine example . . . 
 
(Translation continued: . . . of the dynamic nature of this small 
rural community which, over the years, has developed many 
good visual artists. The program employs Meacham, 
Saskatchewan artist, Anita Rocamora, to give regular clay 
sculpture, sketching and painting workshops to students, 
teachers, and adults in the Bellevue area which also includes the 
communities of Domremy, Hoey, St. Louis, Batoche and Duck 
Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another fine example of Saskatchewan 
Lotteries dollars working for the enhancement of the arts and 
culture in the province.) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member's time has run out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kelvington Outstanding Citizen Award 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to tell you about a 
special person who has made a significant contribution in my 
riding. Earlier this month, Mrs. Annie James was honoured with 
Kelvington's outstanding citizen award. Annie's children, 
grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and many friends were 
present as a presentation was made at the Kelvington lodge 
where Annie now resides. 
 
Annie has contributed to her community in many ways. The 
inscription on the plaque she was presented with reads like this: 
 
 Annie James, Kelvington and community outstanding 

citizen award. In appreciation for the years of your 
caring, sharing, living ways that will always help to 
enlighten our tasks and brighten our days. 

 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Annie's family always came first. Annie 
enjoyed the gatherings at her home when her children were 
teenagers and the many functions for friends and relatives on 
anniversaries and birthdays. After the formal award 
presentation, those who attended the ceremonies joined Annie 
in an afternoon tea. And then the family had a luncheon at the 
James place, as her former residence is now referred to. 
 
Annie James is held in high regard in the community for her 
contribution to enhancing the lives of others. I extend my 
congratulations to Annie James and her family for making 
Saskatchewan a better place to live. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — Actually, Mr. Speaker, if the private members' 
statements are done, and I think they are, I wonder if I might 
ask leave to introduce a further guest. 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
317 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you. I notice in the west gallery a very 
distinguished visitor from the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Bev Dyck, 
who is known to many people here because he was a member of 
this legislature between 1971 and 1982, as well as being a 
former member of the Saskatoon City Council from 1986 to 
1991. And Mr. Dyck was also the chairman of the government 
caucus during the '70s. And I know all members will want to 
join with me in acknowledging Bev's presence and welcoming 
him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — I would like to join my colleague from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld in welcoming a former colleague of mine, 
Bev Dyck, to the legislature. Bev and I worked together on 
Saskatoon City Council and I was always extremely impressed 
with his integrity and dedication to the cause of working people 
in this province. So welcome here to the legislature, Bev. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Care Reform 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question comes 
from Maurice McGratten from Tisdale, and it's addressed to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, I want to know when you are going to do 
something about medicare. If Tommy Douglas knew how you 
screwed it up, he would turn over in his grave. Insulin, for 
example . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member knows that that 
language is really unacceptable and he should put it in terms 
that are more acceptable to this legislature. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, I'm reading from a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member must put it 
in his own terms, in language which is acceptable to this 
legislature. Order. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, if Tommy Douglas knew how 
you fouled up medicare, he would be turning over in his grave. 
Insulin, for example, used to be $1 for a bottle and a needle. 
Now some people get nothing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
that question from the concerned Saskatchewan person. I want  

to say to the member opposite that what the Saskatchewan 
government has done and is doing in health care is a necessary 
and logical and next step in the development of medicare, as 
Tommy Douglas himself advocated and foresaw. 
 
Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd — and this has been 
documented in many writings — said that the next phase after 
the first phase, which was the elimination of essential cost 
factors to access to doctors in hospitals, was to move into what 
they described, the wellness model. They realized very quickly 
that health care was more than bricks and mortar, pills, and high 
medical technology. Good health care depends upon — say — 
such things as accident of birth. If you're born into a home of 
poverty, that child is likely to die in an earlier age than 
otherwise. And therefore the emphasis is to shift from bricks 
and mortar to prevention of accident and disease and illness in 
that way. 
 
We think we're the leading edge of medicare, and we are 
guaranteeing its future and protection for the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Arts Grants 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
question to the Premier from Mrs. Muriel Poag of Moose Jaw, 
and her question is: Mr. Premier, I want to know why or how 
the government can afford to issue grants of up to $25,000 for 
assistance to Saskatchewan artists and arts organizations when 
they say they haven't money for health, welfare, and education, 
and are cutting so drastically on these necessary things which 
should be a first priority, not artists and art. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is obviously clear that 
health, I suppose above anything else, education very close 
behind, is a priority of our society and our quality of life. 
 
I think my answer to the hon. member would be that the 
question is premised on a wrong assumption. It is premised on 
the argument that it's one or the other. And what we've tried to 
do in our province in our budgets is effect a reasonable balance 
between the various competing and legitimate needs of our 
society. 
 
I think grants for artists, modest and affordable, if this can be 
done, is a part of building a Saskatchewan culture, a Canadian 
culture, and that we should do the best that we can to provide 
such funding. Clearly it doesn't have a priority over health care, 
but we're not damaging health care either. 
 
What we're doing is we are reforming health care; we are 
establishing its security for the 21st century. We are renewing it 
the way the World Health Organization has developed it, the 
way the World Health Organization has approved it, the way 
that the Liberal leader at one time herself advocated, prior the 
1991 provincial election, that it should be done, and it is now 
being more and more understood to be the case. 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
318 

So I think for the member's assumption, which is that's it's 
either/or, this is wrong; it's both/and — as much as we can, 
given our fiscal capacity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Health Care Jobs 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I have a 
question as well from a person in Saskatchewan. Incidentally, 
Mr. Premier, they are coming in on a daily basis. We've 
received something in the range of 1,400 of these questions at 
this point. We sent them to you. I'm not surprised that you 
would get them, yes. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Premier, the question that I have for you today 
comes from a lady by the name of Pam Raddysh from 
Theodore. Mr. Premier, Pam Raddysh writes: I am a registered 
nurse and I'm wondering what do you plan to do to fix it for all 
of us without jobs or hours in the medical field in this province. 
We have bills, families, just like you, only we don't have a job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all tell 
the Leader of the Opposition that I get letters too. There used to 
be a very famous singer by the name of Perry Como — so I'm 
told; it was before my time — but none the less he had his 
theme song: we get letters, we get letters. 
 
And we get the same letters that were supposedly directed to 
you but they direct them to us because they're afraid that you 
might not quote these. Time doesn't permit . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well just to make sure that you do. I won't on 
this occasion because time is running out. I will tell you that we 
get these letters of people who say you should ask the Tories 
these questions about health care and the like. 
 
But the answer to the question very specifically is as follows. 
As you know, the Minister of Finance, in what I think is the 
best budget in Canada and will prove to be the case over the 
next weeks ahead, has allocated $20.3 million for home care 
and for the wellness model, the shift. We expect . . . This is 
additional money as part of the program. 
 
And as the Minister of Health has indicated in his answers 
earlier, they expect 460 additional jobs, many of whom will go 
to the nurses and people in the health care field of which you've 
expressed interest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Board Appointments 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 
budget you allude to will probably be historically recorded as 
the disaster of North America. 
 
However, we have a question that comes from Elaine Kelln 
from Regina. Mr. Premier, I want to know how the hospital 
boards are established, and what qualifications do board  

members require? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to answer 
this question to the hon. member and to the letter-writer. This 
has been well established in the interim first period. 
Nominations are received from a variety of interested groups in 
the health care area of people who are both knowledgeable in 
health care and are community-minded and who have an 
understanding and an appreciation of the necessity for the 
health care renewal. 
 
We then go through the process of taking these various 
suggestions and try to quantify them and qualify them in such a 
way which produces the best board possible. 
 
As the member knows, subsequently there will be elections 
sometime later this fall, 1995, and thereafter established on a 
permanent basis. The elections will take place and they will be 
selected by the people. We will always have a combination of 
appointment for continuity's sake and electoral for people's 
input sake. 
 
This is really a dramatic, forward-looking step. No other 
province has ever dared to do this. In Liberal New Brunswick, 
for example, there is no election of school . . . of hospital 
boards. In Alberta, we know what's happening there of course. 
It's straight destruction of the health care system and doing 
away with the health care boards. So this in fact is a very 
positive step and that's the way it is being conducted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Rural Health Coalition 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm sure 
many people across Saskatchewan are really going to be 
comforted by the comments the Premier's been making 
regarding health care, and I've got a question as well to the 
Premier. It comes from Linda Dyck from Borden. And most of 
these questions we've been raising today have been coming 
from rural communities that have been decimated by recent so-
called health reforms. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know what your government is doing to 
ensure that all district health boards are implementing all 
aspects of health service in rural communities as agreed to by 
the Department of Health and Rural Health Coalition in their 
agreement signed February 16, 1994. 
 
What are you doing to force district health boards to comply 
with the agreement? When will the dispute resolution 
mechanism outlined in that agreement be available for 
dissatisfied communities to access? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again this is a very 
welcome question and one that I think I can answer with the 
satisfaction of the member and I hope of the letter-writer. 
 
We are committed to the agreement. We are doing the best that  



February 21, 1995 

 
319 

we can to implement it. We're committed to it both in spirit and 
in the letter. In the vast majority of the communities, there are 
diminishing concerns as they see the implementation of the 
agreement taking effect. On one or two areas there may be some 
trouble spots which we're seeking to address. 
 
The point of the question is, what are you going to do? We say 
we're going to do what we undertook to do in writing; we're 
going follow those provisions in that agreement and make this a 
great reform, a great renewal of health care. 
 
And I say when the history of this province is written and when 
they look at what we did to save health care and medicare for 
the province of Saskatchewan, and we took Tommy Douglas 
and Woodrow Lloyd's dictum and we took it to the 21st 
century, people everywhere in the province of Saskatchewan 
will be very much in support. And I'm calling on the member 
from Moosomin to be also in support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Board Elections 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
further question, and this is to the Minister of Health. As you 
have heard, Mr. Minister, people are still very concerned about 
your government's changes to health care and they want a say in 
the decisions that are being made. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government has been dragging its feet on 
health board elections well over two years now. Your decision 
not to hold elections last fall is going to cost taxpayers nearly 
$1 million, and it looks like we're going to have to wait almost 
another year until sometime this fall, as the Premier may have 
indicated, for elections. 
 
Later today I look forward to moving first reading of a Bill to 
hold full health board elections in which all 12 board members 
are elected, not just four, as your commission chairman, Garf 
Stevenson, has recommended. This Bill will also provide for 
the elections to be held sooner rather than later, within three 
months of the Bill being passed. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you support this legislation and ensure that 
full health board elections are held, and held promptly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I can absolutely assure this 
member, all members of the House, and the people of 
Saskatchewan, that health board elections will be held. Mr. 
Speaker, that is one of the initiatives in health reform that we 
are extremely proud of as a government. We are the only 
government in Canada, Mr. Speaker, to initiate this true 
democratization of health care delivery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to clarify for the member because he seems to 
remain confused. 
 

This fall, Mr. Speaker, this fall we will elect eight of the 12 
board members. Eight members will be elected this fall. 
Following that, Mr. Speaker, we will move to a rotational basis 
as recommended by Mr. Stevenson in his review of the electoral 
process. This fall, however, Mr. Speaker, eight members will be 
elected to the district health boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Executive Council Salaries 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I 
questioned the Premier about the fact that his political staff was 
one of the largest in Canada and he chose to ignore the facts 
placed before him and simply defended the 88 political 
positions whose average salary was $48,000 per year. 
 
I say was, Mr. Speaker, because we now know that the 
Premier's political staff will get a $118,000 pay increase in the 
next year. That's $118,000 for the Premier's 88 staff members, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: how, sir, can you allow this double 
standard that gives $118,000 in pay increases to your political 
staff when the ordinary people of this province are having to 
make do with less? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this question by the 
Leader of the Liberal Party is an interesting one coming from 
the leader of the party which received how many hundreds of 
thousands of dollars was it when the hon. . . . when the member 
from Shaunavon jumped and betrayed the loyalties of the 
people who elected him; and you, in the new politics fashion, 
accepted him very willingly. And you accepted him for one 
reason only. Isn't it a fact, not on principle, but on money? 
Because automatically you got a party status and you got — 
how much was it; will you tell the house? — of taxpayers' 
money for that political staff. 
 
I think it does not serve the public well for the new-style 
politics, so called — which we really know is the same old 
Liberal pork-barrel politics that's always existed in this 
province, and in Canada even under the current Liberal 
administration — to be talking about political staff and doing 
things for political reasons in that regard from the member 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is most 
interesting that it is indeed this Premier, along with all of the 
other people in the front row who made the rules for this 
legislature, who is now criticizing the very rules that he created. 
If they didn't like the caucus third party grants, then they 
shouldn't have created the rule in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the onslaught of tax increases, utility 
rate and licence fee hikes, the average Saskatchewan person is 
having a really tough time making ends meet. 



February 21, 1995 

 
320 

But there is one group, Mr. Speaker, who is treated unlike 
anyone else, and that group is the Premier's own staff. While 
the Premier and the Finance minister think Saskatchewan 
citizens should be oh, ever so grateful for a $150 rebate in 
taxes, each of the Premier's political staff, on average, can look 
forward to a $1,340 annual increase to their salary. 
 
My question to the Premier once again: explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan, sir, what your political staff does that makes 
them deserving of being treated differently from every other 
person in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again I thank the Hon. 
Leader of the Liberal Party for that question. But I want to say 
first of all, I dispute with vigour her categorization of the 
deputy minister to my shop, for example, as being part of the 
political staff. 
 
Coming from this member who . . . I alluded to this, and I'm 
doing the best that I can to avoid being personal, so I'm going to 
avoid any further references coming from this member. But I 
will say this. I don't think it's incumbent upon me to explain, 
any more than it is on you, what it is about your political staff 
that the public is paying for that allows them to get the money 
that they're getting there. 
 
And when you say about the rules, you sit on the Board of 
Internal Economy that sets these rules. You're the ones there. I 
didn't hear you utter 1 cent saying of rejection. You didn't say 1 
cent that you wouldn't take the money as a result of the member 
from Shaunavon walking across the floor of the House. You 
welcomed him. 
 
You took the money and you deposited it and you're using the 
money. And how are you using the money? Why don't you get 
up and justify how you use the money. 
 
I say to the hon. member, this kind of questioning is demeaning 
of her and demeaning of the Legislative Assembly. You know 
better than to do this. 
 
Except everything else is falling apart on you, including the 
Statistics Canada figures, including the budgetary figures. And 
now you're reduced to this kind of a banal argument. I'm sorry; 
you're not going to get me involved in that kind of a game. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I tabled legislation 
that would make all of my records available for public scrutiny. 
We have absolutely nothing to hide, which is more than the 
Premier can say about his own caucus allowance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier pretends to have respect for our 
province's professional civil service. But he admitted in this 
House that his ministerial assistants do not require job 
descriptions, do not even have to apply for their positions 
through open competition, and do not submit yearly 
performance appraisals. 

My question again to the Premier: with a complete lack of 
performance indicators, Mr. Premier, just what criteria did you 
base these wage increases on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, why is this double 
standard sought to be imposed? You tell me by what yardsticks 
advisers like Mr. Ted Yarnton have been hired by you. You tell 
me by what yardsticks . . . you laugh. All right, you tell me by 
what yardsticks Mr. Stringer from Alberta has come out here 
. . . and by the way, advising the Liberal Party in Alberta, so I'm 
advised, on a full-time basis and advising you here. By what 
yardsticks? What are your measurements? Tell me where you've 
tabled how you assess his qualifications, and the people that 
work for you. Why do you get into this? Why is it the double 
standard that that doesn't apply to you, but it applies to us, when 
you get the same sources of funds from the same taxpayers that 
are involved here? 
 
I mean look, you have to be absolutely clear about what you're 
getting involved here, and you should think very, very carefully 
about what you're getting involved here. I don't think you've 
thought this out very carefully. Think about this, and I say that 
when you start showing the people of Saskatchewan that your 
yardsticks and standards are clear and above-board, then I think 
perhaps the rest of us in the legislature will feel some 
compunction to say that we have something to match. Right 
now I don't think there's very much to match. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Civil Service Costs 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, your 
budget calls for a 9 per cent reduction in salaries paid to 
government department employees, from 407 million to $370 
million. While we originally applauded this effort, we realized 
that there'd been no announcement of a downsizing of the 
public service, either in a reduction in the salary base or a cut to 
the size of the civil service. A $37 million decrease means that 
you will have to dismiss about 1,250 employees, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, given this information, I'm wondering if you 
could explain the magical 9 per cent reduction in your budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, what I'd like to point 
out to the member opposite is the size of the civil service 
relative to what the size of the civil service was when we came 
in. We have some 400 fewer civil servants today than when we 
came into office. I would say that in this last year we are hiring 
more civil servants, primarily because of problems in Justice  
that is, we do have to have people to ensure that the jails are 
secure  and because of offloading. 
 
But what I find absolutely intriguing is that we have a new 
supporter for the idea that our government is very tightly run.  



February 21, 1995 

 
321 

And it's the Premier of Alberta, Mr. Ralph Klein, who today in 
the newspaper said: What's he doing when he's cutting spending 
by 20 per cent? From The Globe and Mail he says . . . Mr. Klein 
maintains that his 20 per cent cut in overall spending will only 
bring Alberta in line with other provinces in terms of their per 
capita spending, which reinforces everything we've been saying 
to the members opposite including to the Liberal leader. 
 
This province is tightly run. We have fewer civil servants per 
capita in any of the Liberal provinces, fewer per capita than in 
Alberta. And finally the Premier of Alberta agrees with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's obvious that Madam 
Minister doesn't even understand her own budget, because if 
she did she would have found the answers on page 74 and 75 of 
the Estimates which would have shown, Madam Minister, a 
transfer from the Department of Health to health districts. 
 
There was no cut at all, Madam Minister. It was a transfer from 
one department to another, which does not show the same 
breakdown in salaries. That means that the total amount your 
government will spend on department salaries will still well be 
over $400 million. The salaries paid to education and health 
organizations will still be over $400 million and the salaries 
paid to Crown corporation employees will be close to $300 
million. And that doesn't include pensions and benefits, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I'm wondering if you have budgeted for the 3 
per cent increase that is contained in the SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government Employees' Union) contract which will be ratified 
this week? A 3 per cent increase on all government salaries 
amounts to $30 million increase to taxpayers. Can you tell us, 
Madam Minister, if that increase is budgeted for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say how 
pleased I am that the member opposite admits that he's 
confused, that he thought there was a reduction and that the 
reduction is not there. 
 
What I have said to the members opposite, including the Leader 
of the Liberal Party, they can compare this and that, apples and 
oranges, but our government is one of the most tightly run by 
all indicators outside this province. You look at Statistics 
Canada. What do they say? Fewer than 10 civil servants per 
capita. Government of New Brunswick, how many civil 
servants per capita? — 15. Government of Alberta, how many 
civil servants per capita? — close to 13. Our commitment is to 
provide quality services to the people of Saskatchewan to 
ensure that we sustain not only a balanced budget but a high 
quality of life, and to do it as effectively as possible. 
 
If the member opposite knows something about the contract, I 
wish he would tell this House. I don't know what's been  

decided. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the $30 
million does not include the increase to the cost to taxpayers 
resulting from employee benefits and pensions which you so 
graciously increased. 
 
I'm sure this is going to sit real well with the folks that are 
doing their taxes as tax time comes up, with the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) money that you stole from 
Saskatchewan farm families in the recent budget. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I think the member has 
enough experience in this House to know that that language is 
really unacceptable, and I ask him to use another word. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll change that to 
pilfered. Now, Madam Minister, the deal seems to be getting 
even worse. And I'd like you to confirm the schedule here. 
We're talking about a two-year agreement — zero in '95; 
January 1, '96, 1 per cent; July 1, '96, 1 per cent; January 1, '97, 
1 per cent. 
 
Would you confirm the contract, Madam Minister, and a clause 
therein which says that should any other area of the public 
service obtain a better deal, that that also goes on the SGEU 
contract without it being bargained. Can you confirm this for us 
this afternoon, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
know that I'm not going to discuss the details of any private 
negotiations. 
 
But I will say this, I will say this. We don't apologize for a 
moment for the fact that we are one of two provinces in all of 
Canada which has respected collective agreements, which has 
sat down and negotiated with our employees, and whose 
employees, I think, have been very reasonable in their wage 
demands. So we don't apologize for one second for that. 
 
And I will come back to my main point. The members opposite 
love to be selective; actually the Liberal leader more so than the 
Tories. 
 
Talk about how many people does Alberta have in its Executive 
Council, how many people does Saskatchewan have in its 
Executive Council, forgetting there are other comparisons that 
they don't mention: how much does Saskatchewan spend on 
intergovernmental affairs? Less than $900,000 a year. How 
much does Alberta spend on intergovernmental affairs? More 
than $5 million a year. Different functions performed by 
different departments. 
 
What matters is what Statistics Canada says. Statistics Canada 
says we have fewer civil servants per capita; we spend less per 
capita on operating . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
322 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Health Districts Act 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to move a Bill to amend The Health Districts Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
may I ask for leave to introduce a ministerial statement? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Details of JobStart Announced 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of the Assembly an 
important announcement made yesterday in Saskatoon by the 
Premier, the Minister of the Environment, and myself. We have 
made public the details of JobStart, a $5 million program that is 
helping Saskatchewan young people find jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, JobStart is the cornerstone of our provincial youth 
employment initiative. JobStart provides recognized training 
that will help young people take advantage of the job 
opportunities created by a growing economy and develop skills 
that will prepare them for the knowledge-based economy of the 
future. 
 
In addition to the permanent jobs and portable skills, JobStart 
will produce . . . we expect that some 2,600 summer jobs will 
be created through the partnerships and summer employment 
programs which are related to the JobStart initiative. New 
funding, Mr. Speaker, to the reforestation program will provide 
200 additional jobs for young people next summer. 
 
These resources amount to $11.2 million this year, which is in 
addition to the $10 million already made available under the 
Future Skills program. Altogether this represents an education 
and training investment and commitment on the part of our 
government of $21.2 million in job and training opportunities 
for our young people this year. Mr. Speaker, I invite and 
encourage members of the Legislative Assembly to put young 
people and employers in their region in touch with JobStart. 
There are real jobs; there is real training and bridging 
opportunities available. Just call the JobStart hotline at 1-800-
59START. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
thank the minister for having the courtesy of not sending us a 
copy of her statement, particularly after we gave them leave to 
present this. 
 

The minister's statement dealing with JobStart and summer 
employment is very interesting. The government can't provide 
full employment for people in this province, yet they can come 
up with a little bit of money just before the election to provide 
money for students. 
 
The minister's talking about some of this summer employment 
being used for reforestation. That's a very good program, Mr. 
Speaker, very worthwhile project. But why is it being paid for 
by the Department of Education and not the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources, which would normally be 
the area in which it should be done? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish 
to thank the minister for sending over her comments. I would 
very much like to point out just a couple of things that I hope 
will be taken into consideration, given the very serious situation 
with the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We as a Liberal caucus welcome anything that can be done to 
address the fact that we have an increasing number of young 
people in this province who are in a very serious state, not only 
in their inability to find employment, but as well, being able to 
not find the best way in which monies can be spent to benefit 
them. We still have one out of four people in this province who 
have left our province since 1991, being youth. 
 
We have increased numbers of young people on social 
assistance  from 6,800 to 11,000 since 1991. The youth of 
this province are definitely an area which should be earmarked 
as a priority. 
 
But if I may, I wish to share with the minister that I had a most 
interesting meeting with the Labour Development Board. And 
they had indicated that both of the programs put forward by the 
government were done and in fact were in print in glossy 
brochures, and they had not even been consulted, this group 
that represents business and labour and all of the equity groups 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They felt that their expertise was overlooked, Madam Minister, 
and as much as we appreciate anything that can be brought 
forward to benefit young people, we do recommend that you 
meet with people before such programs are put forward. I think 
it would save the taxpayers of Saskatchewan considerable 
dollars. Thank you very much. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relate to question 
no. 5, I hereby table the answers. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question no. 5 is tabled. Order. 
Order. 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
323 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The light's on now, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much for recognizing me. I am pleased to enter into 
the budget debate here this afternoon. It's the first opportunity 
I've had to speak during this session of the legislature, and I do 
want to welcome back all members to the Assembly. I want to 
have a special welcome to Meta Woods, the new person at the 
table of the Clerk, and to all the pages. I hope that their 
experiences here are fruitful, and they can look back on their 
experiences in this House as a memorable experience in which 
they have learned something about the system in Saskatchewan 
and that it will serve them well in future years. 
 
I'd also like to congratulate the member from Kindersley on his 
election as Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, and 
I'll have a few words to say about that later on. And if the 
member doesn't have the chance to stay around, I hope you'll 
read the comments because I do have something that I think, at 
least from my perspective, is meaningful to say to you to help 
enhance your career along the way. 
 
I'd like to also congratulate the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount for the budget being introduced, for sticking with 
the deficit reduction plan and implementing a debt reduction 
plan in Saskatchewan. For her to have brought into place the 
first balanced budget in well over a decade, I think is a historic 
and important day for the people of this great province of ours. 
 
I also want to congratulate the member from Regina north-east 
who was the previous minister of Finance who started us on this 
course and has served us well as minister of Finance prior to the 
current minister. 
 
I do want to say that the member from Kindersley now, as 
Leader of the Official Opposition, I think brings disrespect to 
his office, the office that he serves as Leader of the Official 
Opposition. 
 
I notice that when he rises in the legislature, he plays the petty 
arguments of an immature politician who does not bring to 
himself or to his office the respect that should be garnered by 
someone who holds such a great position of importance within 
our province and within this Legislative Assembly. 
 
I don't know why it is that the Leader of the Opposition, and in 
fact the Leader of the Third Party in this Legislative Assembly, 
cannot deal with the issues that are the principles and policies 
and concepts that will face Saskatchewan people, that we will 
have to face as we go into the next century. 

Instead they, from their own desks, instead of using someone 
who's already got disrespect in their back benches, using them 
to forward the petty arguments of the day, they stand in this 
Assembly and forward those arguments themselves, instead of 
dealing with those important concepts which will serve this 
Assembly well . . . it'll serve their office well, and it'll serve the 
Saskatchewan people well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that's something that I would pass on as advice to the 
member from Kindersley in particular, because he has worked 
hard to get where he is, and I don't think he should bring the 
disrespect that he is upon the office that he holds today. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are entering very interesting times in 
Saskatchewan. We've been affected by many, many things that 
20 years ago we never expected to have to encounter. 
Saskatchewan in the past, for the most part, could set its own 
course and survive quite well, sailing across the seas and going 
around the globe to have our people and our businesses and our 
system of government, our medicare, be accepted and 
recognized worldwide. 
 
Today we've moved into a different picture that is more difficult 
than it has been in the past, because what we need to do is we 
need to take into consideration many things that affect us, those 
externalities from behind our borders that we don't have much 
control over. But we have to adapt what we do as a government 
and what we have to do as individuals, what we have to do as 
members of the Legislative Assembly, to adapt. 
 
And I think of such things as deregulation by the federal 
government which has put traditionally our Crown 
corporations, that have had a fairly free rein, into a competitive 
market. And our Crown corporations are going to adapt to that, 
Mr. Speaker. I'm very proud of the success story, in particular 
the commercial Crowns, that serve a role for Saskatchewan 
people and serve a role for the province as a whole, and have 
guided us very well and kept us with affordable utility rates that 
are as competitive as anywhere you would want to look in 
Canada, when you look at the basket of utilities that are 
provided by Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. 
 
It used to be, Mr. Speaker, that things like NAFTA, the North 
American Free Trade Agreement, the Free Trade Agreement 
before that, and deregulation were not issues facing our 
province. They are issues today. And what happens with the 
two opposition parties, Mr. Speaker, is that they're in the past, 
they're stuck there. Whereas when it used to be that society used 
to talk in terms of the haves and the have-nots, well today we 
now need to talk in terms of the knows and the know-nots. 
 
And those people in the opposition are the know-nots of our 
society and of this Legislative Assembly, because they know 
not what they do if they set on the petty arguments that they've 
promoted in this legislature and not dealt with the policies and 
the concepts and the principles that we need to guide us as a 
group that is in partnership, working together for the benefit of  



February 21, 1995 

 
324 

all Saskatchewan people, and not just a few petty arguments 
that will serve the issues of the day, to try and catch an inch of 
ink in the media or to get a second of coverage on the radio or 
the television. 
 
And so I think that this legislature, certainly the government 
members, have moved beyond that. We've moved to the point 
where we accept that we have to deal with the externalities that 
affect us. We've accepted that we have to deal in a more 
accountable system than ever before — therefore the Gass 
Commission; therefore the enhancement of the role of the 
watchdogs such as the auditor, the Ombudsman, and others that 
are the watchdogs of the public purse here within our province. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that some of the arguments used to 
date I want to dispel just a little bit. There was talk this week 
already in the Legislative Assembly, accusations from across 
the floor that the government is only telling half the story. And 
they were referring to the Premier being on public television on 
Sunday evening. Well I would submit to them that there's so 
much good news you can't put it all out in half an hour. 
 
The other thing is, is if the Tories wanted to put up $20,000, as 
the New Democratic Party put up $20,000, we'll put the Premier 
back on television for another half-hour so he can tell more of 
the good-news story that exists in Saskatchewan today. I make 
that challenge to you. 
 
And if the Liberals would put up $40,000, we'd put the Premier 
back on for another hour after that so he can give the 
conclusion of the good story and how the sun is again shining 
on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other story I want to dispel this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is 
the talk of hidden dollars within the provincial budgetary 
system that we have. And those watching and listening today 
should understand that this Assembly serves three very basic 
roles: we enact laws; we deal with budgets; and we preserve 
democracy. 
 
On the subject of budgets, there isn't anything hidden, Mr. 
Speaker. It's all there in black and white for those who want to 
read it. And I submit to you if there was money hidden, Mr. 
Speaker, the members of the Conservative and Liberal Party 
couldn't find the money if it was hidden. Obviously if they can 
read the documents, they know where it is, they know where it's 
accounted for, and every penny of money under this 
administration is accounted for by credible people who put it 
out to the public through the documentation, through the debate 
in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — A good example, Mr. Speaker, of the 
former government is the tabling of answers to written 
questions. I remember in the days of the administration, of the 
former administration, in which written question after written 
question was submitted to the government. They didn't answer 
any of them. They never answered the questions, Mr. Speaker. 

Now we have a turnaround time. If there's a written question 
from any opposition member, it's answered on the Table within 
a very few days. We take very seriously our responsibilities on 
behalf of the people we represent to make sure that there's 
accountability and full disclosure and access of information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the things that bother me a great 
deal about the petty arguments that are put forward. You also 
always get the great comparison from the members of the 
opposition. Not just the Conservative members but even the 
Liberal members keep comparing us to the great things that 
happen in the province of Alberta. 
 
Well we pointed out today through the Minister of Finance how 
bloated the public service is in the province of Alberta that they 
can't even attempt to get under control what we have got under 
control in Saskatchewan, not by badgering public employees 
but working in cooperation to build a better society and a better 
government to serve the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — There are many examples that give 
testament to what we have done, Mr. Speaker. You don't have 
to listen to what we say, as obviously some bias from the 
members who serve on the government . . . we're very proud of 
what we've done. You can look at other articles from credible 
financial magazines like The Financial Post, "Crusade on the 
Prairies, balanced budgets by '97." The headline, "Alberta 
flexes muscle in deficit fight while Saskatchewan sugars its 
medicine." 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've been compassionate in what we do. We 
have worked with people, in cooperation with people, to help 
them understand. There's been partnerships formed that will 
serve us well long into the future. And, Mr. Speaker, it's 
gratifying for the members on this side of the House to come to 
the point where we've had a plan to deal with the deficit, and 
that has been done. 
 
We now have put in place a plan for the debt, and that will be 
done as well, Mr. Speaker. And it will be done by this 
government because we have the commitment to do it, we have 
the intestinal fortitude to follow a plan, and not go by golly and 
by guess of the former government that served the people of 
Saskatchewan not so very well. 
 
It's also gratifying to members on the government side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, because we've come through some very 
tough times. And Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan 
people have amazingly stuck with us. I thought they may not 
stick with us, Mr. Speaker, but they have. 
 
I remember when the 52 hospitals in Saskatchewan lost their 
acute-care beds. I went to six or eight of those communities — 
as all cabinet members did — went to some of those 52 
communities, covered all the 52 communities, stood on the 
stage in front of the people in that community. Sometimes they 
were very angry; sometimes 3-400 people in the room;  



February 21, 1995 

 
325 

sometimes not very pleasant at all. 
 
But we went there to explain why we were doing what we were 
doing, and that was to save the health care system and to make 
it better, to serve the people that it's intended to serve. Those are 
the people who pay the bills, pay the taxes, the people who are 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It was 
not a pleasant task. But it was the right thing to do. It was the 
right thing to go and face people in their home communities to 
tell them why this was happening to them. 
 
Now come to today, we have a balanced budget in 
Saskatchewan — two years ahead of schedule. This government 
is to be commended for that. And I believe that the only people 
that do not commend the government for that are the opposition 
members opposite who preach doom and gloom upon our 
province when there's no basis of fact for it. None whatsoever, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number one priority for this government is 
now jobs, and we are committed to focusing on the challenge of 
jobs for young people in the next four years, with the same 
determination that we applied to beating the deficit in the last 
three years, Mr. Speaker. We're determined to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the job of the opposition politicians is to try and 
find bad news in every piece of good news. But no matter how 
hard they try, the opposition politicians can't deny the simple 
fact that the Saskatchewan economy has made a remarkable 
comeback, Mr. Speaker. A very remarkable comeback. 
 
It doesn't matter whether you're talking to the investment people 
who lend money to the province or it doesn't matter if you talk 
to the general population, if you talk to businesses, if you talk to 
working men and women of this province, they acknowledge 
there's a comeback happening that no one ever expected three 
years ago. 
 
It's happened because of putting a plan in place, following that 
plan, being dedicated to our principles and to our concepts, and 
having Saskatchewan people take a piece of ownership in the 
plan that was there. And by far the majority of Saskatchewan 
people have bought into the plan because they saw the necessity 
after the rack and ruin of the Progressive Conservative years in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it doesn't serve the Liberal Party well either, Mr. Speaker, 
to see the old, tired Tories drifting over to the supposedly new 
Liberal Party, But it's hard to determine this to be a new Liberal 
Party in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because they fall back on 
the petty arguments. They have no plan; they have no 
commitment to turn Saskatchewan into the province that all 
residents want it to be. 
 
We have that commitment, Mr. Speaker, and by gosh 
Saskatchewan will continue on the course that we're on. In the 
budget that came down, Mr. Speaker, we were able to do a 
couple of things. We were able to, first off, as I've mentioned, 
balance the budget two years earlier than we had initially  

projected. Granted, a good part of that is because of resource 
revenue, because also of the good agricultural year we've had, 
but nevertheless a plan that's working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the innovative ideas that we put into 
place — the corporate income tax rate for manufacturing 
processing firms will be reduced. The amount of the reduction 
will be tied to the company's presence in Saskatchewan. That's 
innovative, Mr. Speaker. That means companies that put more 
into Saskatchewan will be recognized for that, because the more 
business activity and jobs that are located here, the more tax 
rates will be reduced. 
 
For Saskatchewan-based companies, a corporate income tax 
rate for manufacturing and processing will be reduced from 17 
per cent to as low as 10 per cent, the lowest of any province in 
western Canada, Mr. Speaker. We've also rewarded, in terms of 
tax breaks, to the many individuals who have helped us come to 
the point we are today in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it'll be accomplished by an annual reduction 
against the surtax of up to $150 per taxpayer, and up to $300 
per dual-income household, and the reduction will mean that 
6,000 low income taxpayers will no longer pay Saskatchewan 
income tax. Two-income families earning up to $34,000 a year 
will no longer pay the surtax. And two income families earning 
up $65,000 will see their surtax reduced by more than 50 per 
cent. 
 
Is it enough, Mr. Speaker? No, I don't think it's enough, but it's 
a sign that we have a commitment to make sure that programs 
work that are run by the government for the people of the 
province. And we want to make sure that we are able to ease the 
tax burden that falls particularly on those people in the middle 
income brackets that have stuck with us and paid the most in 
the recovery. We want them to be rewarded as well. So as we 
proceed along the path and the plan of balanced budgets and the 
debt reduction plan, we will assure that we keep Saskatchewan 
people coming along with us to reward them as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
We have to do three things in our balanced budget approach 
and our debt reduction plan. First off, we have to make sure 
Saskatchewan people have the programs they want to serve 
them. Secondly, we have to pay off the debt that was not 
created by this government, was not created by the people, but 
was created by an unscrupulous government, the former 
administration, that paid no heed to plans or programs or the 
good and welfare of all people in the province. And thirdly, Mr. 
Speaker, it will serve us in reducing the tax burden on the 
people who live within the province. 
 
I don't think the Saskatchewan people are asking for more than 
that. Would they like more, Mr. Speaker? Yes, they'd like more. 
Can they have more right now? No, they can't have more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
326 

In this budget, we have a situation where the tax reductions 
over the four-year cumulative value will amount to some $262 
million, 20 per cent of that going to business and 80 per cent to 
the individuals who've been through some very, very tough 
times with this government, understanding the mess that we 
were in, understanding we were on the brink, but wanting to 
come back. 
 
And do you know why that is in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
It's because Saskatchewan people have a sense of community 
— stronger, I would maintain, than anywhere in North America 
because Saskatchewan people care about each other. They care 
about their communities. They care about their government. 
 
Saskatchewan people have a strong sense of community, Mr. 
Speaker, and that's why with a plan we're able to achieve what 
we're able to achieve as a New Democrat government in this 
great province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — One of the items that faces us, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the big uncertainties, is what happens in the 
federal budget which is supposedly going to come down some 
time this month. Sometimes we think maybe there's a two-
edged sword out there. We all feel good about getting out of 
equalization. We don't want to be on the welfare end of 
receiving money from the federal government. We strive  and 
we will succeed  to being on the paying side of the 
equalization pool because we have all the ingredients to make 
this a wealthy province, the wealthy province that it once was; a 
wealthy province that will look back and think how paltry some 
of the things were in the past because we have all the 
ingredients to make that happen. 
 
But at the same time as we strive towards being a have 
province, the federal government will also look at western 
provinces and think, ah ha, maybe they have the ability to pay 
more than other provinces who haven't tackled the difficult 
economic situations that face their jurisdictions. I tell Paul 
Martin today, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance and the 
federal Prime Minister should not be looking with an unfair eye 
at the province of Saskatchewan and other provinces who are 
getting their financial house in order. 
 
I pass that message on to the federal government through the 
Leader of the Third Party in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ask what representations has she made to her federal cousins 
in Ottawa to make sure that they get their house in order? What 
has she said to them about making sure that Saskatchewan is 
not penalized for doing a good job, Mr. Speaker? What has she 
said to the federal government, her federal cousins in Ottawa, to 
make sure that they examine the things where they can get 
money, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if she has gone to the federal 
government and said that some of the private, investor-owned  

utilities in Canada get too much of a break? 
 
How many people in this Legislative Assembly know that 
investor-owned utilities in Canada get back 85.5 per cent of the 
federal income tax they pay to Ottawa? I wonder if the Leader 
of the Liberal Party has gone to Ottawa and said, make sure that 
they get equal treatment out of the investor-owned utilities in 
Canada? 
 
Mr. Speaker, ending the rebates that come to investor-owned 
utilities, which would level the playing-field between investor-
owned utilities and Crown utilities, which are constitutionally 
protected from paying federal income tax, would save the 
federal treasury about $249 million a year — almost a quarter-
billion dollars. 
 
Do you think they'll do that? Well I hope that message has been 
passed on to the federal government. There are many other 
examples; I won't need to go into them here today. I just make 
the point that we are vulnerable not because of what we do, 
we're vulnerable because of what other people might do in 
Saskatchewan and we want them to look at these alternatives. 
 
If you look at our neighbours to the west — their utility rates 
for electricity have gone up over a five-year period about 
double what Saskatchewan utilities have gone up for electrical 
generation. Mr. Speaker, can you imagine, if they had to pay 
income tax on those companies in Alberta, how much their 
rates would have gone up? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say these things need to be examined. I've likely 
gone on about long enough, Mr. Speaker — I know other 
members want to speak on this important debate — but I do 
want to say that a new day is dawning for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker; the sun will once again shine on our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is a 
pleasure today to rise and come in behind the Minister of 
Labour, the member from North Battleford, because I'm sure 
without that dissertation I might not have had a lot to talk about 
because most people in the public and the media are referring to 
this budget as not a new dawn but a new yawn. 
 
The Premier has taken the criticism to heart, because he felt he 
had to go on province-wide television and spend $20,000 of the 
hard-earned money of the New Democratic Party in order to try 
and turn this thing around. I can understand why the Minister of 
Labour today was so emphatic in making his points, because 
obviously the criticism that has been levelled at the Premier and 
his budget about not telling the whole story has struck home. 
 
And we now have the Minister of Labour I'm sure being the 
first in a long line of ministers who are now standing up and 
trying to defend what is practically indefensible as far as the 
Saskatchewan public goes. And what is indefensible, Mr. 
Speaker, is what the member from Riversdale said when he was 
opposition leader, when he was campaigning to be premier. He  



February 21, 1995 

 
327 

said that taxation, increased taxation, was the killer, the most 
efficient killer, of jobs in our society. 
 
And you know what? The member from Riversdale has proved 
his own words in the most emphatic way that this province has 
ever seen. Going into his fourth year, he is still down a 
thousand jobs from when the first day of taking over the office. 
That's after Canada and Saskatchewan's economy, over the last 
two years, has been showing modest growth. Other places in 
Canada have shown significant job growth because the 
economic activity is taking place and the private sector is 
regaining its feet in those jurisdictions. 
 
But the member from Riversdale has chosen another direction. 
He's chosen one that is opposite of what most areas in North 
America have done in order to pull themselves out of recession 
and maintain sustainable economic growth. He has taxed and 
taxed and taxed; he has used the family of Crown corporations 
to tax and tax and tax. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, 1995 reminds me a lot of 1982 in this 
province. We had a family of Crown corporations which was 
swollen and bloated from the takings of Saskatchewan's real 
families, through utility rate increases. And the family of Crown 
corporations is doing very nicely today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have hospitals around this province that people are saying 
are not clean any more. You remember that, Mr. Speaker, from 
back in 1982, 1981. There were allegations right on the floor of 
this Assembly because of budget cut-backs. There are nursing 
homes all over this province being cut back. There are senior 
citizens who are being shopped around like they are something 
worthless in our society — from home to home, from hospital 
to hospital in rural Saskatchewan because of what the New 
Democratic Party government has done to budgeting in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It reminds me a lot of 1982 — high taxation, health under 
attack, and a family of Crown corporations bloated and swollen 
with the proceeds of the pocketbooks of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. Members of the New Democratic Party 
that went through that time should remember the lessons that 
were delivered in 1982 by the taxpayers of this province, and 
they don't like what they see today. And that's why, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier only tells half the story when he goes on 
province-wide television. 
 
And I can see why the minister gets up and he's a little bit 
defensive about some of the criticism. This is a minister that 
was in charge of some of those Crown corporations. You know 
the same ones, Mr. Speaker, that said that they were going to 
contribute $60 million to this year's budget, and that $60 
million all of a sudden has been pulled back. We don't need it 
any more. It's going to stay in the family to be used at a more 
appropriate time when the member from Riversdale decides to 
call an election in this province. 
 
The Minister of Labour, the former minister responsible for 
SaskEnergy, has stood in this House time after time and said  

there should not be a legislated change; that members of this 
Assembly should not review their increase in natural gas rates 
before they're imposed on the people. This new-found democrat 
says that members of this Assembly aren't smart enough, not 
well educated; they couldn't cope with reviewing TransGas and 
utility rate increases. 
 
I take exception to that, Mr. Speaker. I think members of this 
Assembly could do a wonderful job. And then you know what? 
The taxpayers of this province wouldn't have to simply take the 
minister's word for it, why the $60 million disappeared off of 
the balance sheet and remains tucked away in the family of 
Crown corporations for that other day, when the member from 
Riversdale calls an election. 
 
I don't think that's proper accounting. He talks about privately-
owned utilities. Well I can tell the minister that every one of 
those utilities across Canada has to go before a rate review 
process before they pass on any rate increases to their 
customers. 
 
And we might agree that they should pay more income tax, sir, 
but every one of them has to open its books up to the public. 
And that's more than the Government of Saskatchewan has to 
do with any of its utilities. They hide. 
 
And this year even the Provincial Auditor said, we are not 
getting the whole story on the budget. And the Minister of 
Finance's excuse was, well we have more Crown corporations 
than they do in Alberta; we can't use the summary financial 
statements. Well isn't that a wonderful excuse to hide from the 
people. And I'm surprised the minister, the Labour minister, the 
former minister in charge of Energy in this province, has the 
gall to stand up and say that a Crown corporation which hides 
from the public is more accountable than a publicly traded 
utility that has to go before a rate review board to set its rates. 
 
That's a terrible thing for the minister to say. And he knows 
otherwise. That's the minister that should've been up defending 
legislation that would allow members of this Assembly to 
review those rates before they are imposed on the taxpayer. 
That's what the energy companies tell me. They'd be more than 
willing to have the amounts which they charge, before they pass 
it on to the government, reviewed by the public, and the 
minister knows that full well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's the other side of the equation that we in the 
opposition have taken issue with. It's not balancing a budget; it's 
not attacking the deficit — those are things which Canadians 
and Saskatchewan people in the 1990s universally agree with 
and accept. 
 
This country as a whole, Mr. Speaker, has had to learn some 
very difficult lessons when it comes to the finances of the 
public and how they're managed. And those lessons have been 
learned in every province and territory of this country, and they 
had better be learned at the national level by the federal Liberal 
government. 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
328 

(1500) 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that taxpayers across this 
province, and particularly in my riding, are telling me that the 
size and the cost of government has to be pared back, that we as 
a province of around a million people cannot live with the size 
of government that we have. And that there has to be 
constraints put on government that all politicians, irregardless 
of their stripe, cannot move around. 
 
That way the taxpayer will be assured that in the coming years 
that the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) dividend won't 
disappear off the pages at the whim of the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that $60 million would have gone to paying down 
the accumulated deficit of this province, at the very least. And it 
could have gone a long way, Mr. Speaker, to allowing 
Saskatchewan citizens to go and be more productive if some of 
the taxation had been taken off of their backs. 
 
And how much more is stockpiled in there, Mr. Speaker? We 
probably will not find out until after an election is held in this 
province. And that's a travesty, because that information should 
be open to the view of the taxpayer of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I listened to some of the members of the 
government as they like to take credit for this so-called new 
dawning, it amazes me that things like the increase in taxes and 
royalties paid by potash companies and oil companies and 
uranium companies which formerly in this province were state-
owned enterprises — unproductive enterprises I might add — 
which now that they have become private entities are generating 
huge amounts of capital for the Government of Saskatchewan at 
no cost to the taxpayer, that these members over here, the ones 
who criticized those privatizations so readily a short time ago, 
now boast about the revenue that is being generated by those 
organizations to help them in their new dawning. 
 
Well I can tell you, ladies and gentlemen of the New 
Democratic Party, you can only be a hypocrite for so long. You 
can only be a hypocrite for so long and then people are going to 
wake up in this province and they're going to ask those 
questions that you should be able to answer. 
 
So if you're going to take credit, if you're going to take credit, 
then why not give credit where credit is due. Not one dime of 
taxpayers' money is being put into any of those organizations 
and they're pumping sunshine into the treasury of this province 
like we have never seen before. But no credit — no credit 
given. 
 
You know, if we could actually get into the books of CIC, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, some of the megaprojects that the Minister of 
Finance said she had to hold the $60 million back in case they 
got into trouble, if we could get into the books of CIC and 
really see where those things are going, they might have to give 
some credit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a few other organizations, 
private organizations that are contributing to the fabric of this  

province. And it has nothing to do with the member from 
Riversdale or his cabinet or his back-benchers. 
 
It has everything to do with world commodity markets and the 
fact that a previous administration took the ability of 
government away to fiddle in those organizations. That's what it 
has to do with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The ability of politicians of 
any stripe to fiddle with the market-place and fiddle with those 
companies, means that those companies today are generating 
huge amounts of royalties, taxes, and employment for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I really wonder, in the face of 
this economic recovery which Saskatchewan people have paid 
so heavily for, and they have paid dearly, why the government 
— bad enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they would bring in 
legislation which prohibits people from coming to this province 
and investing when they changed the labour laws last year — 
why the Minister of Labour, the new Minister of Labour, would 
allow large increases in salary to go ahead at this time when 
everyone knows that Saskatchewan's position in western 
Canada is uncompetitive as it is; why he would ask the taxpayer 
to pony up another $30 million in one union agreement alone, 
plus all the benefits that go along with it, and try and couch it so 
it looks like there's no wage increase in 1995. 
 
Well that tells me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is an election 
coming just as sure as can be. Now that increase isn't budgeted 
for — at least nowhere that I can find — and yet these members 
here are telling Saskatchewan people that there is a new dawn 
coming. Well I suppose if you only present half the story, you 
might believe that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You might believe it. 
 
The member from The Battlefords also criticized the opposition 
for not coming forward with a plan. Well he must have been 
speaking about the Liberal leader. He must have been speaking 
about the member from Greystone who, I admit, does go on at 
length in this Assembly about mostly nothing — about mostly 
nothing — and follows her Liberal roots truly, because that has 
been the history of the Liberal Party in this country and in this 
province for a long time. It's a lot of smoke and mirrors. 
 
But I'm surprised that the member from Battlefords has not 
recognized that the official opposition in the last two years has 
presented more real change to this Assembly, in the way that 
this Assembly works, than in the history of this province. 
 
For the very first time, private members' Bills are put forward as 
a whole package and presented to this Assembly. And if the 
government members had the courage to debate them and vote 
on them, this Assembly would be better off, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Not only have we asked this Assembly to allow members the 
right to debate utility rate increases before they are imposed, but 
we've also suggested that there are a number of reforms 
possible in the way that appointments are made, in the way that 
this Assembly conducts its business, that all party members — 
New Democrats, Liberals, and Conservatives — could  



February 21, 1995 

 
329 

participate in to make this a more responsible Assembly. And 
that was continued on this year by the member from Kindersley, 
the Leader of the Opposition, who has already introduced an 
entire package of legislation, not just complaints but an entire 
package of legislation which the Government House Leader, the 
member from Regina Elphinstone, probably didn't even read 
before he dismissed, dismissed it out of hand — six Bills 
already, Mr. Deputy Speaker, almost as many as the 
government if not more than the government has presented in 
the first two weeks of this session, all aimed at improving the 
way that this province conducts its business. 
 
And they say that the opposition only criticizes and doesn't do 
anything concrete. Well if any member of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) can point out to me a previous period in the 
history of this province when they were in opposition, when 
they presented clearly defined alternatives like this opposition 
has, I will be truly amazed because I believe it never happened. 
 
So you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the members of the 
government stand and speak in this budget debate, all we ever 
get are half truths. All the taxpayers of this province ever get 
are half truths. And the Premier has to go on television to try 
and sell the message that might be saleable, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if he had the courage to tell the whole truth. 
 
If he had gone onto television and said, Saskatchewan farm 
families, we had to take that $188 million in the GRIP surplus 
and we had to apply it against the deficit of this province 
because of A, B, C, and D and we have made provision that you 
will have programs in place to back you up, you know what? I 
think they might have accepted it. But you know what? He 
didn't even mention it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because he's afraid. 
He's afraid. 
 
If he had gone onto television and he'd said, folks in 
Saskatchewan, we're going to take a whole pile of money out of 
our communities through gambling and gaming and VLTs 
(video lottery terminal) and casinos, you know what? There 
might have been some empathy, but he doesn't even have the 
courage to mention it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The word gambling 
and gaming does not even cross the lips of the member from 
Riversdale who's the Premier of this province who tells us that 
we're having a new dawn coming. Well if a new dawn coming, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is all of us standing in line and pulling a 
handle and watching the lights flash, it's not much of a new 
dawn, is it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And do you know what? People all over this province have said 
they don't want that. And the member from Saskatoon 
Wildwood sits in her seat and laughs, but her own city rejected 
it outright. But I think if given a chance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
across this province, if given a vote, if given the opportunity to 
exercise their democratic will, people in this province would 
say that I'm not going to stand in line and pull the handle and 
watch the light flash to satisfy the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, the Premier of this province. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier didn't have the courage  

to go on television and say to the taxpayers of this province that 
I'm going to keep taxing you. I'm going to tax the very life and 
breath out of you rather than have my family of Crown 
corporations pay back some of the money, pay back some of the 
money which they have gouged out of your hide over the last 
three years. They simply disappear off of the ledger, while 
every other family in this province keeps paying and paying and 
paying. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's not fair. It's not right. And I say to you 
that if these New Democrats don't pay the price in the next 
election for doing that to Saskatchewan people, then people in 
this province will only get the kind of government they deserve. 
 
I don't like the fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that not a week goes 
by that I don't have some young person in my community come 
to me and say, is there any possibility that you might know of 
some place I could apply for a job? I've just gotten out of 
school. I'm graduating in the spring. I've just gotten married. 
I've just started a family. They have all sorts of reasons, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And they come to me and they say, is there anywhere that you 
could point me where I might obtain employment in my home 
province so I could be close to my family, so I could be part of 
the fabric of this province and build this province? And you 
know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Almost always I have to say 
I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I don't know where you could go to get that 
job because everyone I talk to who has the potential to employ 
those people say, I simply can't do any more because I'm being 
taxed to the hilt. I have no more room in my business. I have no 
opportunity to have partners who would come here and invest 
money because the government, either directly or indirectly, is 
taxing me to the hilt. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's a hard message to deliver to 
someone in our society who desires nothing more than the 
opportunity to work and contribute. All they want is a job so 
that they can pay some of those taxes, but they want to remain 
here. They don't want to go to Alberta. They don't want to go to 
British Columbia. But that's where they go. 
 
(1515) 
 
And these New Democrats can criticize Conservative 
administrations on either side of them, but both of those 
administrations recognize the cruelty of overtaxation. 
 
They recognize the words of the member from Riversdale when 
he said in 1990 that the greatest killer of jobs in our society is 
increasing taxation. Both Gary Filmon and Ralph Klein have 
taken that to heart, and they have said yes, we cannot tax our 
people any more; we have to cut back, or we cannot create jobs, 
and we will not have a society that will grow. 
 
But these people don't understand that principle. They 
understand big government. They understand the family of 
Crown corporations. They understand that very well. They're 
comfortable with that. They understand big labour unions. They  



February 21, 1995 

 
330 

understand those things because it gives them a measure of 
control. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish I controlled all things in my 
life too, but I don't. I farm. I deal with an international 
commodity market. I deal with international competition, and I 
have to work around the problems as they are presented in that 
environment — as most people in this province do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because they play in the same environment. And if the 
Government of Saskatchewan would simply wake up and smell 
the roses and start cutting themselves back, start cutting the size 
of government and cutting the tax load on people in this 
province, then I'll agree with the member from Battleford who 
says that this province can be a have province and that we have 
absolutely unlimited potential. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if these members of 
the government and their Premier would have the courage to 
say those things to Saskatchewan people, I think people in this 
province would help government, irregardless of its stripe, 
achieve those goals. 
 
But instead, they refuse to do that. They tell half the story. They 
care more about their political hides in 1995 than they do about 
the real families of this province, the ones who pay the taxes, 
who pay the education taxes, and who are going to be the 
people that are going to have to keep paying for a long, long 
time at the rate that we're going. And if the family of Crown 
corporations would help them out a little bit, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the job would get done a heck of a lot easier. 
 
So I say to the government members: why don't you start telling 
the whole story and then maybe together people will get on with 
building this province. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it's with some pride that I rise this afternoon to 
support the provincial budget for the 1995-96 fiscal year. Mr. 
Speaker, there's no question that all members on this side are 
extremely proud to be members of this provincial government, a 
government that has engineered a remarkable social and 
economic renewal in this province. I'm particularly pleased to 
speak today in my capacity as Minister of Education, Training 
and Employment. 
 
One of the key themes of the Finance minister's budget address 
last Thursday was promoting full employability. The role of 
education and training is critical, ensuring that our people have 
the education, skills and experience they need to get a job. Mr. 
Speaker, over the next four years the debt management plan 
outlined in the budget provides for service enhancements in 
training and employment and improvements that will account 
for fully 35 per cent of the service improvements. Education, 
Training and Employment lies at the very heart of this budget 
and this government's vision for our province. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to underline the caring and  

compassionate side of the truly impressive economic picture 
which this budget paints. In this respect, I would like to remind 
all members of the Assembly of words spoken by our Premier 
as we began to rebuild our province, and he stated: others will 
judge us on a wise management of the public finances and 
economic development. This is as it should be. But we will also 
judge ourselves on the progress we make in alleviating 
inequality, oppression, and fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my greatest pride today stems from success in 
human terms as a provincial government. Our balanced budget 
plan insisted on sustaining our quality of life, not on just 
reducing the deficit. We have refused to compromise our basic 
belief in caring, compassion and community values. 
 
The new debt management plan involves a strategy to improve 
our quality of life by continuing to improve the quality of our 
health and education services. The debt management plan, Mr. 
Speaker, will move us towards the goal of full employment and 
full employability through better education and training 
opportunities, especially for the young people of our province. 
Mr. Speaker, it is about time that someone in Canada staked our 
future in investing in our most important natural resource, and 
that's our youth. It's about time, Mr. Speaker, that a government 
somewhere in Canada staked its future on a full employment 
strategy — real jobs for real people. 
 
In addition to these principles of community and cooperation, 
basic principles of our government, I want to again remind you 
of our commitment to quality and equity in education. As some 
of you have heard me say before, the real bottom line is 
captured in the following question: is this good for kids? 
 
This budget advances equity and improves the use of our 
existing education and training resources. There are important 
budgetary enhancements in this budget. There are also some 
very important reallocations of existing dollars to reflect the 
priorities of our government. 
 
In many ways, Mr. Speaker, this budget may be looked upon as 
a historic occasion. In the budget speech, education and training 
is identified as making a key contribution to building our future 
at a time when there is real hope and genuine opportunity in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is the first province in all of 
Canada to get its financial house in order, a remarkable 
accomplishment achieved in just three years. This is an 
achievement by every solitary person in our province. Our 
partners in education and training have made an important 
contribution in this financial turn-around. The credit of our 
economic renewal belongs to the people of our province. 
 
Today I want to remind members that we have reduced the cost 
of running government by over $100 million since we took 
office. In the Department of Education, Training and 
Employment, about 97 per cent of the total dollars spent goes to 
our education partners, our K to 12 schools, post-secondary 
institutions, and individuals in the form of third party grants. 
Less than 3 per cent is spent on the internal operations and 
administrative costs of the Department of Education, Training  



February 21, 1995 

 
331 

and Employment. Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the citizens of 
our province that there is no fat in our department or across our 
government as a whole. 
 
Today, in spite of restraints, I want to tell you about a new 
program and new dollars and about new and better ways of 
directing our existing dollars to problem areas. This budget has 
good news for education and training. There is help for kids at 
risk. There's help for youth. There's help for school boards and 
post-secondary institutions in this budget, with the promise, Mr. 
Speaker, with the promise of more to come. 
 
The department's 1995-96 budget shows a slight decrease in 
overall expenditure to $880.7 million. Major third party 
operating grants are maintained at the same level, amounting to 
$580.7 million of this total. Taking into account the student aid 
fund and other grants such as that to the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network, general third party funding 
represents about 76 per cent of our department's budget. 
 
I'm also pleased to be able to say today that the provincial 
government is planning a 2 per cent increase in education 
operating grants to education institutions in 1996-97. 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we have to take into account some 
serious concerns about the federal budget which is being 
brought down later this month. But, Mr. Speaker, we will not 
abandon our concern for vulnerable people and equity in the 
face of any unilateral federal actions. 
 
Money for capital projects is designated in the '94-95 budget, 
and work will proceed over the next two years. This 
construction and related activity means employment and a 
climate for job creation, especially during the summers of '95 
and '96. This is yet another way that we're contributing to the 
economic growth and to fostering an environment where jobs 
may be created. 
 
New capital for the post-secondary system amounts to $9 
million, and $8 million for the K to 12 system, while the 
previously announced $18 million program in current projects 
which . . . will carry over into '95 and '96. And we will see an 
estimated $60 million worth of planning and construction 
activity. 
 
As outlined in the throne speech and emphasized in our budget 
speech, our government's number one priority is jobs. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, that jobs spell a future here for our 
children, and we know that jobs are the lifeblood of our 
communities. Everyone in Saskatchewan needs to know that we 
will work just as hard to meet the job challenge as we did to 
meet the deficit challenge, and we will succeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In education and training, we focused on the linkages to jobs. 
We have developed and are implementing a comprehensive 
training and employment strategy. An outstanding example of 
this is the $10.5 million multi-party training plan, signed by my 
colleague, the associate Education minister. This plan works 
with northern mining companies in aboriginal communities, and 
with this plan we are now training Northerners — northern  

Saskatchewan people — for real, long-term jobs. We are 
supplying the labour pool which expands mining operations, 
which are needed. We are doing this, Mr. Speaker, by working 
with business people to give northern residents the skills they 
need to get the jobs that need filling. 
 
The multi-party training plan will result in more then 500 new, 
full-time jobs with Northerners targeted to get 60 per cent of 
those jobs. And in the construction phase of expanded mining 
operations, another 250 jobs will be created this year alone. 
 
In the budget speech, you heard about a new program called 
JobStart. You're going to hear a lot more about it because it is a 
key program in this year's budget. JobStart builds on the kind of 
experience and success we've had in the multi-party training 
plan, on our linking education and training for young people to 
employability. 
 
Yesterday the Premier and the Minister of the Environment and 
myself had an opportunity to provide details of the JobStart 
program to an enthusiastic group of business people, students, 
and educators in Saskatchewan. The new and expanded youth 
employment initiatives surrounding JobStart amounts to $11.2 
million in this budget. More than half of this funding — $6.5 
million — is brand-new money. 
 
JobStart is the cornerstone program — a new initiative to help 
our youth make the transition from school to the workplace and 
to do so successfully. This budget commits $5 million to 
JobStart, to a practical program to help young people who need 
training or placement assistance to get that new job. 
 
JobStart will help young people take advantage of our economic 
and social renewal. The program will expand work-based 
training and job opportunities. Through JobStart, young people 
will develop marketable skills and secure ongoing employment. 
The program will also provide information and referral services 
including an automated registry of Saskatchewan job and 
training opportunities. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have an answer to that question: training 
for what? JobStart supports training for real jobs. It recognizes 
that employers know the skills and experience their industry 
needs. We're responding to labour market demands and meeting 
them through the combined efforts of business people 
provincially, public training institutions and government. 
 
JobStart is a signpost to the future. It gives our youth the 
opportunity to participate in the global economy and to ensure 
our continued economic and social development and growth in 
our province. JobStart is also a flexible program, one that offers 
a variety of approaches suited to individual young people and 
their individual strengths. JobStart offers jobs and job 
opportunities. It offers training to get that first job and it helps 
remove barriers to training. 
 
JobStart also builds bridges to independence. It will help youth 
receiving social assistance to get those skills that lead to 
employment. They will also help young people who face  



February 21, 1995 

 
332 

special barriers to training or finding jobs. 
 
(1530) 
 
The New Careers Corporation offers employable people a real 
chance to become independent of income support programs. 
The youth-at-work initiative works directly with young people 
aged 17 to 25, business and community organizations, to 
develop new jobs. Financial assistance of 3 to $5,000 per job is 
available to employers to help with training costs and wages. 
 
And through bridges to independence, New Careers 
Corporation will help establish up to 50 support groups 
throughout Saskatchewan and offer help to overcome barriers to 
employment and create business opportunities for young, single 
parents on social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, JobStart must be appreciated in the context of a 
successful labour force development strategy which has been a 
priority of our government. JobStart is part of an increasingly 
successful education and training plan which includes several 
programs. 
 
Let's look at Future Skills, Mr. Speaker, a $10-million training 
program which began last November that is helping both 
workers and employers take advantage of job opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Employers are forming successful working partnerships with 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), our regional colleges and communities to develop 
the skilled labour force we need. Individuals are getting jobs. 
And training projects have been announced throughout the 
province. 
 
Taken together with the other employment and employability 
programs I referred to, this represents a total investment of 
more than $21.2 million — an investment in our people and in 
our future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Future Skills program provides industry skills training so 
that Saskatchewan people are qualified to meet industry needs 
for skilled workers. This involves new approaches to 
apprenticeship, work-based training, and quick skills options to 
enable SIAST and the regional colleges to meet the immediate 
needs of new and expanding Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Hundreds of new employees will be trained for real, permanent 
jobs. Future Skills, Mr. Speaker, also provides funding for 
community organizations and institutions to develop and 
deliver programs leading to employment for designated groups 
such as aboriginal people, women, social assistance recipients, 
people with disabilities, and visible minorities. In other words, 
bridges to independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing, there is really nothing, like 
securing a decent job to help alleviate the inequality, 
oppression, and fear that Premier Romanow's words referred to 
earlier. Or to use the wise words of the Finance minister in the 
budget speech: everyone needs a job, and everyone needing a  

job should have one. 
 
Future Skills and JobStart will help provide both recognized 
and portable skills for participants and build on our strong 
growth sectors of the economy. While we train to meet 
particular employers' needs, we are also ensuring that the 
trainee, the worker, receives long-term benefit in the form of 
skills transferable to other jobs or further training. 
 
Through Future Skills, we are providing employers up to 50 per 
cent of recognized training costs per trainee, provided that 
trainees are placed in long-term and full-time jobs. I emphasize 
the importance of recognized training being done by accredited 
provincial training institutions like SIAST and the regional 
colleges as an integral part of this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is new about these two programs, JobStart 
and Future Skills, is that for the first time in this country, 
government is not giving money to business to train people, 
government is not giving money to SIAST and the regional 
colleges to train people. What government is challenging 
business and SIAST and the regional colleges to do is deliver 
work-based training, that the young person or the trainee will 
receive a publicly recognized credential that they can then use 
to career ladder into other opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new Canada-Saskatchewan Labour Force 
Development Agreement was also recently signed. It provides 
for joint planning with the federal government and includes a 
wide range of labour market initiatives, expanded career 
counselling, assessment and placement, an automated labour 
market information system, new work-study approaches, and 
other innovative approaches involving income support 
programs for trainees. 
 
These exciting, practical programs are proof of our commitment 
to the future of our province, to our young people, and to 
creating the climate for expanded economic and social growth 
and job creation. We have a plan of action for a development of 
our workforce, and it's working. We are a significant part of the 
successful government-wide strategy for economic and social 
renewal. 
 
Another important element in the Education and Training 
budget for '95-96 is an increase of $5.8 million in the 
department's grant to the student aid fund. In addition to student 
loans, we are introducing, jointly with the federal government, 
some limited grants for specific groups of students. This means 
more money for students, especially for disabled students, 
women in non-traditional studies, and part-time students with 
high needs. 
 
The additional funding will provide increased loans for students 
who are most in need. These changes maintain our commitment 
to equal access to education and training for all students and 
ensure a continued focus on supporting those most in need. Mr. 
Speaker, this is support for the most vulnerable and a 
compassionate budget priority. 



February 21, 1995 

 
333 

Mr. Speaker, distance education has a pivotal role to play in 
providing equitable and affordable access to education from 
every corner of our province. New technology has enormous 
potential in meeting our diverse learning needs. Distance 
education is a priority of our government. Accordingly, a 
distance education strategy has been developed that will help 
place Saskatchewan effectively in the global information 
economy. 
 
Effective participation in what is being called the knowledge-
based society is critical to our continued growth and success. 
Education is the means of achieving that participation. Our 
distance education strategy will facilitate and support educators 
in the use of technology, see that learners acquire the high-tech 
skills they need, and position us in the passing lane on the 
information highway. We need people with the skills to drive 
on that highway. There is $1.5 million in new money in the 
budget for distance education as one of our department's 
priority areas. 
 
Briefly, the new distance education initiative outlined in the 
budget will increase the number of distance education training 
sites and enable over 100 schools to gain access to the 
information highway. In other words, Mr. Speaker, we're going 
to wire and cable 100 schools in the province. We're going to 
support the education communities and build partnerships 
through a special departmental education and technology unit. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, we're going to support rural and 
northern Saskatchewan with the necessary resources so that 
distance education can be delivered in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're also going to electronically link into 
elementary and secondary schools across Canada through 
SchoolNet. And we will be developing multimedia courses in 
partnership with the film and video industry and the software 
industry in our province. 
 
As well, we're providing new funding for new delivery and 
technology training courses. And we'll provide ongoing support 
to SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) 
for state-of-the-art Saskatchewan education and training 
network. 
 
In the coming year the Government of Saskatchewan has 
committed over $7 million to the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network for the operations of its two 
interactive educational networks. SCN will continue to play a 
major role in the development and delivery of distance 
education initiatives, and in partnership with the government, 
they will work to unveil a new range of education and training 
options for Saskatchewan people. 
 
SCN will continue to work with the government to develop a 
distance education strategy for Saskatchewan. SCN's highly 
successful distance education satellite trading network receives 
active learners in . . . reaches active learners in rural and remote 
communities to deliver credit and skills programing. SCN's 
cable network delivers credit programing, curriculum support,  

and informal educational programing to 246 Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Distance ed, Mr. Speaker, is a window on the future. We can 
break down the barriers of distance and open the doors to 
greater educational opportunities for learners everywhere. Our 
people will have the information skills and the opportunities to 
learn them. Our province will be assured a success in a global 
information economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are important reallocations of resources in 
this budget to address the needs of children with serious social, 
emotional, and behavioural problems. As I told school trustees 
at their last annual convention, special education is an area that 
warrants special consideration. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, our government is delivering on my 
promise to address this need and allocate the resources. There is 
$4.8 million reallocated in this budget package for children and 
youth with behaviour problems, as a result of a special 
education review that our government ordered, and in 
consultation with our education partners, including many 
parents. 
 
In one way or another, we target a total of about $50 million to 
meet the special educational needs of Saskatchewan children. 
This is one more example of our government's dedication to 
alleviating inequality and ensuring equity in education and 
training in Saskatchewan. 
 
There is a spectre, Mr. Speaker, that threatens our many 
achievements. We may all have to face the difficult choices 
which a federal budget that is driven by deficit reduction may 
present us. 
 
One scenario being presented by the federal Liberals is to roll 
health, education, and social service transfers from the federal 
government to the province into one big fund. If that one big 
fund is significantly reduced in total, then all of us will face 
some very difficult choices. 
 
Having said that, let me suggest that the Saskatchewan 
experience, the NDP experience, can help the federal Liberals 
and other provinces. The NDP have reduced our deficit 
successfully. We're the first government in Canada to do so. 
And we've balanced the provincial budget in one term. And we 
will continue to pay down the debt, racked up by those Tories, 
through future balanced budgets. 
 
Everybody in Saskatchewan, every living soul in Saskatchewan, 
has contributed to deficit reduction. We've all shared in the 
pain. Today I want to remind us all that we accomplished this at 
a time when we continued to protect the most vulnerable among 
us. We have stuck to a compassionate agenda. 
 
Today I invite Mr. Martin, the federal Liberal Finance minister, 
and the other Liberals in Ottawa, to follow our example and our 
lead, not to go down the deficit reduction road that we have  



February 21, 1995 

 
334 

seen in some other provinces like the Tories in Alberta. I say 
that the federal deficit can be reduced without massive lay-offs 
of people. I say that the deficit can be reduced without huge 
increases in tuition fees and abandoning of facilities or reducing 
kindergartens. We gain nothing by reducing the quality of our 
social programs in this country, including education, health, and 
social services. 
 
I'd say to Mr. Martin and his other federal Liberals that 
Saskatchewan's experience shows that deficit reduction can be 
achieved without compromising our basic principles. We see 
protecting the most vulnerable and managing of our resources 
in a fair and compassionate manner as fundamental principles 
That is the Saskatchewan way; that is the way of our pioneers 
and our ancestors, and that is the way of this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We in this province have the 
innovation to face the future with confidence. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, in 1986 when I first came to this House as a member 
of the opposition, we were often embarrassed by the kind of 
governing that had gone on in this province. It was 
embarrassing. 
 
We knew and we often said, like our pioneers and our ancestors 
had said to us, a penny saved is a penny earned. Every penny 
counts. And this government has watched every penny of public 
spending to get to that magic day of last Thursday when we 
went from being the basket case of Canada, where we had the 
highest per capita deficit in all of Canada, to be the first 
government in all of Canada to balance our budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we did it two years early. We did it two 
years early. Because not only have we balanced 1994-95, we 
are predicting that we will balance our budgets into the future. 
 
Now there we have the spectacle of the federal Liberals, not 
unlike the Liberals in this legislature who, when it comes to 
times before elections, they tend to electioneer on the left. But 
when it comes to after the election and after they've been 
elected, they govern from the right — they govern from the 
right. 
 
(1545) 
 
And who do they propose to cut from in this deficit reduction 
exercise in Ottawa? They're going to cut health spending, 
they're going to cut education spending, and they're going to cut 
social services — the very programs that make this country 
Canada, the very programs that make us different than the 
Americans south of us. 
 
What did we do? Obviously health and education are big budget 
items. Obviously social services are big items. But we took a 
look at every solitary budget item and we made funding 
reductions. We didn't target the most vulnerable, we didn't 
target the poorest, we didn't target the unemployed, we didn't 
target aboriginal people, we didn't target visible minorities, we  

didn't target the arts community — we touched everybody in a 
fair and compassionate way. 
 
And I say to our federal Liberals who govern from the right 
after they've electioneered on the left, that there is a message 
from the young people in this country. And that message is, that 
while Mr. Martin received a public education and Mr. 
Axworthy received a public education and Mr. Chrétien 
received a public education, don't force the young people of this 
country to be stuck with the biggest debt, in the form of student 
loans, by creating huge inequities in Canada by socking it to the 
provinces when it comes to health, education, and social service 
spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal deficit has to be reduced. The money 
markets are showing us that. The bond agencies and the credit 
rating agencies are telling us that. But don't do it at the expense 
of the most needy individuals through reduced federal cash 
transfers to the province. Look at everything. 
 
My question for the federal Liberals — and I haven't heard 
anything from the provincial Liberals — is why on earth would 
we even consider transferring the national debt to people like 
students, people who can least afford it? 
 
That's what our Premier means when he talks about fairness for 
individuals, not just governments, when evaluating the federal 
proposals. Education and training, Mr. Speaker, are essential 
components of our province's government-wide plan for social 
and economic renewal — our Partnership for Renewal plan — a 
plan that's working. 
 
Our role in education involves the human side of this renewal. 
With JobStart, Future Skills, and related help for our schools 
with the problems that come from our society, we have 
implemented a comprehensive plan which clearly links jobs and 
training and fosters hope in our youth and their parents and 
their grandparents. 
 
We're encouraging greater involvement by employers to training 
people for jobs that exist now. We're building on both of our 
traditions of excellence in education and the optimism that our 
economic recovery has spawned. We're ensuring that 
individuals gain not only employment but training  training 
recognized in ways that provide transferability to other jobs and 
further education and training. 
 
If Saskatchewan is going to prosper in the new knowledge- and 
information-based economic environment, Saskatchewan 
citizens must have access to post-secondary education based on 
what's in their head and not what's in their wallets or where they 
happen to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this historic budget places a priority on linking 
education and training to employability. JobStart, Future Skills, 
the multi-party training plan for northern Saskatchewan, and the 
comprehensive set of initiatives under the labour force 
development strategy — these initiatives highlight this year's 
budget. We're offering both hope and real jobs for our  



February 21, 1995 

 
335 

Saskatchewan young people. We have important new initiatives 
in distance education, as well as a more effective student loan 
plan. It's important to recognize that budget planning took place 
in the context of our government's priorities. We have taken an 
integrated approach; we've adopted a coordinated plan that is 
working and it has brought us out of an abyss of debt. 
 
We're going to continue to build on the excellence of our 
education and training system in the province. Mr. Speaker, 
change has created the need for our citizens to continually 
upgrade and acquire new skills and knowledge. And this 
extends to all learners, from post-secondary students, 
apprentices and workers in training programs, to adults in basic 
education or upgrading programs, or newcomers who are 
learning English as a second language. 
 
I want to reinforce what I said earlier about our ongoing 
educational priorities that also have the force of budget dollars 
behind them. In particular, special education, notably integrated 
schooling services, approximately 300,000 will again be 
available to fund school- and community-based programs for 
children and youth at risk. 
 
This is a crucial part of our dedication to those who are most 
vulnerable, through the unique action plan for children, an 
approach that Saskatchewan has pioneered. Growing numbers 
of young people are coming to school unable to learn because 
of complex problems that form barriers to learning. These 
barriers place them at risk of failure in school and then failure 
in their later lives. 
 
Our schools are a natural and often convenient location to 
provide an expanded range of services to these children and 
their families. And through the action plan for children we're 
providing those children with the health, mental health, justice, 
recreation, education, and social services that they require. And 
we're doing this, Mr. Speaker, in an integrated and responsive 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're putting forward an exciting vision for a 
better future for our Saskatchewan children and our families. 
We're helping teachers and school boards cope with the 
challenges that children with special needs and problems 
present. We are building hope for children who may have little 
else. 
 
The ongoing voluntary school division amalgamation process is 
proceeding well. Public consultations in communities and with 
grass roots people is working. It's cooperation in action, a 
principle that we all should learn to live by. The Saskatchewan 
approach may be seen in contrast to the severe cuts in school 
divisions elsewhere, like Alberta which is Conservative, and 
Nova Scotia which is Liberal. 
 
I find it interesting as well that the recent Ontario royal 
commission report on learning states that slashing the number 
of school divisions has very little to do with genuine 
educational reform. There has been no deliberate sacrificing of 
the quality of the education in our province in the name of  

budget restraints here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we're along the road to developing an 
integrated, comprehensive post-secondary system that provides 
education to all Saskatchewan adults. We serve more than 
113,000 full- and part time students every year. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we've introduced changes to the 
legislation governing private vocational schools that will 
enhance consumer and student protection, and build public 
confidence in this part of our education and training system. 
 
For many rural residents, changes to the regional college system 
will allow colleges greater flexibility in programs and bring 
them more directly into the economic and social renewal of our 
province. Support for local communities is another abiding 
principle of our administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget provides more than $11.7 million in 
funding to our aboriginal partners in education — the Dumont 
Technical Institute, Gabriel Dumont Institute, NORTEP 
(northern teacher education program), NORPAC (Northern 
Professional Access College), SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban 
native teacher education program), the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College, northern training program, and non-status 
Indian and Metis programs. 
 
Working with Indian and Metis citizens more effectively is an 
ongoing priority of our government. We will own our future, 
Mr. Speaker, by building on our excellence and challenging our 
young people. We are creating an environment where education 
and training have the capacity to evolve and change and adapt. 
 
With this budget, Mr. Speaker, we're seeking to ensure that our 
young people have access to the education and training that 
they so desperately need to benefit from the province's 
economic recovery. The job creation and training initiatives that 
I've described today are an integral part of our Partnership for 
Renewal, our Agriculture 2000, and our balanced budget plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're investing in our province's future. This 
budget passes the toughest economic tests. Even more 
important, this budget passes the stern tests of principle that our 
Premier has so often described. We are building equity where 
there was inequality, opportunity where there was oppression, 
and hope where there was fear. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Carlson: — As this is my first opportunity to address the 
Assembly this session, I'd like to welcome you back, Mr. 
Speaker, and all members of the Assembly back for this 
session. I know it's going to be very productive, as it always is. 
 
I want to first of all start off by congratulating the Premier of 
the province of Saskatchewan for giving us leadership and 
direction in the last difficult years that we've had; difficult years 
that we've had to put back together. Not difficult years that 
we've put on ourselves, but sort of a government that's been  



February 21, 1995 

 
336 

trying to put back the province to the stature of what it once 
was. And I want to commend the Premier for giving the 
leadership and direction in that area. 
 
I also want to commend the Finance minister for the budget that 
she delivered last Thursday. It was a balanced budget and the 
first balanced budget in Saskatchewan in the last . . . since 
1982, and the first balanced budget in Canada in a long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year when I was speaking on the budget, I sent 
a challenge out to the federal government. And I challenged the 
federal government to come out with a plan — a plan that 
would move our country, move our federal government, into a 
situation that we in Saskatchewan find ourselves in now. 
 
Last year when I was addressing the Assembly, I had no idea as 
how close we were going to be in the province of Saskatchewan 
to balancing our budget. I thought it might be another year and 
a half or two away, but it come a lot quicker. But if you take 
action, and the quicker you take action, the quicker you're going 
to realize your goal. 
 
And I challenged the federal government to come out with a 
plan that would not attack the basis of our society, to balance 
the budget on them sectors; to come out with a plan like the 
province of Saskatchewan come out with a plan. And it shows 
today, because we're in a surplus situation the year we're in now 
of $119 million; a projected surplus in the coming year of '95-
96 of $25 million; and three more consecutive surpluses in '96-
97, '97-98, and '98-99. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, we're taking the initiative and we're 
going into a debt plan. We're talking about how much we think 
we can reduce the total debt of our province by, over the next 
four or five years. So we're way ahead of the federal 
government already. They haven't even started, although I 
believe they're going to start when they come down with their 
budget maybe on February 28, if they have the determination to 
do it. 
 
And I think the people want a plan. That's what I heard during 
the last provincial election and the last few years. They want to 
know where they're going. They don't want to have a 
government going off one direction one day and off in another 
direction the other day. They want steady, steady, sure progress. 
And that's what this government has delivered, and that's what 
we need on a national basis: something that's steady, slow but 
sure, in the right direction. And we would achieve a better-off 
country if that was the case. 
 
I want to spend a few minutes on health care. I believe we had 
to change the system in order to save it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last summer I had the opportunity to spend a few 
days with some relatives of mine who live in the United States. 
My cousin's wife works in a medical clinic in Sioux Falls, 
South Dakota. And she was telling me, she said, don't let 
anybody tell that down in the United States here that the  

doctors just say, okay, we'll treat you with this or we'll treat you 
with that. Before the doctor starts treatment, they have to get the 
okay from the insurance company that insures that person. If 
you have a flood in your basement in your house, you don't 
throw everything out and send the bill to the insurance 
company. You have an adjuster. So the American system is 
very, very tied to the treatment that you're going to receive by 
what the insurance companies say. 
 
And if we were going to allow our system to continue on like it 
had, we would've entered into a two-tier system. We would've 
had insurance companies having to cover people and paying 
thousands of dollars possibly in premiums a year. 
 
(1600) 
 
So I believe we had to change it to save it. The changes are 
positive. 
 
We've heard lots of fearmongering about people not having 
access to the system. And I want to say that, on the day the 
House opened, in the morning I was here for the proroguing of 
the session. And I was just in the cafeteria, going to have a bite 
to eat before the session opened, and I got a phone call that my 
mother had a stroke. So I went home. And my mother's house 
where she lives on a farm, where she's lived all her married life 
. . . and it will be 59 years. 
 
And she's 10 miles from the hospital. It took the ambulance 15 
minutes to get there — 15 minutes, Mr. Speaker. Not an hour 
and a half, not three and a half hours — 15 minutes. She was in 
constant observation for two days, and the third morning she 
was sitting up in her chair. She was getting terrific care, 
excellent care, and moved out of intensive care and has been 
walking for the last week and is now booked in for 
rehabilitation into the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this morning I had a meeting with the rest 
of my family members and the doctor and the nurses on that 
ward and the social worker, talking about informing the family 
about what my mother might be going through in the future 
ahead. And I think that's the type of thing we're talking about — 
more consultative process for the family members and the 
patient and a more healthier system. 
 
In fact they said any time we want we can even take my mother 
out for a few hours, to go home even for a while. That's the type 
of thing we're talking about — more of a rehabilitation, more of 
a wellness concept. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the last little while we've seen some of 
the media outlets I think have been sort of acting a little bit like 
they're pro-Liberal. They're talking about the Liberals got no 
baggage. Well, Mr. Speaker, anybody who can remember the 
Ross Thatcher government in this province of 1964 to 1967 — 
no, 1971, sorry — seven lean, long years. 
 
Or the federal government under Pierre Trudeau, anybody that 
remembers that. Or if they can't remember that, if they just look  



February 21, 1995 

 
337 

and find some articles and read some history back in that period 
of time, they will find out about governments that are not acting 
in an accountable manner in communicating with the people 
and trying to do their best, but acting, I believe, in an 
irresponsible way, as the governments of Liberal governments 
of the past. 
 
And when the third party, the Liberal Party today, are talking 
about three areas. They want us to spend more money in areas, 
they want us to cut more taxes, and they want to pay our debt 
down quicker. Well, Mr. Speaker, that just doesn't add up. I 
mean you can't spend more money, you can't cut more taxes, 
and you're not going to pay the debt down faster by doing that. 
 
It has to be planned, it has to be sustainable, and it has to be 
workable. And if it's rational and it's been well thought out and 
it's planned, it'll work. But you just can't cut; you can't spend 
more to achieve a higher surplus. It doesn't add up. And when 
the election is called, Mr. Speaker, when the election is called, 
the voters are going to have to check out the credibility of the 
Liberal Party. Because that is going to be key, is their 
credibility. 
 
I want to spend a few minutes now on jobs. I think that jobs is 
one of the most important issues facing this province today. It 
has been for a long time. 
 
And if we take on the responsibility of jobs and jobs creation 
like we did with balancing the budget and setting out a balanced 
budget plan and a debt reduction plan, we will be successful. I 
think I was a bit concerned when we talked about . . . initially 
three years ago about a debt reduction plan or a deficit 
reduction plan. I was concerned we wouldn't be able to achieve 
it. I was a bit worried. And when I was talking about it I knew 
we were going to have to have some good luck. And I'll admit 
we've had some luck, but we've made some of our own luck and 
some luck has come our way. But I never denied that we were 
not going to have to have some good luck. 
 
But when we achieved that . . . and I think that was a bigger 
task than job creation, was to get the deficit under control. And 
now that that's been achieved, I think it's going to be much 
easier to have a job creation program that will meet the needs of 
the workforce in this province; so that there's qualified people 
to fill the jobs that are required. 
 
So there has to be training; there has to be opportunities for 
training; there has to be opportunities for people who wish to 
move off of social services, who want to, to be able to achieve 
that. Because our young people are the future of our province, 
and if they feel they haven't got a future, then there is no future 
because they are our future. 
 
So we have to go into the job market and do the best that we 
can to find as many jobs and to promote as many jobs and job 
training programs as we possibly can. Because like I said 
earlier, if our youth has no future, there is no future. 
 
I guess our family has been a little bit more — I don't know  

what the word is — but a bit more fortunate, I guess, than some 
others as far as finding jobs. I got nieces and nephews who 
have never had too much of a problem finding a job. But I don't 
think that applies to everybody. I think you have to have, you 
know, the opportunity, the family support, confidence building, 
because it's not easy out there. It's not easy to get a job. 
 
And I think that's where the government can fill a role and that's 
what we have to do — that's what we have to do. We have to 
instil confidence in the people, especially our young people, 
confidence in our businesses, so that they feel confident to hire 
and train people. And then we can move forward. 
 
I want close now, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I'm very proud to 
be part of this government and the times that we've gone 
through. I think that we wouldn't have been able to achieve had 
we not been as close a group as we are as a caucus. I think we're 
really a close group. And when we're as close like that, virtually 
nothing can destroy you. And I think that's what's made us so 
successful. 
 
And I just want to say that from now on that the future is going 
to be brighter. We're going to do a good job — we're going to 
do even a better job. And I'm very proud to be part of this, like I 
said before. And I will be supporting the budget. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm also 
pleased to be able to rise here in the House to comment on this 
year's budget address. 
 
I want to comment . . . commend, I should say, the Minister of 
Finance for an inspiring speech, and I'd like to give all of the 
credit for the content of this speech where it so properly 
belongs, and that's to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I first became a member of this government, 
Saskatchewan was on the brink of financial disaster. A province 
of under a million people, we had a projected deficit of $842 
million. The province had had 10 years of deficit budgets, and 
as a result, the debt had ballooned to nearly $15 billion. The 
credit rating agencies had dropped our rating so that it was 
costing us more to borrow. And as a matter of fact, it had risen 
to our third highest expenditure, Mr. Speaker, behind even 
health care . . . just behind, I should say, health care and 
education. 
 
Fewer investors were ready to take a chance on Saskatchewan. 
The national media were calling Saskatchewan a financial 
basket case and predicting bankruptcy. We were teetering on 
the brink of insolvency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can tell you that for a brand-new government and for a new 
member like myself, the task of dealing with this crisis 
sometimes seemed overwhelming. But with the support of the 
people of this great province, we pulled our belts in a notch and  



February 21, 1995 

 
338 

buckled down to the hard work of rebuilding. 
 
We cut government expenditures. Ministers' salaries were cut 
by 5 per cent and MLAs'(Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
salaries continued to be frozen, as they still are today and they 
have been for many years. We cut MLAs' communications 
allowances by 25 per cent. Unlike the past, Mr. Speaker, all 
office equipment is now turned back to the province. 
 
We have changed the rules so that elected officials can no 
longer take their office equipment home with them when they 
are defeated. 
 
The number of government departments have been reduced and 
the departments themselves have also been downsized. 
Saskatchewan trade offices around the world were closed; 
spending on advertising, travel, and supplies were reduced. 
Total operating expenditures have been cut by $300 million 
since 1991. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we've cut government spending by hundreds 
of millions of dollars. By 1998, Mr. Speaker, we still will not 
have as high an operating budget as the previous government 
did in 1991, and that takes into account inflation as well. 
 
In partnerships with communities, we re-crafted and 
streamlined health, education, and social programming so that it 
better met the needs of individuals while becoming more 
financially accountable to taxpayers. None of this was easy on 
anyone, Mr. Speaker, but we pulled together as a province for 
the betterment of all. And it worked, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Finance minister has just told this House that not only will 
the budget be balanced this year and next, but she has also 
introduced a plan which sets out balanced budgets for five years 
to come, Mr. Speaker. Cynics will say those are just 
projections. I say, Mr. Speaker, look at our record — look at our 
record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Minister of Finance also reported that this year 
Saskatchewan will have a surplus of $119 million. Mr. Speaker, 
you will know that I come from a large family. I have 20 nieces 
and nephews, Mr. Speaker, all of them under the age of 11. 
That means, Mr. Speaker, that not one of them has seen in this 
province a surplus budget from any government here in 
Saskatchewan. That is absolutely incredible. 
 
And Saskatchewan will continue to have a surplus. They will 
meet many, many . . . they will have to endure many, many 
hurdles as time goes by. 
 
But the thing that I find most amazing, Mr. Speaker, about the 
budget is that for the first time in more than a decade, 
Saskatchewan has made a payment against its debt. That's right. 
In 1994-1995 we will reduce total debt by $540 million. At a 
rate of 10 per cent, that's already a savings of nearly $54 million 
just on interest alone, and by 1999 we will have reduced the 
total debt by $1.5 billion. 
 

Over a hundred million dollars in interest costs will be saved. 
This can be put back into health care, into education, social 
services and other tax relief. This is what socialism is all about, 
Mr. Speaker: being financially prudent so that we can again 
begin to do the things that this government really wants to do. 
 
This, I believe, is something we should all be extremely proud 
of. As I said, Mr. Speaker, I do not think that I can 
overemphasize this. Every dollar that we put against that debt 
means more of the money that we pay out in interest costs 
becomes available for program enhancements and tax 
reductions. Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to say that 
once again Saskatchewan people and their government have 
rounded the corner and are well on the road to financial 
stability. 
 
But in this budget, we haven't just put money out to pay down 
our debts. Although financial management is very important, 
we believe that this must be balanced against the need to project 
most . . . protect, I should say, the most vulnerable through 
program enhancements and to assist families and small 
businesses through tax reductions. In fact, Mr. Speaker, now 
that we have control of the deficit, we have decided to focus 
our efforts. We're going to pay one-third on debt reduction, one-
third on program enhancements, and another third on tax 
reductions. 
 
(1615) 
 
I'm very pleased that the deficit surtax has been eliminated for 
low income earners and reduced for all provincial residents. To 
accomplish this, an annual reduction against the surtax of up to 
$150 will be provided to each taxpayer. Up to $300 will be 
provided to dual income households. The effect of this 
reduction is that 6,000 low income residents, Mr. Speaker, will 
no longer pay any income tax. With this initiative, we are 
continuing our efforts to protect the most vulnerable, reducing 
tax pressures on Saskatchewan residents while continuing the 
attack on our debt. 
 
A 9 per cent investment tax credit, which applies to capital 
purchases in support of manufacturing and processing activity 
in Saskatchewan, has already come into effect. This will give 
companies incentives to expand their manufacturing and 
processing activities in Saskatchewan and create even more 
jobs. 
 
On July 1st, 1995, the corporation income tax rate for 
manufacturing and processing firms will be reduced. This 
reduction will be tied to a company's presence in Saskatchewan. 
The tax reduction will encourage company growth and 
expansion and will result in increased job creation. I believe 
that this is very important to scrutinize this even closer. 
 
What this incentive does is encourages companies to, firstly, 
come to Saskatchewan and stay here, and for existing 
companies in Saskatchewan to expand and build on the 
resources that we have. 
 



February 21, 1995 

 
339 

This is different than some crazy tax break that sees companies 
come in one day and, after they've reaped the benefits, leave the 
next day or, even worse yet, at night. This is a rather unique 
initiative because it supports Saskatchewan businesses and 
Saskatchewan employees. 
 
The reforestation project is an important initiative for the 
residents in my constituency of Meadow Lake. This project is 
targeted at the youth. More than 200 jobs will be created in the 
North with the planting of over 2 million seedlings. And more 
importantly . . . And most importantly, I should say, Mr. 
Speaker, again I want to re-emphasize, this is targeted at our 
northern youth. 
 
With Mistik Management and NorSask based out of Meadow 
Lake, this project will have very positive implications for our 
constituency and for the constituencies of Athabasca and 
Cumberland House. And with Meadow Lake receiving the 
designation as the Forestry Capital of Canada for 1995, the 
timing of this announcement couldn't be better. 
 
Now to the member from Morse — and I hope the member 
from Maple Creek will pass this on for me — I wanted to say 
that I will give credit where credit is due. The last government 
did initiate a number of projects in this province for which we 
are now seeing positive economic development. One of those 
projects was the Millar Western project in Meadow Lake. Not 
everything that they did was a complete disaster, Mr. Speaker. 
But then isn't that what a good new government does? — takes 
what was provided by previous administrations and continues to 
work with the communities. 
 
As well, the work that this government is doing with the federal 
government, aboriginal people, and mining industry, will secure 
500 new, mining-related northern jobs by 1998. This also is 
very good news for the people of the Meadow Lake 
constituency. 
 
This government has introduced another program targeted 
specifically at youth and that's the JobStart program. It will 
provide training and employment opportunities for youth 
entering the workforce. 
 
In the area of health care this government has increased its 
spending on home care services. With the increase in this 
budget, home care services will have seen a 90 per cent increase 
since 1991. This is very important because it supports the needs 
of individuals in their own homes and communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I am pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of 
Education, in cooperation with New Careers Corporation, has 
introduced a new program, called building bridges to 
independence, which will assist unemployed, single parents to 
move back into the workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this budget shows is that through the work 
done by the people of Saskatchewan this province is seeing an 
economic turnaround. In 1992 we have had a negative 
economic growth rate in this province. Now we are seeing one  

of the best growth rates in our entire country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Drilling activity and oil production were up 
substantially in 1994 over 1993, and retail sales were up nearly 
10 per cent in 1994 over the previous year. At 7.3 per cent, 
Saskatchewan continues to have the lowest unemployment rate 
in the country and there has been a dramatic decline in the 
number of people leaving our province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan's population has been increasing since 1992. This 
is a strong sign of confidence in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to digress just a bit here and talk about 
what is being reported locally. You know, Mr. Speaker, that I 
get mildly irritated when I hear Regina and Saskatchewan 
media saying that elected people are out of touch with what's 
going on in Saskatchewan; they spend too much time here in 
the marble palace. I say maybe, just maybe, Mr. Speaker, some 
of the media need to spend a bit more time out in rural 
Saskatchewan. Maybe they're out of touch. Why don't they 
travel to rural Saskatchewan and hear what is really being said. 
 
People in rural Saskatchewan know about tough times and the 
job that had to be done. They understand because that's what 
their life has been all about. They don't make 60 or 70 or 80 or 
even 100,000, I don't know, writing newspaper columns. They 
work hard and they appreciate it when a government works hard 
for them. 
 
Here's what the Meadow Lake Progress said for last Sunday. 
Their headline was: Balanced budget benefits. And it goes on to 
talk about all the benefits that the budget has brought. And the 
Northern Pride, our other weekly newspaper, their headline was 
that: The provincial government focusing on job creation. 
Good, positive reporting, Mr. Speaker. They criticize when they 
should and they compliment when they should. My hat goes off 
to both of our local papers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be a part of a government that 
has been able to work so well in partnership with Saskatchewan 
residents to deal with our financial problems. 
 
Before I close I want to speak briefly about agriculture. I'm very 
pleased to hear the Minister of Agriculture announce the new 
agri-food innovation fund. Our government is going to 
contribute $27 million to this program over the next two years. 
 
The agri-food innovation fund will help create new 
opportunities for investment and commercialization. 
Opportunities will be developed through an industry partnership 
in diversification areas such as specialized crops, specialized 
livestock, horticulture, and agricultural processing. The fund 
will also strengthen the infrastructure and activities in 
traditional crops and livestock sectors. Farmers in 
Saskatchewan will see the benefits of this fund through higher 
crop yields, better animal products, and new opportunities for 
their farms. Mr. Speaker, the agri-food innovation fund helps  



February 21, 1995 

 
340 

fulfil the commitment made to provide direct funding for 
development and diversification as part of the government's 
agricultural strategy, Agriculture 2000. 
 
But our work, Mr. Speaker, is far from over. I believe this 
budget marks the turning point in Saskatchewan's history. With 
our deficit crisis behind us and our debt firmly in hand, we now 
need to focus our attention on building a new Saskatchewan 
with a bright opportunity filled . . . with a bright, opportunity-
filled future for the year 2000. 
 
I look forward to working with the people of this great province 
as we meet this challenge head on. I look forward to the 
dawning of this bright new day. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I've been 
listening with a great deal of interest as the government 
members have been droning on and on about how good things 
are going throughout the province now, and they seem to be 
taking a great deal of the credit for it. But I think in the next 30 
or so odd minutes we'll challenge some of the good feelings and 
in fact why some of this good news is coming about. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, this is an election budget in fact, same 
as the throne speech, where there's nothing controversial. 
They're trying to come up with as much good news as possible. 
But in fact I think what's going to come clear is that what good 
news there is in this budget is not because of anything good that 
they have done for the province but in fact it was done all on 
the backs of people, especially people that were very much in 
need of services, and in rural Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
And I think these are the people that are going to remember this 
government and this budget, in fact this term of office, more 
than anyone, Mr. Speaker. And the people that I think will 
remember most of course are going to be the nurses, the 
doctors, the people who relied on any form of health care, 
health services, in rural Saskatchewan  those communities, 
those 52 communities, that lost their hospitals, all forms of 
health care. 
 
And in fact even with all the news that's coming out of late of 
20.3 million in home care, really if you take a look at what 
these communities have in health care, the reason — as the 
Minister of Health has been talking about — that they've 
alleviated fears . . . in fact what's happened is that the people 
are more or less giving up on the government to actually 
address the problems and try and change what they have done, 
and that has devastated health care in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Other people that are going to remember this government when 
it comes time to receiving or not receiving credit for balancing 
the budget will be the elderly. I know in the Shaunavon 
constituency, the constituency I represent, there's been a series 
of meetings called for, held by the seniors of the community of  

Shaunavon in regards to the care for the elderly in the 
communities. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You bet, they need a new home down 
there. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Absolutely, there's a need for a new 
nursing home in Shaunavon. This government to date has pretty 
much neglected all their responsibilities in this community and 
many other communities in, in fact, care for the elderly. Those 
people, I think, that are in need of this care, they're going to 
remember full well, if there's any good news to come out of this 
budget, who is going to deserve this. 
 
Also farmers  now these are the farmers that, since the 
government of the day took away their programs through 
retroactive legislation, passed legislation to state that the 
programs and legislation never been in place, giving them a 
certain amount of protection . . . well the farmers are too going 
to remember exactly who it was, in fact, that it was . . . to create 
so much pain as they had in rural Saskatchewan. But in fact it 
was the farmers, and we'll discuss this a little later on, that 
many of the farm leaders are given the credit to for actually 
balancing the books of the province of this year. 
 
And in fact others, not just the farmers that had to deal with 
retroactive legislation, but judges and civil servants and all the 
people who that government, the NDP government, broke the 
contracts with, Mr. Speaker, contracts that meant so much to 
the lives of those people. 
 
Also the rural communities that gave up so many things such as 
their buses. STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) 
services were cut right back; well to nothing in a great many 
communities but to almost nothing in many or several others. 
Or utility offices — we see in many of the communities that I 
represent, where they've lost their SaskEnergy offices or their 
SaskPower offices  pulled those jobs out of there. And now 
in fact they don't have the service, let alone just the jobs. We're 
not talking about whether or not they just have the jobs in town, 
but they don't have the services. You're now asking people to 
give up what I guess was once quite a good service provided by 
our health care professionals, SaskPower, SaskEnergy. And 
now they're talking about waiting two or three hours for some 
of these services. 
 
In fact we've got many, many stories, many letters, where 
people have had to wait an hour to an hour and a half for health 
care services. And now the Minister of Health is trying to brag 
about the successes of the government of the day? 
 
I notice they don't do it in rural Saskatchewan. Whenever 
they're going to do any bragging about their health care agenda, 
they do it right here in the safety of Regina, because it wouldn't 
be accepted, wouldn't be tolerated, that talk from the Minister 
of Health out in the rural communities that they've devastated. 
 
And I guess a lot of the other people that are going to have to sit 
back and decide whether you deserve or you don't deserve  



February 21, 1995 

 
341 

credit will be the taxpayers, because you've raised I think it's 
over a billion and half dollars more in tax revenue. 
 
Now I'm not sure just how many . . . it's hundreds of different 
fees and taxes that you've played with, little bits all along. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn't matter what service that we're looking at 
today, but especially utilities, that these members raised until 
they're exorbitant rates. 
 
Also, I mean we have to give a lot of credit to the oil companies 
that the government of the day . . . I remember when they were 
in opposition and they had then their researcher, Craig Dotson, 
do a paper — I notice many of them smiling now, they recall 
the paper — the one where it was $5.5 billion of debt was 
created by the oil companies. And the member from North 
Battleford, he remembers that full well, because him and I have 
talked about this; and he's sitting there laughing now. 
 
(1630) 
 
But the NDP opposition of the day remember full well that they 
were doing nothing but throwing blame on the shoulders of oil 
companies. And now we sit back and we take a look at who was 
actually pulling these people out of some of their problems. It's 
oil companies. In fact this year alone, when they budgeted $20 
million in revenue from the land leases, in fact they've done 
well over the 200 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact, a good portion of that money is from the south-
west part of the province, where I'm from. And I've asked many 
of these ministers to consider, when so much of the revenue is 
coming from the south-west corner of the province, and in fact 
right in my constituency that I represent, or the member from 
Maple Creek, why it is that they can't take some of these funds 
and instead of funnelling everything into Regina and keeping 
all your bureaucracies heavy, and keeping political staff the way 
you do, why can't you spend some money out in these rural 
areas? Now these are the areas that you've closed the hospitals 
down in and closed the SaskPower offices and on and on and 
on. But why couldn't you have taken some of the monies and 
spent it on highway programs? 
 
Well I think at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, there's going to 
be a lot of people who are going to sit back and say, well you 
know, I really don't want to give this group any credit. And it is 
nice to have the books of the province finally balanced, but why 
is it that everyone, Mr. Speaker, in the province has been asked 
to sacrifice — and sacrifice they did — while in fact what has 
happened is we take a look at the Premier's operation where 
they've actually had increases in salaries of $188,000 in this 
year's budget? 
 
Now there was no increase in staff, so what we're talking about 
are huge salary increases to those people that are now there. 
Your political hacks is what they are. And I think the people of 
the province are going to deserve an answer. 
 
The Leader of the Liberal Party asked these questions in 
question period today. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Premier  

couldn't even give an answer. He had to try and change it, throw 
some ridiculous arguments out, because he is afraid, he is 
afraid, Mr. Speaker, of answering to the people of the province 
why in fact he has created as much havoc as he has and kept all 
the political people around him, in fact giving them increases 
— as they did a year ago. 
 
Many of the members will recall a little over a year ago when 
the ministerial assistants received a twelve and a half per cent 
pay increase. That was also done at a time when in fact you 
were closing hospitals and making sure that dental therapists 
weren't having work, and nurses; highway crews were being 
shut down. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that this raw type of politics that 
these members of the government like to play, I think that's 
going to come back and haunt them, and fairly soon in fact. 
 
If they think they've come down with a great-news election 
budget, I say let's call it and take it to the people and see if 
you've actually fooled them or not. I don't think you have. That's 
not what we're hearing out in the rural areas, I'll tell you that. 
 
Instead of me raining, of course, on the government's parade, I 
think what we should do is maybe take a look at some of their 
own budget . . . in their own budget document some of their 
own figures, Mr. Speaker. And I note in the Department of 
Agriculture and Food — let's look at their own budget 
document — in administration, salaries increased $72,000. 
 
We have agriculture assistance. Now this here is the part of the 
budget in Ag and Food, Mr. Speaker, where it talks about the 
spending on programs. The interim red meat production 
equalization program, they've actually cut that, eliminated it 
altogether, for a saving of $4.7 million. Here's another one, 
grants for general agriculture interests, $3.11 million. 
 
Doesn't it make one wonder, Mr. Speaker, when you have the 
programs being eliminated . . . And in fact crop insurance was 
another line that was of a lot of concern here. Provincial share 
of crop premiums, just about $8 million less, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What that tells you is that there is a lot less participants in the 
crop insurance program than there were a year previous. And in 
fact the administration of that has actually went down 1.5 
million, is just indicators that the program isn't working any 
longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So then it comes back to the original argument. If the programs 
aren't there, if they're eliminating many of the programs, in fact 
cutting others back to bare bones, how then can you have 
increases in administration of this size? 
 
Somebody has got to come clean here. This is a government 
that had an opportunity to really do something in this budget, in 
fact pare down government. And that's what . . . it's not just the 
Liberal Party that's asking them to get their act together as far as 
reducing the size of government, it's the general public. It's  



February 21, 1995 

 
342 

what our constituents are telling us. It's what people all around 
the province are telling us. 
 
If we look in Ag and Food, land and regulatory management, 
salaries up $189,000. Staff, they needed another eight staff 
members in Department of Ag and Food to provide less 
programs. I'll just quickly go . . . policy and planning, salaries 
up $144,000. In ag research, salaries up 31,000 but grants are 
down 400,000. So what they're actually doing is less, paying out 
less to the people that actually have hands on, can do something 
with the money. But they need more people to do it and they're 
going to pay them more besides. 
 
If we go to Economic Development, I notice administration on 
page 39. We are spending $93,000 more in general 
administration in Economic Development. Well the minister in 
charge is sitting here. Why in fact when he gets up to speak on 
the budget, why doesn't he explain to us why this is? 
 
Diversification, salaries up $312,000. Operating is down, which 
is telling me they're doing less and they're paying $312,000 
more. Well I'm telling you that's the savings in one of the 
hospitals that you've closed down. And you tell me where the 
people's priorities are? What they're telling us is that you had 
choices and you've made the wrong choices. I'm not so sure that 
you don't have time to perhaps bring in another budget or some 
corrections that would fix some of the problems, some of the 
devastation that you've created. 
 
Policy and coordination in Economic Development, salaries are 
up $32,000; operating is down — it's about $20,000. There 
again, you're doing less, but you're paying out more. 
 
Business investment programs, salaries up, $170,000; 
operating, or the grants paid out — $1.15 million less. So 
they're doing less again and they're getting $170,000 more for 
doing it. 
 
Education and Training — we're just going to quickly go 
through some of these sections, Mr. Speaker, — 16 more staff 
members. In Energy, administration rose by $197,000. Staff, 
they have 16 more staff now in Energy and Mines than they had 
before. In mineral revenues, salaries up, 142,000. 
 
I mean in every one of these subvotes that we look at — salaries 
in geology and mines, up 178,000; petroleum and natural gas, 
salaries up 132,000; resource, policy and economics, salaries up 
60,000. 
 
Every page we turn to. Here's Environment and Resource 
Management, administration up $119,000. In administration in 
Environment and Resource Management, salaries take up 
$314,000 in this subvote; environmental assessment, salaries up 
103,000, on and on and on. I don't know, to me it doesn't sound 
like this is reducing the size of government. In fact salaries, 
2.106 million in operations. 
 
In Exec Council — this is the interesting one — this is the one 
where we talked about a little while ago where they actually  

kept the 88 staff members that don't have to have job 
descriptions, don't have to apply for their jobs and such because 
of course they're political. And I know there has been some 
comparisons made to staff in Alberta where the Premier's office 
is run by some 46 staff. But we have increases of $188,000 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from North 
Battleford can sit there and laugh, but I'm asking him if there's 
anyone in your constituency that needs care like they do in 
mine, where they need hospitals and they need highways. 
Otherwise I can see why he thinks it's funny to spend it on 
political hacks in the Premier's office. 
 
Let's take another department. Here's the Department of Health. 
We have actually staff increases, by the looks of it. Now so 
much of the staff, I think, of the Department of Health, as was 
said in the throne speech, there's some 1,400 staff people that 
are being moved out into the health districts. However when we 
take a look at the salaries, everything seems to be going up. 
There wasn't a dramatic drop in the salaries for administration 
in the Department of Health that now is in place in Regina. We 
didn't drop that a lot, but there's been huge increases to the 
district health boards. 
 
Now if you ask anyone, say out in Mankota or Climax or 
Lafleche or Rockglen or Coronach or Ponteix or Eastend or 
Gull Lake or Vanguard — I could go on and on and on — well 
what is it that you really needed in health care in rural 
Saskatchewan? Did you need more policy and planning people? 
I suspect they'll say no. But you know, if you could maybe keep 
a couple of hospital beds open and some nurses and, you know, 
because usually what they ask for is something very common 
sense. 
 
If we look under district health services and support, 
Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation went down $921,000. They 
reduced cancer research funds; at the same time district health 
board elections, $975,000. So they took money out of the 
cancer research to fund health board elections which they 
should have had last fall. 
 
That's what the opposition parties were asking for. Have them 
last fall in conjunction with the municipal elections so you 
wouldn't have these huge costs. But now that they've made that 
mistake — they weren't prepared to go out there and have 30 
elections that they knew they would lose badly at — we're now 
spending almost $1 million and they're taking it out of the 
cancer research fund to do it. I say, shame on you. 
 
District support administration rose by $1.5 million. It's a 
department I think that the Premier or the Health minister is 
going to have to revisit in this budget document because you've 
made some serious errors but I think that you have some time to 
fix this up. 
 
Here's something of interest, Mr. Speaker. Highways and 
Transportation, we actually had a staff reduction of 70 people. 
On the surface it sounds good and you'll hear this all throughout 
their speeches, some of these good notes. But when we have to 
go right into the document line by line and have a 



February 21, 1995 

 
343 

 look at where were the 70 jobs, I look at item no. 3, 
preservation and maintenance. Well the salaries actually 
decreased in this area, $2.437 million; capital operating 
dropped $4.206 million. So what we're talking about in this 
section is that the people, the crews that are actually in the 
trucks that go out; they're in the graders and the tractors and 
they're either building highways or repairing highways or 
repairing bridges or whatever. They're keeping our highways 
safe for the motorists of the province. They're the ones who had 
to give up their jobs. 
 
But let's see who didn't give up their jobs. In item no. 6, 
transportation policy and programs, now there's what we need. 
We don't need highway crews; we need more policy. Oh, if this 
isn't typical of what the government's doing. Salaries rose 
$284,000. Well I'm telling any member over there, get into your 
vehicle and drive out in the rural areas and ask them, do you 
really think we need more people in policy for the Department 
of Highways or do we need more people fixing highways? It's 
so obvious to everyone but those few members. 
 
Well let's take a look at a few other . . . Indian and Metis Affairs 
Secretariat, policy department rose $206,000. But yet if you 
look at item no. 3, total for support for aboriginal organizations 
and issues, dropped $125,000. So there again, there again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think that the noise level in the 
House is getting just a little too loud. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you for bringing them to order, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at what these 
people are providing, well there again in this department they're 
providing less but they're getting a lot more revenue to do it. 
 
Department of Justice — we see staff went up by 71. That's 
quite a few more employees in the Department of Justice. But 
given, I guess, the record of the government and everything 
that's been transpiring, maybe it's necessary. Administration 
rose $411,000; court services, salaries rose $162,000; legal 
services, salaries rose by it looks like about 300,000 . . . on and 
on and on. 
 
Department of Labour — we have the Labour minister in here 
now. Administration rose $118,000. The planning and policy 
department rose $133,000 — got more staff to do it. 
 
I could go on and on. I think it's becoming quite clear. 
Municipal Government, we have 12 more staff members. 
Provincial Secretary, Protocol Office — now this is the office 
that takes care of all the parties for the heads of state — rose 
$354,000. And we need 11 more staff members to take care of 
the Provincial Secretary. And everyone, Mr. Speaker, knows 
full well that it is a political office in this case. And what all 
those 11 members are doing, I question if they're not all 
involved in preparing for the upcoming election, Mr. Speaker. 
 

On and on and on it goes. Social Services, administration up, 
goes up 361,000. I could go on and on. 
 
But I think it's becoming quite clear what actually is happening 
is government is getting larger. In the departments where they 
didn't get more staff they at least got large pay raises because 
you can't have salary increases continuously. You can't have 
salary increases continuously like it is in line after line after line 
of your budget document. You should be ashamed, is what you 
should be. 
 
If you take a look at what some of the news columnists and 
community leaders, the auditors and others have to say about 
your budget, we wonder if they're going to give you credit. 
 
Well here we have out of the Star-Phoenix and I quote: 
 
 The provincial government got its budget deficit under 

control largely because it threw yours and mine into 
disarray and because 1994 was a year of economic 
windfalls. 

 
That's exactly what it was, Mr. Speaker. They taxed the 
taxpayers of this province, they taxed the taxpayers of this 
province. They taxed the taxpayers of this province about a 
billion and a half dollars more, and in fact the same oil 
companies that they rigorously attacked before the election are 
. . . That's where the revenues came from, Mr. Speaker. That 
and the fact that through retroactive legislation, they destroyed 
farm programs. 
 
If we take a look at . . . Here's an article, or an editorial by 
D'Arce McMillan of the Leader-Post: Saskatchewan farm 
leaders like the NDP's balanced budget but think agriculture 
should be given the credit for helping making it all possible. 
They pointed to their gross revenue insurance plan which, partly 
because of crop prices, made it so that there was $760 million 
more for this government to have some access to. 
 
Here's another one, Mr. Speaker: Rural Saskatchewan 
shouldered its load on the way to a balanced provincial budget. 
 
And roughly what the editorial is about is that it was the 
farmers. There's $188 million that the farmers had to give up 
and do without so that they could do it. But it doesn't matter. 
 
There's many more. The auditor's report saying, you know, he's 
not sure why it was you couldn't come clean with the people. 
You're still only showing them 60 per cent of the books. 
 
You got some of the more known columnists in the province, 
some respected columnists. Here's Murray Mandryk of the 
Leader-Post in a comparison of Roy Romanow versus Ralph 
Klein. And, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say that he's actually 
wishing he was an Albertan after taking a look at this budget. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think at the end of the day what we're going 
to be doing is letting the facts speak for themselves. The people 
of the province are going to find out from us what the truth is,  



February 21, 1995 

 
344 

what this budget is really doing to them; in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that the people of Saskatchewan have made all the sacrifices. 
The government opposite, I've heard some of the members talk 
about the sacrifices that they have made as MLAs or they have 
made as cabinet ministers. That's an insult to even talk about 
those kind of cuts when you've decimated rural Saskatchewan 
the way you have. 
 
But spending has increased 4 per cent this year, Mr. Speaker. 
That doesn't sound like a government who is really concerned 
about getting its act together. And by the end of this fiscal year, 
this NDP government will have taken in $1.7 billion more from 
Saskatchewan people in taxes, revenues, and fees. In returning 
. . . I mean they're bragging about some of these tax breaks they 
did give, the one tax break they did give which amounts to 
$17.4 million. That's quite a cry from the 1.7 billion in taxes 
and fees that they've been charging people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan's overall tax rate remains the second highest in 
the country, trailing only to Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. A 
family of four in Saskatchewan earning $50,000 per year pays 
15 per cent more provincial taxes than in Manitoba, 44 per cent 
more than in Alberta, and 36 per cent more than in B.C. 
 
I don't know what you have to brag about. You're all feeling 
good. You're feeling pumped. I notice finally you can get up 
and give a speech, and you can see there's some camaraderie 
over there; there wasn't before. We feel good for you for that 
reason. But the taxpayers, the taxpayers of the province, they're 
not in sync with your good feelings because they're the ones 
that are still having to pay for the mess that you guys have 
created. 
 
And I'll tell you there's going to be a few things that you will 
never be forgiven for. And it's for such things as taking money 
out of cancer research and putting it into health board elections. 
It's for closing 52 rural hospitals and decimating health care in 
rural Saskatchewan when, if you take a look at the provinces 
next door saving some $240 million in health care cuts and 
didn't close one rural hospital, people are going to be asking the 
New Democrat government what it was that you people could 
have done that you didn't and instead took out your evil ways 
on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll close now because I think that really that's all 
that this budget deserves. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Before I begin my remarks about the budget, like 
other members in this House I would like to congratulate you, 
Mr. Speaker, both for the birth of your granddaughter and also 
for the excellent work you have been doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — The excellent work you have been doing in 
trying to bring order into this den of chaos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased and very proud to be able to 
stand here today and address a few remarks about  

Saskatchewan's first balanced budget in 12 years. I am so proud 
to be part of the team that has finally brought some financial 
order to the problems that we inherited when we took 
government in October of 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past few weeks I have been out visiting 
constituents, and I have to tell you that almost uniformly they 
have been extremely positive in their comments about the 
balanced budget and the implications of that balanced budget to 
the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
They recognize that we have more than capably, with their hard 
work and sacrifices, solved the deficit challenge. They say to 
me now, and I hope you're going to get on with the job 
challenge. And I point out to them that there are extremely 
strong measures for economic development in this budget. 
 
My constituents also tell me that they like the debt management 
plan. They appreciated it when we took government, that we sat 
down, reviewed our principles, and developed a solid plan for 
deficit reduction. They now say, well we're glad that the deficit 
is gone; are you going to be dealing with the debt? And I am 
very pleased to be able to point out to them in the budget plan, a 
solid debt management plan for the next four years. 
 
I'm very proud that we've already paid off $500 million on the 
runaway Tory debt. And I'm more than proud that we will by 
the year 1999, pay off $1.2 billion of this unacceptable public 
debt that drains our resources and robs our future away from 
our children and grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I go out visiting constituents, one of the things 
that I am most pleased about in this budget plan is the fact that 
it is a balanced plan and is not simply tax reductions or slash 
and burn. There are three solid parts to this plan. 
 
We are dealing with services for Saskatchewan people, the 
services that they are asking for from their government — not 
frivolous frills, but the essential services that they are asking 
for. We are dealing with debt management in a solid and 
planned fashion; and we are dealing with tax reduction for 
individuals and for businesses. 
 
As we developed this plan, Mr. Speaker, we did two things. 
First of all, we reviewed our principles — our New Democratic 
principles of compassion, community, economic justice, and 
social justice. 
 
Once we did that, we developed a strategy based on those plans. 
Our strategy started at the top, was fair across all regions of the 
province, was achievable, is sustainable, and will encourage 
economic growth — both economic growth through direct 
business encouragement by things such as the lowering of the 
small-business tax rate to 8 per cent, the investment tax credit 
for manufacturing and processing of 9 per cent; to encourage 
new investment; and also the surtax reduction of $150. Those 
things are smart things to do. They are things that will allow us 
to continue on track with a sustainable balanced budget in this 
province. 



February 21, 1995 

 
345 

Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud to have been part of the 
government that brought financial sanity back to this province. 
And with that, I would say thank you for letting me address the 
House on this matter, and I look forward to continued balanced 
budgets by New Democratic governments in this province. 
Thank you. 
 
I would like to at this time adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I ask for the motion of adjournment, 
the member from Saskatoon Wildwood has put the Speaker in a 
very difficult situation in that she made an error in 
congratulating the Speaker. And I don't want to get in trouble 
with my wife or my daughter; it was a grandson, not a 
granddaughter. I was just going to make sure they knew I could 
still tell the difference. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Name Substitution on Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would 
move to change a member of a committee. I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 
 
 That the name of Mr. McPherson be added to the list of 

members on the Standing Committee on Private 
Members' Bills. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


