






















































April 10, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 10, 1995 

 

 
1461 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from the Gull Lake 
area and some from Maple Creek as well. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1, 
rather than allocating these funds towards capital 
construction projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from McLean, Regina, Qu'Appelle, 
Davin, and Kerrobert, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
received and have been reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and 
they are hereby read and received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize any other members, I 
would like today to inform the members of the Assembly that 
Mr. Sam Darkwa, Esq., Clerk of the Parliament of the west 
African state of Ghana, will be guest Clerk at the Table for the 
duration of this week. 

The purpose of Mr. Darkwa's visit is to observe the proceedings 
and the administration of the Assembly. He chose to visit 
Saskatchewan on the advice of a number of his colleagues from 
parliaments elsewhere in Africa. Next week, Mr. Darkwa will 
be the guest of the House of Commons in Ottawa, and then 
finally Westminster in the United Kingdom before returning to 
Ghana. 
 
Mr. Darkwa began his parliamentary career in 1962 when he 
was appointed as Clerk Assistant. He again held that post from 
1969 until 1972. Mr. Darkwa has served his country's executive 
as Senior Secretary to the President from 1966 to 1967, and as 
Principal Assistant Secretary to the Minister of Youth and 
Social Welfare, from 1972 to 1974. 
 
In 1975 and 1978, Mr. Darkwa served as assistant director, 
Commonwealth Youth, African Region. In 1979 he was 
appointed Deputy Clerk of the Ghana parliament, a post he held 
until 1981. During the 1980s, he worked in Zambia with the 
Commonwealth Secretariat. In 1992 Mr. Darkwa was appointed 
Clerk of the Assembly, and in 1993 Clerk of Parliament. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in making Mr. Darkwa 
welcome during his visit to Saskatchewan. Mr. Darkwa. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to draw to your attention and introduce to you and through 
you to the other members of the House, a group of 28 grade 4 
students from St. Andrews School in my constituency. They're 
seated in your gallery and they're accompanied by their teacher, 
Claude Barry, and by Mrs. Beaurivage. And I would ask the 
members to join me in extending them a warm welcome this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
Business to Business Expo '95 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regina's reputation as a 
grey, cautious, uneventful, civil service kind of a town has 
never been deserved. But these days it's shedding that 
reputation quicker than some members of the Assembly change 
their policies. 
 
As evidence of the new face Regina is presenting to the world, 
this morning the chamber of commerce and the Minister of 
Economic Development announced the Business to Business 
Expo '95 trade show planned for this fall. 
 
And because of the many exciting high tech communications 
developments announced recently, the Economic department 
will sponsor a telecommunications and information technology 
section at the show. 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1462 

This is just another example of how the government is working 
in partnership with Saskatchewan industry to create a climate of 
investment and growth. The information technology section at 
this show is a logical outgrowth of announcements about the 
CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) call centre and 
the Canadian Cancer call centre. 
 
We've made an excellent start and there's much to be done, 
which is why this section will be a vital component of Business 
Expo '95. Regina has the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 
It has a very positive outlook for housing in the current year. In 
fact, the Canadian Mortgage and Housing authority says, quote: 
Regina is riding a wave of consumer and business confidence. 
 
I congratulate the Regina chamber for its role in creating and 
sustaining this wave. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Regina Named One of Canada's Top Quality Cities 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regina is changing 
its image in other ways as well. Not only is it booming 
economically, it is becoming known as one of the best cities in 
Canada in which to live. This is a secret many of us already 
know. 
 
However it is good from time to time to have our own value 
judgements confirmed by a completely objective outside 
source, just to give us a reality check if nothing else. 
 
So it was with great pleasure but no real surprise to read in the 
current issue of Chatelaine magazine that Regina is one of the 
healthiest cities in Canada. I know that members of Regina 
caucus know that; now the whole country knows it. 
 
In a survey of 25 Canadian cities, Regina was rated fourth, 
slightly behind Quebec City, Calgary, and London, Ontario. 
The first and third places we can dismiss as an obvious ploy to 
diffuse the national unity debate taking place; just as obviously, 
Calgary's place will soon be eliminated due to Klein's cut-backs, 
leaving Regina alone at the top. 
 
Chatelaine considered nine factors including air quality, 
numbers of hospital beds and doctors, park space, and so on. 
These are among the fundamental elements of comfortable city 
living, having nothing to do with the accident of location and 
everything to do with quality of life. 
 
It is interesting that cities with spectacular settings finished at 
the bottom of the list. 
 
Regina mayor and council take seriously their responsibility to 
support the goals of healthy communities, and I thank them and 
congratulate them as well. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, this article is good news, but it's old 
news for a long-time Regina resident like myself. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Esterhazy Wellness Expo 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to report on an event that happened this past weekend 
in my constituency and met with great success. The Great 
Esterhazy Health, Wellness and Fitness Expo took place on 
Friday and Saturday. Well over 4,000 visitors packed Heritage 
Hall to view exhibits sponsored by 40 different organizations. 
 
There were demonstrations of golf, karate, weightlifting, and 
acupuncture. Presentations included nutrition, smokeless 
tobacco, transplants, and first aid. 
 
The Premier, who very capably served as honorary Chair of 
expo, was present at the official opening ceremonies. Other 
special guests included Aaron Ruffin and Gainer the gopher of 
the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the expo is an excellent demonstration of 
communities and organizations cooperating to promote the 
well-being of everybody. Wellness is people educating 
themselves on how best to stay well. The 40 groups involved as 
exhibitors proved that wellness can be as much fun as it is 
fulfilling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this time to congratulate the 
exhibitors and volunteers for another great expo. I want to make 
special mention of IMC Canada (International Minerals and 
Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.), the North Valley Health 
District, the Esterhazy medical community, St. Anthony's 
Hospital, the Potashville School Division, the town of 
Esterhazy, and the expo steering committee. Their hard work 
made the event a grand success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Canada Junior B Hockey Championship 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city of 
Lloydminster in my riding has reason to celebrate today. Over 
the weekend, Lloydminster hosted the Western Canadian Junior 
B Hockey Championships at the civic centre. I am pleased to 
report that the Lloydminster Bandits won the gold medal by 
defeating the Regina Capitals 3-2 in the final. 
 
I had the pleasure of participating in the opening ceremonies for 
this hockey championship. And to have the host team win in 
front of their fans was an excellent way to conclude the 
championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six teams from British Columbia, Alberta, 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Thunder Bay competed in this 
championship. And the fact that the two Alberta-Saskatchewan 
teams placed first and second says a lot about the calibre of 
hockey in our provinces at the junior B level. 



April 10, 1995 

 
1463 

I would like to congratulate the Lloydminster Junior B Bandits 
hockey team and their coaches for providing the ability and for 
giving us the best entertainment in western Canada. 
 
I'd also like to congratulate all the organizers and volunteers 
who ensured the success of this event. A tremendous amount of 
work and commitment is needed to host an event of this 
magnitude, and running a flawless tournament and having the 
host team win the gold medal is a feather in the cap of the 
community of Lloydminster. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden Precision Skating Team Attending 
Canadian Championships 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to wish 
the Lumsden Axels precision skating team good luck at the 
1995 Canadian Precision Skating Championships being held in 
Calgary this week. 
 
Precision skating is a relatively new sport that has rapidly 
gained popularity across Canada as well as the world. It 
involves synchronized skating with 12 to 24 people moving 
with precision, unison, and artistry. 
 
After many successful years in a recreational category, the 
Lumsden Axels have ventured into the competitive area at the 
junior level. This means even more hard work and two 
programs instead of one. 
 
As a result of their determination and dedication, they are 
Saskatchewan's junior competitive champions and thus they are 
eligible to compete at the Canadians in Calgary, where over 100 
of Canada's best precision teams will meet. 
 
There are 18 members on the Lumsden team and they are 
coached by Telena Oussoren-King. Please join me in wishing 
the Lumsden Axels the best of luck and an exciting time at the 
championships. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
introduce to you this afternoon, and through you to the other 
members of the Legislative Assembly, six grade 9 and 10 
students from the Punnichy High School, along with their 
teacher, Sylvia Nagy. They're situated in your gallery. They're in 
here to watch a little bit of question period, but they're on a 
pretty tight schedule today so they won't see much of it. 
 
But I want to take this opportunity to welcome them and ask the 
members of the Legislative Assembly to join with me in  

welcoming them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this afternoon is for the Premier or whomever wants to 
take responsibility on that side of the House for the million 
dollar pensions they receive. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, there was a big headline in 
Saturday's paper: "Pensions may change." That kind of 
misleading headline when you have every intention of keeping 
your pensions exactly the way they are. In fact the Premier said 
that in Calgary on Friday. 
 
Mr. Premier, I know that you're always very concerned about 
your position being misinterpreted through the media. Could 
you clear this up for us. Do you intend to roll back your million 
dollar pension, or do you plan on keeping it exactly the way it 
is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear with 
the member opposite. I think he was referring to a story in the 
Leader-Post Saturday, which referred to "Pensions may 
change." In it the deputy leader says: 
 
 "Clearly, there may be unintended consequences of Mr. 

McDowell's report, as has been indicated by the media 
report and by the member opposite." 

 
Referring to your line of questioning. And not having been in 
the House Friday, having been out in Canora at community 
meetings in that part of the province, I want to say to you that 
the questions that you put were based in reference to the 
McDowell report which has some indication that the new 
pension plan and the old pension plan would see some increase. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that there is a process in 
place for reviewing this matter. A committee chaired by the 
Speaker of the Assembly, the Board of Internal Economy, will 
sit down and review the McDowell report. And for the Leader 
of the Opposition Party and the Leader of the Liberal Party . . . 
obviously when this committee originally met you never saw fit 
to review your pension, my pension, anyone's pensions. In fact 
at that point in time you never raised the issue. But when the 
committee meets, this issue will obviously be one of the items 
that we will be looking at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, indeed on Friday the Deputy Premier admitted that the 
big raise in your pension may have been an unintended  



April 10, 1995 

 
1464 

consequence of the McDowell report. I suspect when this 
pension plan was first introduced by the Liberals in the 1960s, 
nobody foresaw pensions of 60 to $100,000 per year funded by 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. In fact you could even say your 
million dollar pension is an unintended consequence of that 
plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, given your Deputy Premier's commitment to deal 
with the unintended consequences, do you plan on dealing with 
that, unintended consequences of the original plan by capping 
— by capping — your obscene pensions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 
members opposite, that when the committee meets, and not 
being in control of the agenda of that committee, obviously this 
will be one of the items that will be reviewed. And I intend that 
members opposite will want to be at those meetings. 
 
The Leader of the Liberal Party, who demanded a 37 per cent 
increase, may want to get one of her back-benchers to introduce 
a private members' Bill that would roll back her 37 per cent 
increase. It's just a thought. But if you're sincere, Madam 
Member from Greystone, if you are sincere, why don't you get 
the member from Shaunavon to introduce a private members' 
motion that would roll back your 37 per cent increase? 
 
And if it were any more than politics, you would have raised 
this in the committee, of which you are a member. You never 
took the opportunity to raise the issue of pensions in the 
committee because you had an election strategy. Clearly and 
simply this is your approach to trying to get an election issue 
going. But if you were serious . . . and maybe we could arrange 
a back-bencher who could come forward and move a private 
member's motion that would see, when members cross the floor 
from one party to another, that there would be no increase, and 
you could take a roll-back as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, even one 
of your own back-benchers is predicting your pension — and 
the members on the front bench's pension — is turning into a 
major liability for your party. I suspect more than one of them 
holds that opinion. That's because they go home on the 
weekend, and they hear what people are saying. 
 
It's probably not much fun defending your $100,000-a-year 
pension to people who have lost their hospitals or to people 
who have to pay more taxes. It's not much fun explaining why 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) was gutted and the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan was cut in half when your pensions 
remain untouched. It's no wonder your back-benchers are 
starting to grumble. 
 
When are you going to do something about this, Mr. Minister? 
When are you going to start by setting an example of sacrifice 
just like everyone else has had to in this province? We in the  

opposition would commit to you today to be part of a Board of 
Internal Economy meeting this week if you people would also 
commit to that. Will you give that commitment on the 
government's behalf today, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I'm glad to see the member 
opposite, in a spirit of cooperation, is agreeing with what I said. 
I said that when the Board of Internal Economy meets, this will 
be one of the items that obviously will be on the agenda, given 
the fact — I say again — that the Deputy Premier said that 
clearly there may be unintended consequences of Mr. 
McDowell's report. 
 
And so as it would relate to pensions, obviously one section of 
the report dealt with the pension issue. And when the meeting is 
held, obviously we will be there. And I would also invite the 
Leader of the Liberal Party to be there as well. And she may 
want to, while we're discussing unintended consequences . . . of 
how she might give back, retroactively, the 37 per cent increase 
that she took personally. 

 
Employment Discrimination 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, do you 
believe that it would be discriminatory to refuse to hire an 
individual or to refuse to rent an apartment to someone because 
of their union affiliation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, here we go again. This is an 
exam and I'm going to be marked on the results, I take it. I took 
notice of this question last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, and I intend 
to report the answer to the House as soon as I'm briefed on the 
answer. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, 
we'll keep asking the question for as long as it takes for you to 
decide to answer it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is a 
significant part of your portfolio; a part of your portfolio that is 
supposed to be undergoing a complete review and an overhaul 
for the last couple of years. 
 
Now that overhaul is as elusive as your answers to my very 
simple question, which you've had a whole weekend to study. I 
think you know well that this is discrimination and that your 
government's union preference tendering policy engages in 
discrimination as well — discrimination against non-union 
workers and against rural trade people. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Human Rights Commission refused to 
investigate this matter because they say that union affiliation is 
specifically not contained in the Human Rights Code. In this 
overhaul that is now apparently been postponed until after the 
election, will you sponsor an amendment that guarantees an 
individual's right to work regardless of their affiliation? 



April 10, 1995 

 
1465 

Would it not make sense to eliminate the discrimination against 
individuals who do not belong to a union, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, it's my impression that the 
safeguards respecting union membership are already contained 
in The Trade Union Act, and exist there in quite a complicated 
and a refined way. 
 
Our review of the Human Rights Code has been ongoing for 
some time and has been delayed because of an accident which 
the Chair has suffered, and we expect that report to arrive 
shortly, but I'm not certain when. 
 
But I am certain that it is not contemplated that the Human 
Rights Code will repeat provisions or supplement provisions 
that are already contained in The Trade Union Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It sounds 
almost like it's almost for sure that we'll have something coming 
down at some time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it's interesting to note that the overhaul of the Human 
Rights Code has been postponed until after the upcoming 
election. It makes one wonder just what kind of hidden agenda 
is in place there. We've already seen one major amendment to 
The Human Rights Code in the last session, Bill 38. 
 
Mr. Minister, in addition to helping tens of thousands of 
non-union working people in this province which need to be 
included in the Human Rights Code, why not also consider an 
amendment to the Human Rights Code which would protect 
law-abiding gun owners against a Liberal gun registry? 
 
Why not use the Human Rights Code to actually help the 
majority of humans for a change, or are your silly and childish 
speeches going to do the trick, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — That is an amusing question. The 
speeches that I have been making against Mr. Rock's package 
make many of the same points that you yourself make, sir, from 
the public platform and that your leader makes from the public 
platform. We make substantially the same speeches. 
 
But when you come into this House, trying to use that 
amendment, that amendment to the Human Rights Code, and 
pretend that it is of any use at all in the fight against Allan 
Rock's gun control package, you're just hoodwinking people; 
you're just fooling them. You're pretending to do something that 
is absolutely of no effect at all, and practically any lawyer 
practising in Saskatchewan will tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
news gets worse for the taxpayers of this province who will 
have to foot the bill for the Premier's pension. After discussions 
with the Public Employees Benefits Agency, it was revealed 
that the Premier's pension will be significantly higher than the 
amount that was cited last week in the paper. These calculations 
did not include a section that allows for an extra bonus for the 
Premier. And based on the McDowell commission's salary 
recommendations, this would bring the Premier's first year 
pension to $123,000 per year. 
 
My question is to the Premier. And in his absence, I direct this 
to the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. Minister, I have 
one short question from the taxpayers: do you consider this 
fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Liberal Party, having referred to the Premier's absent — a little 
unusual to be allowed in the House — but I want to say to you 
that every time he slips out of the House his pension goes up by 
20,000. It's going to be a hard time getting him back in here, at 
the rate you're going. 
 
But quite seriously, Mr. Speaker, the matter of the fact is that 
the individual in this House, to show the hypocrisy, who has 
taken the biggest jump in potential pension in this session in 
this term is — and I open the envelope — the madam from 
Greystone when she took a 37 per cent increase. That's who 
took the biggest increase in pensions in this term. That's a fact. 
You take the biggest increase. 
 
And if you are elected Leader of the Opposition, if you're 
elected Leader of the Opposition in the next election — as the 
polls are indicating, you may win 10 or 15 seats — and you stay 
there for 30 years as the Premier has done in his position at one 
level or another, your pension at age 80 or 85, in fact under the 
money purchase plan, will be over a million dollars. Did you 
know that? It'll be over a million dollars. 
 
If you win as Leader of the Opposition and you stay there for 30 
years, you will have a pension plan that's yours and for your 
estate — different than the Premier's — over a million dollars. 
Isn't that a disaster? 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's 
most interesting how these particular people on the opposite 
side of the House try to, in fact, mislead the people of this 
province. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has taken a . . . 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1466 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I think that kind of 
inflammatory statement adds absolutely nothing to the question 
period, and I ask members to please tone down their questions. 
And while I'm on my feet, I ask others members to please quit 
interrupting when the answers are given and when the questions 
are asked. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 
rarely is it commented on that every cabinet minister in this 
Legislative Assembly took a 75 per cent increase the day that 
they became cabinet. No one mentions that 79 per cent increase 
came to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. So as much 
as the members opposite try to make this a different kind of 
issue, this is about the Premier's pension, and anybody can look 
at the numbers. And what the member opposite is saying today, 
he's calling into question the Public Employees Benefits 
Agency in this province. They try to blame every single other 
person on their outlandish pensions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government has been in power for almost 
four years, and you've talked about the need for the people of 
this province to join together to make sacrifices. Why hasn't 
your Premier, in close to four years, tried to amend section 17 
of this Act, which is going to give him, and him alone, this 
bonus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again to the member opposite 
 in her complete exaggeration the Premier's pension has gone 
up by about 50,000 a year in the last week, by your estimation 
 I say again it's going to be tough to get him back in the 
House. 
 
But I want to tell you something about moving from being a 
private member to being a cabinet minister. There is roles and 
responsibilities that change, that have been compensated for 
many, many years. 
 
Now your only increase in role has been to manage the member 
from Shaunavon, and I understand that's a difficult task. I 
understand that that is a difficult task. He's an unruly cuss; 
there's not doubt about it. But 37 per cent increase for that; 37 
per cent increase in your pension as well, Madam Member? I 
say to you, your new title should be the minister of what? — 
hypocrisy, based on the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. It may help 
if members would just heed the warning a bit and not use the 
inflammatory statements. All right? 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There's a recognition in every province in Canada about the 
increased duties of anyone who becomes the Leader of the 
Opposition or a Leader of a Third Party — any one of them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The pension issue affects a number of members, but the 
Premier's bonus, it speaks clearly to the credibility of one 
person, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is the one who must set the 
standard, a standard for his government and a standard for the  

province. What kind of a standard is it when the Premier's 
annual pension benefit is two and one half times the total yearly 
income of an average family in Saskatchewan? 
 
My question: if government is about leading by example — and 
yes indeed, you are still government — can you tell us how 
people can be expected to make sacrifices and pay higher taxes 
when this is the standard that your Premier and your 
government sets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — We'll talk about standards all right, 
Mr. Speaker. And I want to say to the member from Greystone 
that I have here a little chart that was done up based on what 
your potential pension will be if you're elected Leader of the 
Opposition and you stay there for 30 years — this is under the 
money purchase plan — and you live to be . . . I think this 
assumes 25 years of pension. Your pension will be $1.1 
million. That's under your pension plan — $1.1 million. That's 
what your pension will be with your new increase that you took 
for yourself, that you took for yourself. 
 
Now I want to say to you, Madam Member, will you come to 
the Board of Internal Economy, and in the spirit of cooperation, 
turn back in the money that you took, the 37 per cent increase, 
along with it the pension? You took the biggest increase in 
pension of any member, any member in this Assembly, when 
you took your 37 per cent increase. Will you turn it back in 
when we have the meeting? And I challenge the members of the 
opposition to watch closely what that hypocrite from Greystone 
does when she comes to the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sentencing Circles 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. And this question arises 
from comments made by the Provincial Court judge, Claude 
Fafard, who has expressed concerns about the use of aboriginal 
sentencing circles in cases involving sexual assaults. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have had some discussion on this scenario 
over a period of time, but I think where Mr. Fafard is coming 
from, he's just wondering exactly where your department's 
position is on sentencing circles. When can they be used and 
what safeguards are in place to ensure that sentences fall within 
the usual range of sentences that other criminals face? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I sincerely 
thank the member for that very important question. 
 
This matter of sentencing circles is being explored through 
practice, in the Provincial Court in particular. And their use has 
been slowly developing, and developing in a conservative way, 
I think, in that particular court. We're learning as we go. 
 
There aren't a lot of precedents out there for this, but what it  



April 10, 1995 

 
1467 

does is involve the whole community in the sentencing 
question. It's after a person has been found guilty of the offence 
and the matter then is, what should be the punishment? And 
involving the whole community seems like a good idea and in 
practice in most cases looks like it is a workable and good idea 
and we are cooperating in its use. 
 
The process is being driven largely by the Provincial Court 
judges and so far we're quite satisfied with it. But everybody is 
watching it closely and for one of the reasons that the member 
mentioned in his question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, as Judge Fafard has said, most sexual assault cases 
don't meet the guidelines or the criteria set out for sentencing 
circles. And I believe what is coming out of this whole debate, 
Mr. Minister, at present is, one is wondering whether you 
believe we should have a racially specific justice process. 
People are wondering whether we're creating a two-tiered 
justice system, with one system for aboriginal people and one 
for everyone else. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess the question is specifically, why 
does one group warrant special treatment under the law? It 
appears based on race, as we see in this scenario regarding 
justice circles. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think it is the fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
no non-aboriginal person has requested a sentencing circle yet. I 
don't know what the court would do in the event that a 
non-aboriginal made such a request. 
 
The reason why the aboriginals have such an interest in it is that 
it has resonance in the traditions and the culture, and is in many 
historical contexts consistent with the way in which they dealt 
with departures from socially acceptable conduct before the 
white system was imposed upon them. And therefore it finds its 
natural constituency in the Indian and Metis community. 
 
I personally believe that if this idea works, where the whole 
community becomes involved in the healing process and in 
dealing with the results of crime, it will prove to be a most 
effective method. And it may well be that the larger community 
have much to learn from the aboriginal community with respect 
to this method of dealing with crime. 
 
Heaven knows one of the worst things we can do, in some 
cases, is just to throw somebody in jail where they learn all 
kinds of really antisocial behaviour and emerge worse than 
when they went in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
further question to the Minister of Justice, and this again relates  

to young offenders and it relates to the recently . . . Recently the 
Department of Social Services made a grant of $32,000 to 
Regina Treaty Status Indian Services Inc. for the purpose of 
providing culturally appropriate measures for young offenders. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what we'd like to know are: what exactly are 
culturally appropriate measures for young offenders and why 
are taxpayers being forced to spend $32,000 on them? Again, 
why is one group being singled out for special treatment under 
the young offenders correction system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well these, as the member well knows 
from a discussion during estimates, these are initiatives that are 
attempting to find new ways of dealing with old problems. 
Heaven knows we need to find new ways of dealing with old 
problems because the present ways just aren't working very 
well. 
 
And the member is . . . there's no more eloquent spokesman for 
that point of view from the opposition side than the member. 
Indeed the member himself has generally approved of the 
sentencing circle approach, and we appreciate that. He did that 
during estimates. 
 
We don't think that . . . Well there are a lot of problems out 
there. You look at the numbers and there are too many Indian 
and Metis people incarcerated, too many locked up in 
correctional centres, too many coming before the courts, and 
nobody feels that more than those communities themselves. 
They're desperately searching for an answer. 
 
And we're trying to help them find an answer. And I think the 
member agrees with those kind of initiatives and that sort of 
approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Urban Municipality Act Amendments 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 
very evident that there must be going to be an election in this 
province soon because day after day we are faced with the 
situation in this House of standing up and asking questions and 
less than half the cabinet is here day after day to answer them. 
 
And I have a classic point today, Mr. Speaker, where I want to 
place a question to the minister responsible for Municipal 
Government, and as usual, Mr. Speaker, there's no one here to 
answer the question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Well I the don't think the 
Government House Leader has any grounds to stand on when 
he himself in his answer referred to the absence of a member. 
 
Order, order. I wish the member would refer to Hansard for 
today and then maybe apologize to the House for his error. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for Municipal Government. Madam  



April 10, 1995 

 
1468 

Minister, section 81 of your new urban municipal Act gives the 
municipalities the right to enter into business. That's to compete 
directly with the private sector, Madam Minister. 
 
Nobody seems to think much of the idea, Madam Minister. 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) voted 
against the idea for the last convention; 84 per cent of the CFIB 
(Canadian Federation of Independent Business) members who 
were polled are against urban governments going into business. 
And yet in the face of all of that you claim to represent urban 
government; you put it into your new legislation. Why is that, 
Madam Minister? Why do you need this change when the 
businesses and the municipalities have clearly told you not to 
do it. Why do you go ahead and do it anyway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker seeing as we're 
allowing debate on a Bill here in question period, which is a 
little unusual, but seeing as it's being allowed, I will say to the 
member opposite that the minister has made it clear that we will 
be discussing with the municipal organizations, and if there are 
changes needed to the Bill, we will look very seriously at 
making those kinds of changes. And if the member has other 
questions on Committee of the Whole on the Bill I'd be more 
than pleased to answer them right now. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask 
leave to make a statement. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to tender my resignation as Member of the Legislative 
Assembly for Regina Hillsdale effective as at the close of day 
today. 
 
Early in February I resigned as minister of Health and minister 
responsible for the Status of Women and stated that I would be 
taking up a new career, probably in the legal field. Effective 
tomorrow, I will be returning to the full-time private practice of 
law with the law firm of MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman with 
whom I articled when I graduated from law school. 
 
I want to express my sincere thanks to the constituents of 
Regina Lakeview and Regina Hillsdale, whose extraordinary 
support has helped me better serve them over the last 9 to 10 
years. I am greatly honoured to have had the opportunity to 
serve as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Regina Lakeview from 1986 to '91 and Regina Hillsdale from 
1991 to '95. I leave this position knowing I have taken my 
responsibilities very seriously and I have done my utmost to 
serve my constituents to the best of my ability. 
 
Although I am known for my work as minister of Health, I have 
also held a number of other positions from time to time. First 
and foremost, was that of minister responsible for the Status of 
Women. 
 

Also, some of my responsibilities included: a member of 
Treasury Board, minister responsible for Saskatchewan Cancer 
Foundation, minister responsible for the Health Research Board 
and the Health Services Utilization and Research Commission, 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Women's Advisory 
Council, and member during transition on Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, a member during transition on the Souris Basin 
Development Authority, a member during transition on the 
SaskTel board, minister responsible for the Centre of the Arts, 
minister responsible for Wascana Centre Authority, minister 
responsible during transition for the Public Service 
Commission, minister responsible for Saskatchewan Alcohol 
and Drug Abuse Commission, minister responsible for mental 
health advisory and for the Provincial Health Council, and I 
also have the honour of being a member of Planning and 
Priorities for a period of this time. 
 
Once again, I want to thank the Premier for having given me the 
opportunity to serve the people of Saskatchewan as a member 
of Executive Council. I executed my duties diligently and with a 
clear focus on the long-term benefit for the people of 
Saskatchewan. I appreciate very much the trust the Premier 
placed in me and I appreciate the opportunity he gave me to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan in this way. 
 
To all my colleagues in this Legislative Assembly, both 
opposition and government MLAs, I wish you the very best in 
your career as members of the Legislative Assembly. I know 
many of you put in endless hours of work for your constituents. 
Opposition MLAs and back-bench MLAs often work every bit 
as hard as cabinet ministers, but so much of what you do goes 
unnoticed. 
 
I know as an MLA in opposition I, like many others, put in 
countless hours meeting with people, dealing with problems, 
and travelling throughout the province. The job is what you 
make it. And like anything else, you get out of it what you put 
into it. Your constituents have put their vote of confidence and 
trust in you, and if you respect this trust and fulfil your duties 
with integrity and diligence, you will have their support and 
appreciation. The very best to you, thank you for your 
camaraderie, your goodwill, and your support. 
 
Thank you also to the Speaker and the officers and staff of the 
Legislative Assembly. Your help over the years is appreciated. 
The very best to you also. Once again, thank you to the caucus 
staff and to my personal staff; your loyalty and support is 
greatly appreciated. 
 
Finally, thank you to my husband, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone, and our children, Paul, Marin, Matthew, Travis, 
and Sacha, whose support and enthusiasm made my job a little 
easier. 
 
With these words, Mr. Speaker, I wish each and every one of 
you the very best. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1469 

(1415) 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 53 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 53 — An 
Act respecting Agricultural Operations be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 53 is an Act that I think a lot of people in agriculture have 
wanted for a long time because it incorporates provisions for 
particularly livestock producers to not have nuisance lawsuits 
brought against them because of the type of farming operations 
that they do. 
 
And this, as you know, Mr. Speaker, is often a source of 
irritation in a community, when you have things like liquid 
manure storage, when you have natural water bodies that may 
or may not be contaminated by livestock operations. 
 
So what the government has attempted to do here, Mr. Speaker, 
is to provide a dispute settlement mechanism that will make 
sure that when it comes to issues of odour, noise, dust, that 
there is something that happens before the farmer finds himself 
dragged into court and a lawsuit brought against him, which in 
many cases, Mr. Speaker, would entail tens of thousands of 
dollars, both in legal fees to defend yourself against the lawsuit, 
but also potentially having someone come through with a 
judgement against you that would say that you might have to 
relocate your operation or that you might have to make 
substantial technological changes.  
 
And in the case of some of the present-day intensive livestock 
operations in our province, that would amount to many, many 
hundreds of thousands of dollars. You would not relocate a hog 
operation with 5 or 600 sows, Mr. Speaker, for less than those 
kinds of numbers. 
 
So we have an appointment by LG in C (Lieutenant Governor 
in Council) that can consist of not less than three members, to 
go in and look at a situation, to mediate it, and to prevent court 
action being taken. Importantly, the minister can supply to the 
arbitration board any services that is felt necessary to fulfil their 
mandate. And that means legal counsel, consultants, technical 
advisers, because in many cases the situation that we're talking 
about involves people like SaskEnergy, SaskPower, Sask 
Water; it may involve municipal roads, may involve provincial 
highways, and indeed may be part of a zoning situation around 
a major urban centre. 
 
A case in point was a lawsuit brought in my home community a  

year ago by an individual against a couple of feedlots on the 
west side of Moose Jaw and their plans to expand their 
operations. And it was quite a long- drawn-out affair, Mr. 
Speaker, and there was a lot of money spent by all with this 
thing. And at the end of the day the feedlots got permission to 
expand, but it was nip and tuck there for a while whether these 
businesses, which employ a lot of people and are a very 
necessary service to the agriculture community in Moose Jaw 
and area, were allowed to go ahead with their expansion plans. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we all are aware of the item that 
was in the news last year involving the current president of 
SaskPower, Jack Messer, and the fact that he'd brought a 
lawsuit against his neighbour because of a fly situation that 
occurred around his yard. He didn't like his neighbour's flies, 
and that ended up in a lawsuit. And the Department of 
Agriculture had to settle that suit and in fact pay Mr. Messer so 
that these flies wouldn't bother him. And in fact his neighbour 
ended up having to sell out to him and move out of the 
community. 
 
Most farmers, Mr. Speaker, feel that that type of nuisance 
lawsuit simply isn't acceptable today. Agriculture, by necessity, 
is having to diversify. There are many farms in Saskatchewan 
today that have got livestock as part of their business plan now 
that haven't had for the last quarter of a century. The changes to 
the Crow rate, diversification, all sorts of things are going to 
predicate that farm families in this province in agri-business 
become more intensive. 
 
And that means that you are going to have to seriously look at 
situations that may cause odour, insect, and other problems 
associated with the production of value added products, 
whether that be beef or pork or a processing plant or changing 
the way you do your cropping rotations — all sorts of things 
that may put you in conflict with the ever-increasing 
urbanization of certain areas of the province. 
 
It means, Mr. Speaker, that all of us now are faced with things 
like environmental impact studies, environmental impact 
statements, when you for instance go to borrow money. I 
recently took out a small loan, and I had to — and that was for 
some bred heifers — and I had to give the bank assurance that 
the particular land that I was going to use wasn't going to have 
certain problems attached to it. 
 
And I recently asked FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) to lift the 
caveat that they had on a particular quarter because I thought 
they had already had enough security. And before they'd release 
that quarter, I had to go through an environmental impact 
statement on the remaining four quarters which remained under 
the caveat. And I found that rather strange because they asked 
me all sorts of questions about oil pollution and everything else. 
 
But I guess it's a fact of life. It's a fact of life that, as we in 
agriculture continue to advance and continue to do things, we're 
going to be faced with the potential. 
 
So I think it was important for the government to bring this  



April 10, 1995 

 
1470 

forward. I'm hoping, Mr. Speaker — and these are questions I 
guess that the minister will have to answer in committee — but 
I'm hoping that what we aren't going to have here is a brand-
new bureaucracy set up. I believe that there must be enough 
people inside of government today that can handle this situation 
without sort of reinventing the wheel. And that the fees, that the 
fee structure that this type of process is based on, is not going to 
go the way of every other agricultural fee that we've seen in this 
province in the last three years where we have seen dramatic 
increases across the board in the fees that farmers and farm 
families are having to pay. 
 
And there are dozens and dozens and dozens of them, Mr. 
Speaker, that have doubled and tripled and quadrupled because 
this government has been so hungry for the cash of the 
taxpayer, in whatever way that they can, that they have 
increased those fees across the board. 
 
So we'll be asking the minister what kind of fees schedule that 
he's going to put in place and what kind of a bureaucracy is 
going to be put in place, Mr. Speaker. And are what should be 
very simple solutions, going to be muddied up because of this 
government's penchant for interference? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the next few years we are going to see intensive 
livestock operations in particular, I believe, multiply in this 
province manifold. In my own constituency at present, people 
are trying to raise money to put in a 600-sow farrow-to-finish 
hog operation up by Central Butte. That many pigs is going to 
produce a lot of manure. That many pigs is going to produce a 
lot of odour. And that many pigs, Mr. Speaker, even under the 
absolutely best circumstances, is probably going to have a few 
flies attracted to that barn. 
 
So as we see this happen across this province, we had best be 
prepared, Mr. Speaker, to realize that the bread and butter and 
the tax dollars that make this province go still owe agriculture 
an awful lot when it comes to putting the bottom line in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that during Committee of the Whole the 
minister's got the right answers to the questions that we'll be 
proposing. Because I think if he does, there's a lot of support 
around this province, at least what I've seen in the media to 
present, for Saskatchewan agriculture producers to be able to 
press ahead and diversify the economy of this province the way 
they know they can, without unnecessary interference by people 
who simply think that they're going to move out into the 
countryside and they're going to find a quiet, cheap place to live 
where they aren't going to have to pay as much taxes as they did 
somewhere else. And they're going to make sure that the 
neighbour down the road doesn't have any smell or flies or 
inconveniences, when that particular neighbour might have 
been in business for the last four generations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the potential is here for the government to do 
a every good thing for the province of Saskatchewan, and we'll 
have to wait and see how the minister's answers in committee 
show us if we are or not. 
 

Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 51 — An Act to 
amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 
1985 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
that the purpose for this amendment is to change the way in 
which certain costs are distributed in collecting student loans. 
Presently the student . . . and the program is administered by a 
branch of the Department of Education, and all the costs 
associated with that administration of the program is included 
in monies appropriated for that purpose by the legislature. 
Basically all the costs fall under the administration budget of 
the Department of Education and are not directly related to the 
student loans. 
 
In the minister's second reading speech she stated that this 
arrangement has worked well in the past except for two 
situations, the first being when a student loan is sent to a 
collection agency; and the second is regarding bankruptcies. 
 
The minister stated that the department turns loans which are 
seriously in default over to collection agencies, since the 
Department of Education does not have the resources to deal 
with those circumstances. And from that point, the collection 
agency charges a fee for their services, based upon the 
percentage of loan they recover. 
 
For some time all the loans collected by agencies must be 
deposited in the fund — that's the student loan fund — while 
the agency's charge must be paid out of the department's 
administration budget. She stated that this was impractical 
because it's difficult to predict how much will be collected in 
any given year and how much will have to be paid out in fees to 
collection agencies. 
 
I'm not exactly sure why this figure is so difficult to estimate, 
since it has been that way for a number of years, and I'm sure 
that there are average percentages that fall into default and need 
to be collected. But I'll be examining that in the near future, Mr. 
Speaker. We're looking for information now to verify just what 
kind of percentages and how it has been collected. 
 
(1430) 
 
The minister of revenue . . . of Finance doesn't seem to have a 
lot of problems in estimating how much we're going to pay in 
taxes every year. So I should think that the Minister of 
Education, from her records, should be able to determine what 
would normally fall into default in the student loans, what the 
numbers of monies would be, and how much the collection 
agencies can recover of it. So the numbers should be reasonably  



April 10, 1995 

 
1471 

simple to gather, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know exactly how 
much in average is spent on fees to these collection agencies; 
how many of the students end up declaring bankruptcy; how 
much in the end the province has paid to recoup sometimes very 
small loans. 
 
The minister also mentioned in her second reading speech that 
current provisions caused difficulties in the case of 
bankruptcies. In some cases students file bankruptcy as a basis 
of inability to repay their student loans. At this point the 
province must retain legal counsel to challenge the claimed 
bankruptcy. And it seems that there should be an easier solution 
to this situation, Mr. Speaker. The Bankruptcy Act should 
exempt claimants from including student loans in their 
liabilities, and therefore saving everyone the time and money 
necessary to go through all the steps. 
 
I believe at the present time that student loans are not 
collectible . . . or are not exempted because of bankruptcy. I 
realize that there are exceptions to this though, Mr. Speaker, yet 
those few exceptions are certainly not the rule. And it's time 
that straightforward solutions need to be found for these kinds 
of situations. 
 
And the amendment in Bill 51, according to the minister, will 
alleviate some of the administrative problems. Under the new 
provisions, most administrative costs of the student aid program 
will continue to be budgeted for on an annual basis as they are 
now. However, monies which have to be paid to third parties 
like collection agencies and legal counsel under agreements for 
service related to the collection of loans in default will now be a 
charge on and paid out of the student loan fund itself. 
 
In other words the cost associated with the collection of loans 
will be taken from the fund from which the loans were 
originally made and into which the loans are repaid. This will 
have a negative impact, Mr. Speaker, on the student loan fund 
as less money will therefore be available to make loans. 
 
As well, the minister has assured the Assembly that the new 
provisions do not transfer any costs from government to other 
parties, but instead just establish a more flexible method of 
handling some of the administrative details required under the 
program. 
 
There are a few avenues that I have been researching on this 
particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I have yet to receive all the 
answers that I am looking for. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at the 
present time I would move adjournment of the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
The Assembly assumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 52 — An Act to 
amend The Teachers' Federation Act be now read a second  

time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I've had time to 
review Bill C . . . Bill 52 — I'm thinking of Bill C-68 too much; 
I'm getting my C's in there — and for the most part believe that 
it's simply a housekeeping Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under this Act the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation or the 
STF has a wide range of responsibilities, and they must set and 
maintain high standards of professional competence and 
conduct among all teachers in the province. And in some cases 
they must administer disciplinary action against teachers who 
violate those standards. 
 
As well the STF deals with professional development and 
teacher welfare and negotiations on behalf of teachers for 
benefits, pensions, and teachers' contracts. 
 
The role of teachers seems to be expanding each year. Many 
must now administer medications, deal with student violence, 
young offenders in their classrooms, as well as ensure the 
well-being of those students who are malnourished or abused. 
Teachers don't have it easy, Mr. Speaker, as I'm sure you're 
aware. And no organization knows that more than the STF, 
whose membership is around 12,000 or so. 
 
I understand Bill 52 is designed to overcome a few of the 
internal and professional situations that have come up in the 
past. The amendments deal with regards to the internal issues 
that have to do with the voting criteria on matters before the 
federation council, the composition of the executive, and 
procedures by which elections of the executive are conducted. 
 
In short, routine matters before council will now pass with a 
majority of votes cast rather than requiring a majority of all 
those present. It also makes it possible for the executive to 
maintain a consistent number of members in the years when the 
president is re-elected and there is no past president because the 
past president is only allowed to remain in the position of past 
president for one year and then must step aside. If the president 
that was in place during that year seeks re-election and is 
successful, they run into a situation where there is no past 
president. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, a new provision is being added which 
will make it clear that a conviction for a sexual offence under 
the Criminal Code constitutes professional misconduct. It 
allows the STF to adopt a zero tolerance policy in which 
criminal convictions related to sexual assault which will 
automatically result in guilty findings of misconduct. In other 
words, a sexual offence conviction will be defined as 
professional misconduct and automatically be grounds for 
immediate dismissal of a teacher. This is a provision which I 
believe should have been adopted some time ago, and I'm 
pleased to see it in this present legislation. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides for a situation where 
teachers avoid disciplinary action by simply resigning as 
teachers and giving up their membership in the federation. The  



April 10, 1995 

 
1472 

federation will now be granted the additional authority to 
discipline a teacher if the teacher was a member at the time 
proceedings against the teacher began and in the case where the 
teacher ceased to be a teacher less than two years before 
proceedings were initiated. 
 
The Bill does not address situations where a teacher is found 
guilty of sexual offence in one province and moves to another 
and is allowed to teach again. We must draft some sort of 
interprovincial agreement, Mr. Speaker, that will protect 
students against situations such as these. We hear of these 
circumstances, and while they are rare, we need to make 
provisions to make them even more so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that jurisdiction doesn't fall under The Teachers' 
Federation Act, and so it must be addressed by the provincial 
government in other legislation. 
 
Lastly, Bill 52 deals with updating gender neutral language. 
Instead of "chairman", the Bill reads "chairperson," and so 
forth, Mr. Speaker. These are standard changes which should be 
updated in all previous legislation as it comes to the Assembly. 
 
I have met with Mr. Fred Herron and Mr. Dwain Drew, 
president of the STF, to discuss the ramifications of Bill 52. 
And I'm confident that these changes are needed in order to 
make it easier for the federation to fulfil its mandate. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I have a few questions that I must 
receive answers to before I would like to go to full speed ahead 
on this legislation. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move at this 
time that we adjourn debate on Bill 52. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 35 — An Act 
to amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 
1993 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have just a few 
things that I want to add to the discussion. In the minister's 
statements to the House, the minister states that this is a simple 
housekeeping Bill, and it certainly on the surface appears to be 
just that. However we have all long since learned not to take 
everything the Minister of Economic Development says at 
strictly face value. 
 
The apparent effect of this Bill is to extend the loan powers of 
the Minister of Economic Development with specific reference 
to the new northern development fund. It allows the minister to 
set interest rates and terms of loans and allows him to sell off 
seized property from default . . . sell off seized property from 
defaulted loans. 
 
This, as the minister says, corrects a gap that was caused by the 
repeal of The Economic Development and Tourism Act. I note  

however that there are a couple of things that the minister is not 
telling us. First of all, I have to wonder why this was not done 
. . . not put into the original economic development 1993 Act if 
it is such a standard provision. 
 
Second, it seems to me that the government already has the 
powers described through the provisions of clause 16 of the 
original Act, which allows the Lieutenant Governor to set 
regulations for anything mentioned in the Bill, specifically 
including loans. Of course this provision requires regulations to 
be passed by OC (order in council) and published, while this 
Bill allows these matters to fall entirely under the minister's 
discretion. I 
t is also noteworthy that the minister tries to distract us in his 
speech by saying that this Bill only impacts on the northern 
development fund. Of course this is the most immediate impact 
of this Bill and I'll have more to say on that in a few minutes. 
 
However what the minister would again like this House to 
ignore is that the provisions of the old economic and tourism 
Act referred exclusively to the northern revolving fund. This 
Bill expands the minister's discretion for the entire length and 
breadth of his department. It allows this minister to strike deals 
with whomever he pleases, under whatever conditions he 
pleases, with no reference whatsoever to either this Assembly 
or even to the cabinet. Our caucus believes that this is a very 
dangerous move and we oppose it. 
 
Like so much else this government has done, it runs contrary to 
the fundamental tenets of responsible government. As well, 
given the substantial funds that this department controls, we 
believe that the taxpayers of this province will be very poorly 
served by this broad fiefdom being afforded to the minister's 
office. However, let us leave this discussion aside for the 
moment as these are issues that we will be exploring in much 
greater depth in committee. 
 
Since the minister in his remarks waxed eloquent about the new 
northern development fund, I would also like to take a few 
minutes to address the government's northern economic 
development initiatives, and indeed it's economic development 
strategy as a whole. 
 
The minister says that the main reason for this Bill is to bring 
the provisions of the new northern development fund more into 
line with the old northern revolving fund. Our caucus is 
certainly in favour of promoting the special economic 
development needs of the North and we have long been 
supporters of programs such as the northern revolving fund. 
 
However it looks like the government took the idea of a 
revolving fund a little too seriously. They seem to have just 
revolved the old program into a new one that has much the 
same mandate and guidelines. They're really doing nothing new 
for the North; they are just recycling old programs so that they 
can make impressive news releases. 
 
I suppose our caucus should be flattered that the current 
government thinks the previous government's programs were so  



April 10, 1995 

 
1473 

good that the best they can do is imitate them. While this may 
be a clever political strategy, it is very poor economic 
development strategy. 
 
It illustrates all too well the poverty of ideas that exist on the 
opposite side of the House. The very title of the economic 
development Act points to this. It used to be Economic 
Development and Tourism, but this government was so useless 
in developing tourism that they finally just threw up their hands 
and gave up and let somebody else do it. 
 
This isn't a bad idea at all for this entire government. Just give 
up and let someone else take over, because it is clear that you 
do not know what you're doing. 
 
Yet in spite of their own admissions of incompetence, the 
Minister of Economic Development has the gall to come before 
this Assembly today and ask for more powers. Why should we 
give him more powers and more discretion when he has failed 
so miserably in exercising the responsibilities he already has? 
 
This is the hypocrisy of this government that this Bill so boldly 
highlights. On the one hand, this Bill contains a stark admission 
that this government has no ideas and wouldn't know what to 
do with one if they did. On the other hand, this Bill comes 
before us, asking the Assembly to expand the government's 
range of options for displaying their incompetence. Mr. 
Speaker, it is amazing that such a short Bill can say so much 
about the state of affairs in this province. 
 
However when you have woven the kind of web that this 
government has, you cannot make even the smallest move 
without getting caught in your own traps. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
our government . . . our caucus does not support this legislation. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Apiaries Act 
 

The Chair: — I will ask the Minister of Agriculture and Food 
to introduce his officials to members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 
me today I have Mike McAvoy to my left, Merv Ross behind 
me, and as well the deputy minister, Dr. Hartley Furtan. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials. I have very few questions on The 
Apiaries Act. 
 
I understand that this Act goes further than what we've had in 
place for some time with the American border, and you're now  

proposing, on both the Alberta and Manitoba borders, to have 
controls in place . . . the movement of bees and associated 
equipment. Is that true? And would you please tell me, if that is 
true, how you plan on enforcing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The provision in the Act that 
allows closure of borders has been there for a long time. In fact 
we closed the border I think about two years ago to hives 
coming in. 
 
What this amendment to the Act is doing is clarifying the 
provision about packaged bees. The Act doesn't clearly spell out 
that we have the ability to close the border for packaged bees as 
well, and the industry has been asking us to clarify this so that 
it's clear that the borders are also closed to packaged bees. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, I understand that, Mr. Chairman. 
Would you tell me how you're going to enforce it, is what I'd 
like to know. Can you give me some indication of what you 
have in mind for enforcement, both for the honey-bees and I 
presume this applies to chalkbrood and leafcutters also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This Act does not apply, or the 
conditions do not apply, to the leafcutter bees. They are for 
honey-bees. We rely mostly on the industry to inform us of 
breaches to the Act, and they're enforced then through the court 
system and fines, if somebody's in violation of the Act. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So in other words you're telling me that it's 
basically a self-enforcement thing, that you're relying on one 
producer to tell on another, sort of situation, is the only way that 
you can reasonably come up with enforcement of this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We have a provincial apiarist who 
obviously is watchful in the industry, but it's not . . . we don't 
have bee inspectors out guarding the border. We rely mostly on 
the industry to let us know of breaches to the Act. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Can you, Mr. Minister, just give me . . . say 
an individual at Tisdale or Nipawin says so-and-so has got 
material from, I believe, Manitoba in his operation. Can you 
describe to me the process that would go forward that might 
bring about this $5,000 fine that you have increased from $500? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Our provincial apiarist would 
investigate. And if he determined that that was true, it would 
then be turned over to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) and the justice system. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So it would be up to people outside of the 
Department of Agriculture then to press forward with any 
charges that would arise out of this Act. Would your provincial 
apiarist be called upon to, you might say, be the expert witness 
in this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Very likely that he would be. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I place these questions to you, Minister, so  



April 10, 1995 

 
1474 

that we can clearly understand process. Having been in the bee 
business for 25 years myself, most people in the industry are 
rather independent and don't talk a great deal about some of the 
aspects of their operation. And I find the honey guys not too 
much different than the leafcutter guys — we're a little bit of a 
different breed. And I hear a lot of discussion at annual 
meetings about what's the appropriate means of making sure 
our industry stays disease free, and it is a big concern these days 
in both of them and some people use both of the bees side by 
side with some diseases transferable. 
 
But people are very hesitant to, I guess, turn themselves into 
part of a secret police organization who has to think about 
telling on their neighbour or everybody being so guarded about 
their operation. And it doesn't do a lot, I think, for some of the 
new agronomics that should be talked about among producers. 
So that's why I was curious as to the process here that you 
envisioned happening in order to enforce the Act. 
 
An Act is only as good as its enforcement, and I guess we'll just 
have to see what the first few cases look like when there are 
charges pressed, in order to see if this is living up to the 
expectations of producers around the province. I know they all 
want it. But at the end of the day, I'm not sure anybody wants to 
tell on their neighbour, and that's the real crunch. 
 
So I just say, good luck with it. And I guess people in the 
industry will watch, and I don't have any further questions, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Farm 
Financial Stability Act 

 
The Chair: — Does the minister have additional officials for 
this? If so, if you'd introduce them to the committee, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, we have the same officials, 
different chairs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
whole area of the feeder and breeder loans associations has 
gone through a lot of change over the last few years since it was 
started. And I think most people in the cattle industry tell me 
that they've been a good thing for livestock production in the 
province. That we have seen a significant increase in the size of 
the cow herd, that more animals are having value added to them 
than were previously the case. That people who might not have 
been able to re-enter the red meat sector have been able to do 
that because of the associations. 
 
They are not without problems, because like most things in life,  

they are prone to the errors of humanity. And certainly there's a 
few situations have arisen in the last year or so that point out 
that one individual can make a hell of a mess out of a lot of 
other people's hard work. 
 
And I'm wondering if you might sort of give us a run-down of 
where you see the associations going, given some of the 
problems that have arisen where we've had allegations of fraud 
and misappropriation of funds by people who were charged in 
the management area, and if you see that being an impediment 
to the future of these associations. 
 
Are they workable? Are these things . . . can they be worked out 
so that they don't impact on the entire program? And if it has 
legal niceties you can't comment on, I appreciate that. But could 
you give us your view of where this part of the agricultural 
industry is going? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The 
feeder-breeder association loans have been a very successful 
part of Saskatchewan agriculture, and we have a large number 
of these in operation. They are generally very successful. The 
loss rate is very, very low. And once or twice that we've had 
losses, as the member points out, have been under 
circumstances that were somewhat regrettable. 
 
The difficult part of these loans is that not only do taxpayers 
have their backing in it, but individual producers contribute a 
portion of their investment to a fund which then covers for 
other members in the association, so we obviously want to keep 
these to an absolute minimum, and to none at all would be even 
better so that people who are in them would not lose their 
money. 
 
Part of their success has been that because individual members 
have money at risk, they tend to be somewhat self-policing, and 
they certainly have been very successful. 
 
One of the things that we've done  and we've done a number 
of amendments to this Bill, trying to tighten it up all the time 
and to prevent the regrettable instances occurring, and I think 
we've been successful  one of the things that we've done 
under administration, not without . . . without changing the Bill, 
is we've forced a board of directors to take more direct 
involvement, broaden the base out so that we don't have one or 
two people with signing authority within the organization who 
might take some risks or cut some corners or indeed commit 
fraud in extreme cases. So that's one of the things that we've 
done, and we think we have this under control. 
 
There's only one or two incidences that have occurred, but that's 
too many. And we're trying to tighten it up as best we can. And 
I think we're being successful at it. And it continues to be a 
useful tool for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. I don't intend today to 
get into specific circumstances, but I do intend during your  



April 10, 1995 

 
1475 

estimates to visit this situation further because there's a couple 
of situations out there that I think need a little more exploring. 
They've been ongoing for a number of years. 
 
And I'm told that people are less that happy with the way the 
bureaucratic response has been to certain circumstances. I don't 
think it would be fair in this particular Bill to get into that, but I 
can tell you during your estimates that we are going to have that 
discussion, and there's a number of people that have asked me 
to pose certain questions to you, and they want to watch on TV 
as we go through that process to see what your responses are. 
 
I've taken the opportunity to consult with most of the groups 
involved in the cattle business with this particular Bill, and by 
and large they have been supportive of the changes because 
they do allow repayment to happen in a different way that will 
be more advantageous to the associations and to the members. I 
think by and large they all recognize that members of 
associations have to be committed in order to, as you say, 
remain accountable to the taxpayer because we're talking about 
very large guarantees here. I would guess this program is 
probably well over $100 million at this stage in guarantees 
around the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, does this Act, as you've structured it, allow to 
form . . . can different type of an entity than what you presently 
constitute a loans association, can a Pool or a cooperative that's 
different share structure, can they . . . What would be the limit, I 
guess, for you to recognize a group coming forward with a 
proposal on these associations? 
 
And there is some concern out there that the Pools, for instance, 
have looked at this as a way to move in and access public 
money. And I guess that's the question that's being asked to me. 
What do you see as the outer limits of being able to access 
money through these programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — At the present time under the Act, 
it is restricted to individuals; corporations don't qualify. As 
well, each individual member has a limit of $150,000. And 
there's no contemplation of opening that up to other groups or 
to raising that limit for individuals. So right now it's very 
targeted at small family farms, sorts of operations. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So there's no anticipation that . . . What 
would be the case for instance of a corporate entity right now? I 
have a family farm corporation that has three shareholders. 
What is the upper limit on a farming corporation and the 
number of individuals that could apply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Right now there is no limitation on 
that. We would not accept the corporation, but each member 
would be eligible to apply. Again they have to have approval of 
the association. They have to have approval from lending 
institutions that they are reliable and have a security. But there 
wouldn't be a limit on the number of individuals that could 
apply although the corporation wouldn't be eligible. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, so there would be really nothing to  

prevent individuals who are shareholders in another 
organization from each deciding that they could access this 
money and then, because they were shareholders in that other 
organization, also use it to their benefit as far as raising 
agricultural products, namely cattle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That's correct. Somebody could 
have feeder financing through Sask Wheat Pool, but could still 
. . . wouldn't disqualify them from being a member of a feeder 
co-op. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You have one part 
of the Bill that talks about the associations being responsible for 
taking all the proceeds from a sale of a particular commodity, 
like calves in the feeder association . . . or calves in the breeder 
association or cows, making their loans . . . making the 
requirement that they be paid to reduce the loan. Because that's 
a five-year loan, is it my understanding that it's only the value of 
what is payable for that year, or is it for the whole loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's what one of the 
amendments that we're proposing does — clarifies that, that it's 
only for that year's loan that has to be deducted, that year's 
payment. They can pay more if they want but this amendment 
clarifies that all that they have to pay is the portion of the loan 
that's due in that year. 
 
Mr. Martens: — If the individual sells cows on a breeder 
program, does that mean that he has . . . only has to pay back 
that portion of the money required for that? Or is it against the 
whole loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, it would be the prorated 
amount on that individual animal. So if there's still $500 owing 
on that particular cow, that would have to be paid off, but the 
balance of that would not be required to be paid on other 
animals. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I believe the producer can trade cows for ones 
that he would want to sell — am I correct on that? — and/or 
replace a dry cow. And that's usually the reason why they're 
being sold, they're either old or aren't in calf. Would the same 
conditions apply to that individual if he's going to trade a cow 
and brand it with a producer association brand? Is that 
applicable under these circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, the producer would be 
allowed to replace a cull cow with a cow of equivalent value 
and then have that cull cow transferred to his ownership and be 
able to keep the proceeds of sale from it. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Would you be able to tell me how many cows 
we have under this program in the province, for the plan, and 
then give me the value of the guarantee and the estimated value 
of . . . Well I can estimate the value of those cows. But give me 
the volume of cows and the value that the guarantee is on the 
cows. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We have about 35,000 cows — we  



April 10, 1995 

 
1476 

don't have the exact number here — and I think last year they 
were at an average value of about 925 or somewhere in that 
neighbourhood. The total guarantees under the program, 
including the feeders and the breeders, is $44.5 million. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Another point that is made here deals with 
how the association handles their liability when there is a 
potential of a default. Can you explain that process to us so that 
we have a clear idea on how this works? 
 
And there have been a number of serious problems that have 
occurred in one part of the province, and I just was wondering 
how . . . and you don't have to reflect on how that one is done, 
but how would normal procedures be dealt with when there is a 
default from a producer association on the loan guarantee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The steps in the procedure would 
be that all purchases to that association would be stopped 
immediately. The association would then collect or attempt to 
collect the money from the member who is in default. Failing 
that, the lending institution would then have access to the 
insurance fund that the members contribute to, and if it that's 
not adequate, then the government guarantee would kick in. 
 
Mr. Martens: — All of the producers who belong to the 
association would have to relinquish their dollars in the 
assurance fund in order to offset that individual's losses. Am I 
correct there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So the government guarantee in effect is the 
last guarantee if all other avenues are covered: first of all, the 
sale of the animals of that individual, then the involvement of 
the assurance fund of all those other individuals who are in the 
association, who have assurance funds in there. 
 
What about the area of and the responsibility of the association 
if they have not got very much money in the fund. And then the 
other question . . . and then does that trigger more money 
coming from the provincial government? And then I've got 
another question for you. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, the members are required to 
have 5 per cent of their purchases set aside in the assurance 
fund on the feeder association and 10 per cent on breeder loan. 
So that's absolutely correct. If it's a large association and a lot of 
members, they would more likely to be covered by the 
insurance fund. If there's a small amount of money in there, 
then it's more a risk to government. But that's the way it works. 
First the assurance fund goes, and then government guarantees 
kick in after that. 
 
Mr. Martens: — On the default, can there be a crossover 
between a default in the breeder plan and a default in the 
feeder? Can there be a crossover from the breeder to the feeder? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, there's no crossover either 
with the cattle or with the assurance fund. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just like 
to thank the officials for helping us out with the last two Bills, 
and look forward to seeing you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I would also like to thank my 
officials, and the opposition for their fine line of questioning. 
Thank you. 

 
Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 

 
The Chair: — I'll ask the Minister of Justice to introduce his 
officials to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, arrangements have been 
made to postpone the consideration by the committee of The 
Securities Act. And so with the consent of the House, we'll just 
hoist that on to the next day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — According to . . . (inaudible) . . . I 
move the committee report progress. 
 
Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting Trading in Real Estate, the 

Real Estate Commission and Brokerages, Brokers and 
Salespersons Trading in Real Estate 

 
The Chair: — I'll ask the Minister of Justice to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today Mr. Jim Hall, the Superintendent of Insurance in the 
Department of Justice; and Ms. Linda Ens, a senior policy 
analyst with legislative services in the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I note 
that you have two individuals that we did have the opportunity 
of sitting down with recently in the office to go through the 
Bill. And one might add, well maybe there really isn't anything 
to add since I've had the privilege of sitting down with officials, 
but I think maybe it's appropriate we do address some of the 
issues. 
 
I understand that basically, rather than just amending an old 
Bill, you've taken the time, your department has taken the time, 
to basically look through the whole Act and come in with a 
totally new Act. And maybe you could update us on that, the 
reasons for it, and the involvement the real estate association 
brokers may have had in the bringing forward the different 
sections of the Act, the changes that would have taken place,  



April 10, 1995 

 
1477 

and the ideas and reasoning behind it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the 
member. A two-year process has gone into the development of 
this piece of legislation. The 1987 legislation was very 
successful. And what it did was in effect make the industry 
self-regulating, and it has worked very well. 
 
As you would expect with a new piece of legislation, there are 
problems that occur as you get experience under it. And most of 
the changes that are incorporated into the Bill before the 
committee today have come from the industry as a result of 
their experience in self-regulation. We decided to incorporate it 
into a new Bill rather than an amending Bill because it became 
obvious that the Act could do with some reordering of sections 
and reordering of parts, and that the understanding of the Bill as 
you went through it would be improved if that reorganization 
took place. And so we decided to go with this format. 
 
Also the number of changes are not insignificant, and rather 
than present them with an amending Act to be read in 
conjunction with the Bill, we thought for the benefit of the 
industry it would be advisable to bring it forward as a new piece 
of legislation. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I understand that under the new Act 
— and I'm not sure if it was something that occurred under the 
original Act as well — consumers will now be forced to make 
written offers on homes. Is that something that's been 
introduced just recently or part of the new Act; or is that in the 
Act, or was it a major concern regarding the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It was previously the requirement that 
an offer had to be in writing. The Act is being amended to 
require offers other than offers to purchase to be in writing, so 
offers to lease will be included. And it's expanded the scope of 
the kind of offers that are required to be reduced to writing. We 
see it as a consumer protection provision because the terms are 
set right down in writing and there will be no dispute as to the 
nature of the offer. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Does this create any kind of an added cost to the 
consumer in regarding to the change of real estate or changing 
hands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, it would not increase the cost to the 
consumer at all. 
 
Mr. Toth: — An area that probably did have a fair bit of 
discussion — I'm sure the realtors association offered a number 
of suggestions on — is the disciplinary provisions that this Act 
brings forward. And it permits the Real Estate Commission to 
discipline realtors. Did the existing Act contain any disciplinary 
measures or were realtors basically protected from complaints? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, there were disciplinary 
procedures of course under the old Act, and they were sketchy 
in nature, leaving some of the procedures to be developed by 
by-laws of the commission. And that in fact happened. 

What we're doing here is taking those by-laws and putting them 
into the legislation. In so doing I think we have a . . . the 
procedure for this industry is consistent with the disciplinary 
procedure for other industries. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in bringing forward this section on 
disciplines, basically in the past who has initiated disciplinary 
measures? Would those come from consumers who may have 
felt that they've been mistreated by their broker or by their 
agent? Or is it a problem that . . . or has it been a problem 
within the industry itself and they felt they needed some 
measures or some guidelines whereby they could discipline 
members? 
 
I'm wondering if you could just indicate the reasons for the 
disciplinary measures and how they were arrived at. Who 
basically brought them forward? Or is this just a matter of the 
industry itself trying to protect themselves, looking ahead as to 
what they might run into the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, the complaints that have 
come forward of a disciplinary nature have come from three 
sources in the past. They come from consumers, as the member 
has perceived. There are also complaints that come forward 
from fellow brokers who want to complain about the conduct of 
one of their fellow brokers. And a third source is from the 
commission itself in some of its spot audits. So those three 
sources of complaints are who initiates the process. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And how would an individual go about initiating 
a complaint, and who would they raise the complaint with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The procedure is relatively informal. 
Complaints may be made in writing to the commission 
indicating the conduct complained of, with details of that 
conduct. Or a person can simply phone the complaints officer in 
the commission and discuss the conduct over the telephone; in 
effect, file the complaint over the telephone and that may 
initiate the process. 
 
It's then in the hands of the commission and if it has any 
substance, it then is referred to an investigation committee and 
the procedures under the Act click in and apply. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us who 
makes up the commission that a complainant would file a 
complaint with and then maybe give us an understanding of the 
process that would be followed if a complaint is registered — 
how that complaint is followed up on, what review scenario 
takes place so that indeed, at the end of the day, if a complaint 
is raised against a certain . . . say it's an individual or a specific 
company, that that company doesn't find themselves tied up in 
the tedious process of defending themselves over a complaint 
that really may not have a lot of facts to substantiate it. 
 
And I guess what I'm concerned about is that we do have a fair 
process and a process that does not tie up an individual's ability 
to continue to provide for themselves if a complaint is 
registered against them that may not have a lot of substance. 



April 10, 1995 

 
1478 

(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The commission, of course, is 
constituted under the Act and consists of nine members, some 
of whom are appointed, some of whom are elected. The 
commission has staff, of course, and among the staff is the 
complaints officer that I referred to earlier, who receives the 
complaints. This officer will consider whether there's any 
substance to the complaint at all, whether it falls under the Act, 
whether it consists of or whether it amounts to professional 
misconduct or some disciplinary offence under the Act. So 
there is that initial screening there. 
 
If the officer feels that there is something that requires some 
further consideration, then the officer refers the matter to an 
investigation committee, which is referred to in section 34 of 
the Bill. That's established by the commission and the 
investigation committee is then seized of the matter. 
 
The investigation committee look at it. If they require more 
information, they instruct the complaints officer to get that 
information and then consider the matter then in the light of 
what's before them and decide whether this is a matter that 
ought to be referred to the commission for a discipline hearing 
under section 37. 
 
If there is a discipline hearing, it is heard by the commission. 
We're not sure whether that's going to be . . . most likely a 
committee of the commission. Most of the professional bodies 
designate some of their numbers to be the discipline committee, 
and that's likely the route that will be followed here. And the 
commission then hear and determine the complaint. 
 
The complaints officer is in effect then the prosecutor with 
respect to the complaint, and of course the person complained 
against has a right to be represented as well, and the matter goes 
forward as usual. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that the commission 
consists of four members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council and five members elected by the registrants in 
accordance with the by-laws. Number one, who would be 
considered the registrants? Are we talking of the real estate 
association in general regarding the five members? 
 
And secondly, the four members appointed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council — who would make the recommendations 
for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to make those 
appointees, or are basically those appointees just becoming 
another political base of appointment? 
 
And I'm wondering if you could clarify that so we know exactly 
where we're coming from or where the government or the 
department is coming from in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The five persons elected are elected by 
the registrants, which is everybody that's registered under the 
Act. And that's an election conducted by the commission itself. 
 

Before members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council are appointed on the recommendation of the Minister 
of Justice, and the department consults with everyone that has 
an interest. All of the organizations that have an interest in the 
good administration of this Act and in that process comes up 
with names of people who have a knowledge of the industry 
and are the sort of people that are likely to make a contribution 
to the effective operation of the commission, and then the 
minister takes that recommendation to the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council for approval. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, would there be any reason why the 
commission would not have looked . . . or the department 
would not have looked at possibly having all these positions 
elected? 
 
We may have our different views of opinion as to whether or 
not they will become just a political football down the road. 
And from your comments, you're suggesting that basically the 
Justice minister will certainly talk to the commission and seek 
their guidance in the appointment, but that view can change 
from one minister or one government to the next. And it would 
seem to me that . . . would it have been possible or would it be 
feasible to have had a totally elected commission versus part of 
the commission being appointed by Lieutenant Governor in 
Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The structure of the commission is 
unchanged from the original Act in 1987. The member will 
know that before 1987 the industry was regulated by 
government, plain and simple, without the industry being 
involved in any way or responsible for the regulation of itself. 
 
In '87 the board was set up in this way, and my understanding is 
that this set-up recognizes the obvious interest of the people 
registered under the Act in its operation — the brokers and the 
like. But it governs the trade in real estate, and there are 
obviously other groups that have some interest in that other than 
the people who are doing the buying and selling, or at least 
whose business it is to buy and sell real estate. So the board is 
set up in such a way to reflect those interest as well. And that's 
the reason why we consult on the basis that we do in appointing 
the four people by order in council. It's an attempt to ensure that 
on the board of the commission is reflected various points of 
view, various interests in the buying and selling of real estate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when a 
complaint is registered with the commission, and you indicated 
that there possibly will be a specific investigation committee 
rather than all the total . . . or the number of members, all the 
members on the commission really, reviewing that matter, that 
that committee would then be asked to do an investigation. 
 
When that complaint is registered, would an individual or a 
specific organization know that a complaint has been brought 
forward about their activities, or about maybe a possible 
conflict of interest? Or when would an individual know that 
they're being investigated? Would that individual just realize 
after the investigative committee has done their research and  



April 10, 1995 

 
1479 

suggested that possibly a total review of an individual or a 
group's licence be looked into, is that when they'd be informed, 
or are they informed up front? How is a person notified or do 
they become aware of a complaint registered against them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The complaint, as I said earlier, is made 
to the responsible officer, and the officer looks at it and 
determines whether or not there's any substance to it. If it is just 
a complaint that doesn't fall under the Act, that's the end of it 
right there. And the person against whom the complaint is made 
would probably never know that there had been this complaint. 
 
If however the officer feels that there is some substance to the 
allegation, then it is likely that the alleged offender would be 
notified immediately and be given an opportunity to put the 
matter . . . to put his or her view of the situation to the 
complaints officer before the complaints officer refers it to the 
investigating committee. 
 
I suppose that it could happen that the offence is so obvious 
that it just was referred directly to the investigation committee, 
but then that committee would have to notify the offender and 
get the perspective of the alleged offender before deciding 
whether or not to refer the matter to the commission for a 
formal hearing. 
 
The investigation committee, remember, is just a screen 
between the laying of the complaint and any formal action with 
respect to the matter complained of. But so far as notice is 
concerned, I would fully expect that the alleged offender would 
be told by the officer that a complaint had been made and been 
given an opportunity to respond to it before the matter had even 
been referred to the investigation committee. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So then what you're saying . . . what the 
legislation also brings forward . . . is that after an investigating 
officer has reviewed the complaint? That officer then has the 
ability — or the commission, I guess I should say — the 
commission then has the ability to determine whether or not 
they should pursue with the complaint or whether they could 
just consider that this matter is closed and done for. It really 
doesn't have any substance to pursue the matter any further. 
 
In that case then, you may find what you're saying then, an 
individual may never have known that a complaint was laid 
against them, which I think may be appropriate; I don't know. I 
just kind of . . . If a complaint is fairly trivial in nature, really 
has no substance, then I guess there's not much point in creating 
a lot of anxiety in an individual's mind about a possible 
complaint that really may not have any substance. 
 
And on that basis I guess it would be appropriate not to really 
raise the issue unless there is something of substance whereby 
the complaint . . . and then I would understand, if there is 
something that would indicate to the investigating committee 
that they should review this further, if I understand you 
correctly then, the complaint that was raised against an 
individual, that individual who had the complaint raised against 
him would then at least have the opportunity to refute the  

complaint against them before it proceeds further to the 
commission and into a full-fledged investigation, if I can use 
those words? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. Let me just be sure that I've made 
myself clear on the various steps here. 
 
Think, Mr. Chair, of there being three boxes here in connection 
with this process. The first is the complaints officer who 
receives the complaint. Either it comes in in writing, or it comes 
in over the telephone. That's sort of your first screening device, 
if you like, to separate out the claims that are . . . or the 
complaints that are clearly not covered by the Act. 
 
Then the second box is the investigating committee which is 
appointed by the commission and which reviews claims that the 
complaints officer thinks has some substance. And the function 
of the investigation committee is to determine whether this is a 
matter that ought to be dealt with as a disciplinary matter before 
the commission. 
 
So the investigation committee is the second box. And the 
commission itself is the third box. And they each have 
somewhat different roles. Then the role gets more formal as you 
move through the three boxes that I've described. 
 
The complaints officer will screen out, as I've said, the crank 
calls, the matters that don't have any substance to them at all, 
that don't fall under the Act. If, however, the complaints officer 
feels that this is a matter which has some substance to it, is 
covered by the Act, and if true would amount to professional 
misconduct or some other disciplinary offence, then the 
complaints officer refers it to the investigation committee. 
 
Before doing so, we would expect the complaints officer to 
contact the person involved — the broker or whoever — and 
draw to his or her attention that this complaint has come in and 
what it's about and get from them the other side of the story. 
And then have that information on hand to present to the 
investigation committee and say here, we've got a problem. 
Here's the complaint. It's against Joe Doe, a licensed broker. I've 
talked to Mr. Doe and he says . . . and report that up to the 
committee. 
 
Then the committee looks at it and considers what it should do. 
Does it have enough information to deal with the subject? In 
which event, as I said earlier, they may ask the complaints 
officer to go out and investigate other aspects of it or get more 
information. But at the end of the day the investigation 
committee has to decide whether this is a matter which ought to 
be referred to the commission under section 37. 
 
Now certainly by that time the alleged offender has been 
contacted at least once, maybe more than once, and the process 
is apprised of the position of the alleged offender by that time. 
And then if it is a matter that should be considered by the full 
commission under section 37, then of course the alleged  



April 10, 1995 

 
1480 

offender is a party — is in the position of an accused really — 
coming forward to be represented by themselves or by counsel 
to meet this complaint and try and establish their innocence of 
the complaint that is made against them. So that process should 
work; it should work without too much formality, and by the 
two screening mechanisms of the complaints officer and the 
investigation committee, keep away from the commission 
matters that don't have any substance. 
 
As you say, they may not even know that the complaint has 
been made, or it may be something that can be mediated or 
explained when the proper context is understood, and it never 
does get to the point where a disciplinary hearing, as such, is 
held by the commission. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I like 
your three-box scenario. It reminds me of a process that we 
went through with the auditor in this province, and he basically 
brought to our attention that if we thought of the finances of 
this province as far as three grain bins . . . we've got the general 
fund, and you've got the Crown corporations, and you've got 
pension plans over here, and yet they are all part of the overall 
picture. 
 
Unfortunately most of the time we just look in one bin, and 
either we can determine whether we find it empty, half full, or 
full. And I'm not sure how the boxes totally fit here, but maybe 
the grain bin scenario could be used by your . . . you can pass 
on your box scenario to the Finance minister, so she can explain 
the financing of this province in a little clearer fashion to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But coming back to the real estate Bill we have before us . . . 
and when a complaint is laid and after an investigation it is 
determined that . . . a more thorough investigation and a 
follow-up investigation, I guess, if you will . . . and I don't 
know whether you would call it charges or whatever the process 
or the forum is involved. 
 
It would seem to me then that if a complaint is followed up, it 
feels that it is substantial and that there should be further 
review, the individual, whether it’s a broker or real-estate agent 
. . . I guess what I'm coming to is, that person then . . . does the 
commission then determine whether to suspend an agent or take 
away their licence to operate while this review is undertaken? 
Or do we look at the review process as part of the ongoing 
format, and the fact that in this country we do believe people 
are innocent until proven guilty and that that individual is able 
to continue to operate their line of business while the 
investigation takes into consideration . . .  
 
Because I'm not exactly sure if we've got some guidelines set 
out as to some time limits. If an investigation should be fairly 
time consuming and take up a fair bit of time and if you have a 
suspension — as we've noted in section 36, it talks about 
interim suspensions — then a person's livelihood may be at risk 
at that time. And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what kind of 
provisions have been brought into this Act to basically deal 
with those problems that may arise. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The provision respecting an interim 
suspension is a new section, and arises because of something 
the member mentioned in his question. And that is when, under 
the existing law, someone against whom a complaint has been 
made can just keep engaging in the business until their hearing 
has been held, and if they appeal, until the appeal has been dealt 
with. 
 
And there is in this Bill, section 36 as the member points out, 
which provides for an interim suspension. Now this is a 
suspension that is made by the superintendent. It's not a 
decision of the investigation committee or for that matter the 
commission, but is a decision made by the superintendent on 
the application of the investigation committee. 
 
So if you consider that the investigation committee is 
representative of the industry, it is a situation where the industry 
feels that the complaint is so serious, of such a nature, that the 
right of the registrant, of the person against whom the 
complaint has been made, to sell real estate, buy real estate and 
otherwise carry on under the Act, should be suspended while 
this matter is being looked at, then they can make an application 
to the Superintendent of Insurance. And if they can satisfy him, 
as is the case now, or her, that this is a case where there should 
be a suspension, then an order can be made. Now that's a 
limited order. 
 
You'll have seen that it only applies for 90 days, not more than 
90 says. And so the other part of the process has to work within 
that limited time frame or the person can resume their normal 
activities after the end of the 90-day period. 
 
The commission of course has disciplinary powers which 
include the cancellation of the registration or the suspension for 
a specified period and various other orders that can be made 
under section 38 of the Act. 
 
I just think it is significant to notice though that it is the interim 
order which is made before any evidence is heard, before there 
is a hearing, it is not made by the industry. It is one where they 
have to satisfy the Superintendent of Insurance that such an 
order should be made. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the reason I raise that, Mr. Minister, and I 
raised it when we had our meeting as well, was the fact that 
unfortunately we've basically evolved to in our society, to a 
point where if a complaint or if a charge or some form of 
comment, derogatory comment, is made about an individual . . . 
in a judicial manner of whether or not that individual person or 
group have had an opportunity to have a fair hearing and even 
their day in court, the public at large tend to view individuals as 
having been guilty even before they've had that opportunity. 
And certainly a person in the real estate area too would . . . if 
disciplinary problems are brought forward, if indeed a licence is 
revoked for even that 90-day period, I'm sure that any individual 
may find themselves in that position, will find after 90 days that 
they may have fewer people willing to come and do business 
with them, feeling that they may not be the most trustworthy 
individual or individuals. 



April 10, 1995 

 
1481 

And I think it's very important that we at least have good, solid 
guidelines to make sure that we're not infringing on, first of all, 
basically passing sentence prior to the full investigation hearing 
being complete; and secondly, we also have to keep in mind the 
protection of the public as well, especially if it should be a case 
where . . . and throwing out a scenario, let's say a case of fraud 
was brought forward and of course the public want to be 
protected, know that they've got . . . the commission or the 
industry is policing itself. 
 
So those are some of the areas that we need to be mindful of. 
And I'm sure the committee and your department were quite 
mindful of this when they were putting all the information 
together to build this Bill for the industry. And I know the 
industry itself is quite concerned. They want to build an 
industry that has a good, solid reputation that people can trust in 
it. 
 
I'm wondering if you could just give us a bit of an explanation 
of the disciplinary powers that the commission does have 
should they, at the end of the day, in an investigation determine 
that yes indeed, the complaint was legitimate and that maybe a 
person or group abused their position. And what powers would 
the commission then invoke, what disciplinary measures would 
they bring into place, and how would they deal with misconduct 
of anyone under this Act, within the industry? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
powers of the commission where they have found a registrant 
guilty of professional incompetence or professional misconduct, 
are set out in section 38 of the Bill. These powers are similar to 
and consistent with the powers that some of the professional 
bodies have with respect to their members. 
 
The member will have noticed that there are disciplinary 
provisions in the 1987 Act. And what is happening here is that 
a bit more flexibility is being introduced into the range of 
orders that can be made by the commission. 
 
In the most serious cases, the commission can order the 
cancellation of a registration. In less serious situations, they can 
order a suspension for a specified period, or suspension 
conditional on certain action being taken — sort of a 
suspension until certain conditions are satisfied. 
 
There is also provision for the board ordering upgrading by 
ordering that the registrant complete specified classes or 
courses of instruction. And also an order that can be made is 
that the registrant obtain treatment or counselling, for example, 
if they had a substance addiction problem. 
 
The section also gives the board power to order restitution. 
They may reprimand, which they would do presumably in a 
case that was not especially serious. 
 
In addition, the commission has the power to order payment of 
a fine and payment of the costs of the hearing, which is I think  

standard fare with respect to these disciplinary bodies. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, would there be cases where a 
complaint raised and through investigation would be shown that 
the complaint may move beyond the abilities of the 
commission? And I'm talking of the fact is there a possibility 
that complaints could rise into a position of being a criminal 
matter whereby the commission would then suspend their 
review and would suggest it go further? Or how is that process 
handled? Or if a criminal matter is brought forward, if it 
becomes a criminal matter, and then the commission just 
divests itself of the investigation and allows the judicial system 
then to take over. I'm wondering if you could just update us on 
that format and how it falls into place in the scenario we have 
before us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Where either the commission or, in the 
step prior to that, the second box, the investigation committee 
believes that the conduct complained of may amount to a 
criminal offence, the committee or the commission can stop 
what they're doing — either stop the investigation or stop the 
hearing — and report its findings to the deputy minister of 
Justice and to the Chair of the commission and to the 
Superintendent of Insurance, so that the system is apprised of 
the fact that this may be criminal conduct and more than just a 
matter of disciplinary proceedings under the Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And while this is all taking place, an 
investigation is taking place, do I understand that the 
complainant and the individual who has a complaint laid 
against them would present their views during the hearing 
together, or is this done separately? Because I noticed in one 
area where the complainant is notified of a date of a hearing. 
And I'm just wondering if in notification are they just basically 
indicated that this hearing is taking place and if they wish to 
come and listen or sit in on the hearing, they have that 
opportunity. Or would they be coming specifically to be a 
witness or to be involved in testimony regarding the complaint 
that they had raised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In the normal case, Mr. Chair, this is a 
public hearing conducted along conventional lines. The 
complaint will be carried by the employee of the commission 
that I referred to earlier, the complaints officer . . . act as a 
prosecutor. Perhaps in some cases they will retain counsel to 
act. And it will be the fact that the complainant will be normally 
called as a witness to give evidence about what happened, 
because every person accused of a situation like this has the 
right to cross-examine and otherwise receive due process so that 
they will in effect be facing each other in the hearing room. The 
ordinary rules of natural justice then apply as to the disclosure 
of documents and the right to cross-examine and to make 
representations and call witnesses on both sides. And at the end 
of the day, the commission decides. 
 
So it's not unlike all of the other mechanisms that are in place in 
similar situations in the professional statutes and certain other 
statutes. 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1482 

Mr. Toth: — I noticed, Mr. Minister, that certainly we do have 
laid out a number of points as to what the superintendent may 
or may not do. And even an appeal, we see what the judge may 
or may not do. And at the end of the day, what does the 
individuals who had the complaint against them, what appeal 
process do they have? 
 
And I would imagine they would have an ability to appeal a 
decision by the commission. Who would they go to if they feel 
that the commission has been unduly fair in laying out . . . 
taking actions against them? If it proceeds beyond the ability of 
the commission then into a legal matter, then what format of 
appeal would an appellant follow through to basically 
determine or indicate that they feel that they haven't been 
treated fairly? And in most cases, that's why an appeal would be 
brought forward. And what format would they follow, and then 
how would they go about re-registration after everything is said 
and done? 
 
I guess you would have to, first of all, determine whether or not 
they were guilty of the complaint, whether there's substantial 
evidence to substantiate it. If they are, then of course you then 
have to look through the process. And I think you talked about 
re-education and some upgrading and certainly some of the 
disciplinary powers the commission has laid out. 
 
In the case of the courts, after a person's paid their due sentence 
of . . . as it's been laid against them, what format or process 
would they then follow through to be reinstated or again receive 
a licence? 
 
Now I think I've got a fairly broad perspective, a number of 
questions I've raised with you here — whether you can 
remember them all — but maybe you could just comment on 
that for me, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The decisions of the commission are 
appealable to the superintendent under section 43 of the Act. 
And that right to appeal is broadly based in the sense that the 
appeal may be taken either by the . . . well it arises in different 
ways under section 43. It may be an applicant who has been 
refused registration, but in the disciplinary processes, the 
registrant who has been found guilty of professional 
misconduct or professional incompetence can appeal. Similarly 
a brokerage may appeal. And those appeals are to the 
superintendent and must be brought within 30 days of the 
decision or order of the commission. 
 
There is a further appeal to the Court of Queen's Bench, and 
that appeal is provided for in section 44. Those are appeals 
from the orders of the superintendent under either section 36, 
which is what we were just talking about, with the interim 
suspensions; or section 43, which is the one that I've just 
referred to, the immediately preceding section where the 
superintendent has heard an appeal and made an order 
contemplated by that section. 
 
Those appeals must be launched within 30 days of the decision 
or the order, and the matter gets to the Court of Queen's Bench,  

before a judge of the Court of Queen's Bench, by serving a 
notice of appeal. And the matter is dealt with by the court in the 
usual way. The powers of the court are set out in subsection (4) 
of section 44 and cover every eventuality, every possibility. 
 
The process is reasonably tight. Because it is to the Court of 
Queen's Bench, the matter normally to be brought on fairly 
quickly. The court hears these kinds of cases every week in 
Regina and Saskatoon, and less frequently in other centres — 
but you know, every second week, every fourth week, 
something like that. So the matters can get to the court without 
any particular delay. 
 
Now the member also asked about reinstatement after the 
cancellation of a registration. The person in question would 
apply in the normal way and have to satisfy the commission of 
the normal things, the normal elements of an application, and I 
think have to satisfy the commission that they can be reinstated 
without any particular concern that the conduct may be 
repeated. The commission will handle that in the normal way 
and we have confidence they'd be able to do that. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what steps have been taken to 
protect, say, a consumer or consumer groups or a group of 
consumers? Say a complaint has been registered against a 
realtor and there have been . . . that realtor is in the position of 
basically dealing with a number of transactions and this 
complaint has been raised and an investigation comes forward 
and suggests that possible suspension of licence would take 
place and there's been a number of incomplete transactions kind 
of sitting on the table. 
 
Who looks after those? What provisions have been . . . Are 
there any provisions in place that would address that so that 
consumers are not unfairly left in limbo until an investigation is 
totally completed while they've been trying to, say, close a deal 
on a land sale or a house sale or whatever? And I'm wondering 
if there's anything to address that matter. Or does somebody 
else . . . Does that then fall to another partner if you're with a 
group? Or how are those circumstances addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The superintendent is involved in these 
situations and the superintendent would normally, where there's 
any question of default or mishandling of money or a possibility 
of that exists, may step in and freeze the bank accounts of the 
individual or the business to protect the money. And then 
either, if there are partners or employees, have somebody else 
handle the transactions that the member speaks of; or if there 
are large transactions involved, if the volume is more than just 
run-of-the-mill, then the superintendent can go to court and 
appoint a receiver or a trustee to manage the business and bring 
these deals to completion. 
 
And in that way the people who are dealing with the broker 
who is under investigation are not prejudiced. They'll see their 
transactions go through, but they will go through under the 
supervision of the superintendent, either by some person  



April 10, 1995 

 
1483 

appointed informally, as I've just indicated, or by someone 
appointed by the court to ensure that the transactions are 
properly tidied up. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I've 
got a few brief comments that I'd like to make today and then a 
few questions. And I want to begin, Mr. Minister, by 
emphasizing it's our belief that Acts governing professional 
associations in general are very important for the protection of 
the public, the professions, and those directly involved in the 
professions. Therefore it is important that we give the Bill 
before us appropriate consideration, I believe. 
 
The amendments proposed, as well as The Real Estate Act 
itself, are very important and comprehensive. It is our position 
that the protection of consumers is of primary importance, and 
we commend the members of the real estate industry for 
recognizing this and working very hard towards this end. 
 
I understand the review process began in October of 1992, and 
therefore I recognize a great deal of time has been devoted to 
improving the way the industry will be regulated. We know 
from our consultations with the Real Estate Commission and its 
members that they are very supportive of the review process 
which took place. 
 
I agree with all those concerned that the current Act needs to be 
amended and clarified to ensure it meets the needs of the 
industry today and to enhance its protection for consumers. 
 
Upon reviewing the proposed Act, we find a number of changes 
that would be beneficial to the public and to the industry. 
 
First, we believe that allowing the registrar to register applicants 
under terms and conditions set by the commission should avoid 
unnecessary delays for the applicants. The clarification of the 
duties and responsibilities of all brokers, branch managers, and 
agents, will more accurately reflect the current practices of the 
industry, and we believe this is overdue. 
 
The industry has evolved, and it is important that the proposed 
Act reflect those changes. We are also very pleased to see many 
amendments to the Act which will enhance the protection for 
the public. In general, several sections deal with providing 
consumers more accurate information and protection when 
buying and selling property. As well, the amendments to this 
Act clarify the rules of conduct for those involved in the real 
estate profession, and we know the members are pleased with 
this. 
 
In general, we view the proposed Act as important and 
deserving of this Assembly's support. We have no objection, 
and we will be supportive. 
 
However, as it relates to the government's role in dealing with 
professional associations and its consultation process, I'll be 
putting forward some concerns that we have in this regard. 
 
First, there appears to be some inconsistency in the way that  

government deals with professional associations during the 
consultative process. Specifically, it appears there are 
inconsistencies in what some different associations are being 
told by the government, Mr. Minister. Time and time again, 
professional associations tell us that the government uses the 
excuse that they must do things a certain way in order to 
maintain government uniformity and consistency as it relates to 
writing or rewriting the proposed Acts. Unfortunately different 
associations are being told different things. And you, Mr. 
Minister, will probably want to make mention of that and 
perhaps why people would view that, when you're speaking 
later. 
 
But this raises the question of fairness, relating to how the 
government deals with the associations on an individual basis. 
We know that this government has shown time and time again 
how ineffective and overly bureaucratic it has become. And we 
all know this type of approach does not serve the best interests 
of the public nor the professional associations that the 
government deals with. 
 
Therefore I will have some questions in this regard, particularly 
as it relates to the government's demand of making the hearing 
process overly bureaucratic by adding an investigative 
committee. I'm told the government's reason for doing this was 
to make the hearing process uniform with other hearing 
procedures. It appears this added level of bureaucracy to the 
hearing process will have no advantage and could make the 
process cumbersome and overly bureaucratic. As well, this new 
procedure will increase the cost to the commission and will not 
provide a fair hearing for the accused. 
 
In fact I'm told the addition of an investigative committee may 
make the hearing process unworkable. I understand there may 
be some indecision as to when or how or at what stage this 
process . . . at what stage does the process allow the accused to 
enter a plea. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I've made several points that I guess I've 
raised that you may want to respond to. However I'll begin with 
just a few other questions. 
 
I note that I think it's section 15 deals with the superintendent. 
And, Mr. Minister, I'd like to know why the superintendent who 
is appointed by the minister has only 30 days to approve or 
disapprove any changes to the by-laws. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, the member raises a number 
of questions. We have been working on this for over two years 
with the industry, and we think we have a fair understanding 
out there of the minds of the commission and the other parties 
that have an interest in this. And our understanding is that the 
commission is satisfied with the arrangements that are 
described in the disciplinary part of the Bill. 
 
That the investigative committee, as we understand it, is 
certainly not going to create any overly bureaucratic  



April 10, 1995 

 
1484 

mechanisms and need not be any kind of big cost item. As a 
matter of fact, it'll probably be a cost reduction over time 
because it will result in the full commission having to hear 
fewer complaints. If you think a screening mechanism operating 
effectively can screen out complaints that ought never to have 
reached the commission, you then must conclude that the 
commission will have less work. 
 
Therefore the formal proceedings will be fewer. The necessity 
to retain counsel will be . . . those occasions will be fewer. And 
overall it should be a cost reduction. It need not operate in any 
formal way; it could do its work perhaps . . . I can easily 
conceive how it could be done without formally gathering 
together -- with fax machines and with, you know, with the use 
of the telephone. 
 
They could determine many of these things without having to 
get together. It's not contemplated that the investigation 
committee will hold any kind of formal hearings, but they will 
simply act as a screening mechanism between the investigating 
officers — the complaint officers on the one hand and the 
formal commission on the other. And it would seem to be a 
really excellent idea. And to repeat myself, our understanding is 
that the Real Estate Commission itself doesn't object to this 
mechanism at all and consider it to be kind of a healthy way to 
set this thing up. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, you made 
mention about a cost savings; that was going to do some 
questioning further down the line, but in fact we'll get into it 
right now. 
 
Can you give me, Mr. Minister, some idea of what the cost of 
the investigative committee will cost the commission on 
average? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I really am not in a position to answer 
that, Mr. Chair. It depends on how the commission set up the 
arrangements under which this committee will operate. 
 
So I suppose that it's possible to conceive that they can set it up 
in a way that it would cost significant amounts of money, but 
on the other hand it would seem that the functions of the 
committee under the Act could be carried out without any 
undue cost. But I'm certainly not in a position to make any 
estimates. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, then I wasn't sure 
what your comments would have been as far as the investigative 
committee. By your feeling it wasn't going to be adding more 
bureaucracy, in fact there's a cost savings. But, I mean, of 
course you're saying you can't give me some idea of what the 
cost savings would be, but can you give me a quick sketch as to 
how this is going to make the hearing process a lot more fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, my point, Mr. Chair, was simply 
that the process ought to result in the commission itself having 
to spend less time in formal hearings. I tried to put it this way.  

The investigation committee operates as a kind of screening 
device whereby the commission can ensure that the cases that 
go before the full commission for a formal hearing are cases of 
substance, and the commission's own investigation committee 
have looked at the situation and determined that this is a case 
that ought to be brought before the full commission. 
 
Now in the ordinary course, if that screening device is an 
effective screen, you could only conclude that they would be 
screening out some cases that really shouldn't go to the 
commission. And the commission would then have fewer cases 
before it, have to sit for fewer days, and incur less costs. 
 
And that's why I draw the conclusion that the net result of this 
is likely going to be that the administration of the disciplinary 
procedures will be less costly than they would be if the 
investigation committee wasn't there. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, can you explain within the 
hearing process at what stage the accused would enter a plea? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — My answer to that question is that the 
formal notice of the complaint would be served pursuant to 
section 37(1), where the matter has been referred to the 
commission for a hearing and determination. And the registrar 
sends a copy of the formal complaint to the registrant whose 
conduct is the subject of the hearing, along with a notice of the 
date, time, and place of the hearing. So that is the first formal 
notification. 
 
I've indicated earlier in my response to the hon. member for 
Moosomin that I would expect that the registrant would have 
had an opportunity to present his or her side of the story to the 
officer who receives the original complaint, and if not to that 
officer, then while the matter is being considered by the 
investigation committee. 
 
But in any event the formal notice would have to be given 
under section 37. And then on the hearing date, when the matter 
is to be heard by the commission, the procedures in these type 
of cases would require the person to, in effect, make a plea, 
make a response at the beginning of the hearing. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I'd asked a question a little 
while ago in regards to section 15 about the superintendent 
being appointed by the minister and only having, I think it was 
30 days to approve or disprove any changes to the by-laws. And 
I'm just wondering if this is a standard procedure all throughout 
government, or can you give me some explanation of this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Sorry, Mr. Chair, that I didn't deal with 
that when I rose earlier. But the 30-day provision is short, and 
it's short for the convenience of the industry. The 
superintendent is close to this industry, keeping in regular touch 
with the commission, and it's an easy matter for the 
superintendent to respond under section 15 within 30 days. 
 
In other situations, the response takes more time. For example,  



April 10, 1995 

 
1485 

if the minister had to approve the processes by which . . . the 
minute you obtain ministerial approval, would just chew up 
more time than 30 days. I think you'll find that other statutes 
would give 90 days to a minister to do certain acts, maybe even 
longer. 
 
But in the case of the Superintendent of Insurance operating 
under this Act, a 30-day time limit can be met. And that must be 
to the advantage of the commission because they'll know within 
a very short time frame whether the various things that are done 
are satisfactory to the superintendent. There'd be a minimum of 
delay. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I'm told that the Real Estate 
Commission would like to have seen the new home builders 
incorporated under the Act. This would prevent problems such 
as we have seen in the past when, for example, ready built 
homes — I'm not sure what the name of them was — defaulted 
and consumers had to absorb all the costs. The government did 
not allow the new home builders to become incorporated under 
the Act and I'm just wondering why that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The exemption for people engaged in 
the business of home construction is an exemption that existed 
in the '87 Act and is being carried forward in this Act. It is . . . 
these people are engaged in building houses and they sell the 
houses that they build either through their own company or 
through some other arrangement. 
 
They are in that respect similar to the first exemption under 
section 3, which is a trade in real estate by an owner of the real 
estate. That is to say, if you decide to sell your house yourself, 
you are not covered by the Act. You are an exception; you are 
exempt. 
 
And the home construction people are in a similar kind of 
position except that they do it as a business. But they're not 
buying and selling other people's property; they just build and 
sell their own product. 
 
The problem with the home constructors — and it certainly is a 
problem — is that on the occasion when the constructor goes 
bankrupt, becomes insolvent and leaves people holding a house 
that is half built or less than half built, not finished anyway, and 
they don't get what they're contracting for. And the reality is 
that this Act wouldn't address that problem even if the home 
constructors were included. So that we would not have resolved 
the problem that we've been reading about over the past couple 
of years even if these people were brought in under the Act. 
 
So all things considered, at the end of the day we simply 
decided to continue the exemption. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Mr. Minister, then are the home 
builders . . . are you contemplating having an Act for just the 
home builders themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The home construction industry has 
approached us and we have been having conversations with  

them about the problem. We frankly don't know what to do 
about it at this stage. There is nothing in place anywhere in the 
country that really deals with this question of an insolvent or 
bankrupt home constructor. But discussions are going on and 
we are certainly open to participating in a solution to it if we 
can find something that looks like it might work. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, if you felt that the home 
builders couldn't be brought in under this Act — if I remember 
your earlier answer, you talked about to cover those that are 
buying and selling houses — so it would make one wonder why 
maybe the auctioneers couldn't have been brought in under the 
Act. Was that a consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, as the member will 
appreciate, an auction is a much different way of disposing of 
property, selling property, than through a real estate agent. In 
our province, as elsewhere in this country, it's a matter for the 
vendor to determine how to go about selling his or her property. 
You can list it with an agent, or you can engage the services of 
an auctioneer. 
 
We have an Act, a piece of legislation, in this province 
governing sale by auction, and it has provisions which apply to 
all such sales. So the person who places the property with an 
auctioneer, for sale, knows that it's being placed in accordance 
with the provisions of that Act. 
 
Another point that I want to mention to the hon. member is that 
we are engaged presently in a review of that legislation to 
determine whether anything else is required to provide more 
consumer protection or more certainty with respect to auction 
sales. And the industry is being consulted about that. 
 
But there is a clear separation between how a person chooses to 
dispose of their property, and if they want one as opposed to the 
other, then that's really up to them. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of further questions. Mr. 
Minister, I noticed that we have in place the real estate 
assurance fund — provisions for the setting and establishment 
of a fund. I notice there's a substantial sum of money, and in 
section 48(4) it talks about: 
 
 Income from the fund becomes the property of the 

Commission to be used for any purposes that the 
Commission considers proper when the amount of the 
fund exceeds: 

 
  (a) $250,000; or 
 
  (b) any greater amount that may be prescribed in the 

regulations. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is this section basically fall on the 
same provisions of the original legislation or is this a new area? 
And what would be the specific purposes of this fund? 



April 10, 1995 

 
1486 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — These provisions are substantially just 
carried forward, Mr. Chair, and to the member. The fund is the 
same. The administration of the fund is the same. The purpose 
of the fund is the same. The fund is intended to cover 
deficiencies for any money held in trust and that sort of thing. 
And there have only been a couple of claims against that fund 
over the years. 
 
The money from the fund, the surplus if I can term it that, is 
used by the commission for internal education of the industry. 
And that, as far as I'm aware, is the only purpose for which the 
money is being spent. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Another area, Mr. Minister, I just want to raise a 
question on is regarding trust accounts. And under that section 
that deals with trust accounts, we have a portion there, section 
73, where it talks about unclaimed trust money. And I'm 
wondering what we really mean when we refer to unclaimed 
trust money. And section 73(1) also says: 
 
 Subject to subsection (2), where a brokerage holds 

money in trust for more than two years, the brokerage 
shall pay it to the Minister of Finance. 

 
What I'm wondering is why would it be termed the Minister of 
Finance would get that trust money? Wouldn't that money be 
held for specific purpose in regard to a transaction? Wouldn't 
that money then fall to the original person or individual who 
would have put that money up, and that money is then put in 
trust? I understand money is held in trust until a transaction is 
completed. And I guess I don't totally understand why the 
money then would find its way to the hands of the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The section as I understand it, Mr. 
Chair, is meant for the administration of the broker's business 
more than for anybody else's purpose. For example, if a person 
makes an offer and makes a deposit and then it doesn't go 
through and then the person just disappears, moves away and 
doesn't do anything with respect to the money, the broker is 
sitting there with the money, having to administer it, having to 
keep records with respect to it. This provides a way that the 
broker can be relieved of the responsibility of holding the 
money. 
 
Now there are provisions within section 73 that provide . . . that 
insert provisions that are important when we're discussing this. 
The first is that the trust arrangements continue if the broker has 
express authorization from the person who is entitled to receive 
payment of the money to continue to hold the money in trust so 
that a two-year provision is subject to whatever may be the 
provisions of the trust. 
 
The second thing is that the Minister of Finance clearly holds 
the money in a trust-like provision because if a person comes 
along who is entitled to the money, then the Minister of Finance 
pays it to that person. 
 
So I think we can properly look at it as a way to just relieve the  

broker of the responsibility of holding money where nobody 
seems to want it. They can close their books on it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess that's the question. I was just kind of 
wondering, at the end of the day when it ends up in the hands of 
the Minister of Finance, it's not necessarily just going into 
general revenue but indeed basically is in that state of limbo, yet 
in a position of being held in trust until the individual who 
would be responsible for those funds finally lays claim to it. 
 
One other area that is brought to my attention  I thank your 
officials for raising it as well  I guess is a question regarding 
time-share programs. And I believe that . . . I'm not exactly sure. 
If I understand it, it is being addressed under regulations as it 
was something that must have been raised at the last minute and 
really wasn't in a position to be totally dealt with under the 
legislation we have here, although it has brought mention here. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could just raise that with us, inform 
us as to the provisions that deal with time share and whether or 
not all the regulatory powers or regulations will be in place to 
address all the questions or the concerns that have been raised 
in this regard or that may have been raised regarding time-share 
programs in the past. So that this indeed will be covered under 
the legislation before it is finally brought into . . . and passed 
into being or into place, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the member 
for that important question. These time-share transactions came 
to our attention only relatively recently. I misstate myself. Some 
problems in connection with these time-share transactions came 
to our attention only recently. 
 
They are in some cases being very aggressively marketed and 
marketed in a way that is just not in accordance with how we do 
business in this province in other aspects of commerce. And 
this section gives us the ability to regulate with respect to the 
problem, and we present it as the power to make regulations 
because this is a marketing area of almost unlimited variety. 
 
You can be selling time shares on a houseboat or time shares on 
a condo or time shares on a cabin and all kinds of permutations 
and combinations of arrangements. Canada is interested in this; 
other jurisdictions also. And we're going to try and work in 
cooperation with other provinces and with the commission to 
provide some protection to consumers in this area, to provide 
them with enough so that they at least aren't being victimized by 
the people who are peddling these time-share arrangements. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I guess, Mr. Minister, the question that 
really comes forward, and I know we've had individuals who 
have indicated that they had been contacted by people who are 
trying to sell agreements to time share. 
 
And yet what I find at the end of the day, from some of the 
people that I've talked to . . . as well you've bought access to 
this property. The time that . . . and certainly in Saskatchewan 
maybe there's some limited time to utilize some of this  



April 10, 1995 

 
1487 

property, and you've got two weeks maybe in February. Well 
once they've made application, once they've bought access to 
the property, all of a sudden they find, well that property isn't 
available about the time they want to use it. And then it creates 
a major problem for them. 
 
And I don't know if this addresses some of the concerns there or 
how people get around some of the questions that arise at that 
time, but I guess hopefully the regulations that are being 
imposed or brought forward through this legislation, under this 
legislation, will be able to address some of the concerns and 
maybe even go beyond that, regarding further complaints that 
may arise in the process of time-share agreements. 
 
And I'm not exactly sure how much further to pursue the matter 
or how much further we may go on it, but I'm wondering if 
these provisions do address and will be at least flexible enough 
to address complaints that may arise in the future, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think the answer to that is yes. The 
member will see that the regulation-making power is cast very 
broadly and in very general terms, and we believe will be able 
to respond to the concerns that the member has mentioned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


