






















































May 17, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 17, 1995 

 

 
2327 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding toward the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through 
you to my colleagues in the legislature, 63 grade 6 and 7 
students from St. Marguerite School in Saskatoon. They are 
accompanied today by their teachers, Craig Van Parys and Terri 
Krochek, and chaperon Mr. Sellar. 
 
They'll be sitting here through the end of question period, Mr. 
Speaker, after which they're having a tour of the legislature and 
then they'll meet with me — or if I can't get there because of 
things I have going in the House — one of my colleagues will 
meet them for drinks and for questions. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's a 
honour for me today to introduce two guests seated in your 
gallery: Mr. Frank Gribbon, who members of this House may 
know through his work with the Saskatchewan Council on 
Compulsive Gambling, and who has now taken on a new role 
as the Liberal candidate in Regina Sherwood. And 
accompanying him today is Merv Henwood. Please welcome 
these gentlemen to our Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a great pleasure 
for me today to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly on behalf of my colleague, the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Rosetown-Elrose, 42 grade 8 students who are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are from Rosetown. They are from the Rosetown Central 
High School. They are accompanied by their teachers, Norm 
Cline and Carroll Dyck, and by their chaperons, Sandra  

Mathison and Lawrence Klemmer. 
 
They have had a tour already. They'll be with us during question 
period and I'm looking forward to meeting with them, on behalf 
of my colleague, later on for questions and drinks. 
 
So I would ask all of my colleagues to join me in giving them a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the member 
from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and on behalf of the member from 
Rosetown welcoming the students and teachers and chaperons 
from Rosetown, because my cousin, Norman Cline, is one of 
their teachers. And I want to welcome Norman and his 
colleagues and students here today. 
 
I'm sure the members can appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that since I 
became a lawyer and a politician, you can imagine how proud 
the family is that Norman is a teacher. So welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to, if I could, introduce to you and through you to the other 
members of the Assembly on behalf of the MLA from Indian 
Head-Wolseley, 17 grade 3 and 4 students in your speaker . . . 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Windthorst School in 
Windthorst, Saskatchewan. 
 
They have with them today their teachers, Robyn Roy-Hampton 
and Jill Taylor, and chaperon Brenda Lynn Pusch. 
 
And I would like all members to welcome them here today. I'm 
not sure if I'm meeting with them or not because I just was told 
that I'm introducing them. So anyway, if I could have everyone 
please join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Children First Infant Day Care Centre 
 

Mr. Sonntag: — Caught me off guard, Mr. Speaker. On 
Monday I had the pleasure of taking part in the grand opening 
ceremonies of the Children First Infant Care Centre attached to 
the Carpenter High School in Meadow Lake. This facility 
involves a partnership between the Indian and Metis friendship 
centre; the Department of Social Services; Education, Training 
and Employment; and Health. 
 
The collaboration of these departments has resulted in an 
opportunity for young mothers to stay in school. Children get 
quality care, and their parents get an opportunity to continue 
their education. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2328 

Mr. Speaker, letters from some of the parents demonstrate the 
success of this infant care centre. One teenage mom writes: 
“Without this day care, myself and other teen moms wouldn't 
have been able to graduate this year.” 
 
And another one writes: “If it wasn't for this centre, I probably 
would not be in school at all.” 
 
Not only is the centre providing quality care, there is also a 
locally developed credit course approved by the Department of 
Education that assists young people with their parenting skills. 
With this day care, young mothers can rest assured their child is 
in a warm and caring environment while they pursue the 
completion of their high school education in their own 
community. 
 
I would like to congratulate all of the agencies and individuals 
involved for their hard work in pursuing new ideas and methods 
of sharing, caring, and working together. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert's Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier we've had 
statements about the YWCA women of distinction awards in 
Saskatoon and Regina. Today it's my pleasure to recognize the 
Prince Albert women of distinction who were named and 
honoured last night at their annual awards banquet. 
 
This year women were named in five categories. Gloria Lennox, 
the principal of Queen Mary Community School, was given the 
business and professional woman of distinction award. She has 
been involved in Prince Albert education for a number of years 
and was instrumental in the development of our 
ground-breaking West Flat project. 
 
Elsie Livingston was recognized in the community 
enhancement category for her lifelong work in literacy for 
children and adults. 
 
Marilyn Robson was recognized for her contribution to health, 
fitness, and sports, because of her efforts to provide recreation 
opportunities to the mentally and physically challenged. 
 
Roberta Burns is the woman of distinction in arts and culture 
and the director of the Indian Metis Friendship Centre. 
 
Finally, Kim Ziobrowski was the young woman of distinction 
and the winner of the $1,000 SaskPower scholarship named 
after astronaut Roberta Bondar. Kim is a grade 12 student 
involved in science, drama, music, and in student government. 
 
Prince Albert is very proud of these women and I ask members 
to join me in recognizing them here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cookout for Literacy 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm not one who 
usually minces words, but in this case you'll have to excuse me. 
There was a function in my riding on Saturday which offered 
more food for thought, if you will pardon the expression. 
 
Superior Propane and country 108 CKSA radio organized a 
Cookout for Literacy. Being a former teacher, I laud this 
fund-raising event. This event raises money for local literacy 
programs. 
 
Cookout for Literacy originated through Superior Propane in 
1993 and involves their offices throughout the country. In 1994, 
the celebrity chef program was initiated and turned out to be a 
huge success. Local personalities helped raise dollars locally 
and that was part of the 96,000 that was raised across the 
country. Maidstone had the distinction as being one of the top 
fund-raisers, Superior Propane offices, in Canada. 
 
I am pleased to report that the Maidstone office and its branch 
in Meadow Lake raised approximately $2,000 for literacy. I 
would like to thank the staff of Lloydminster . . . propane 
offices in Maidstone, Lloydminster, and Meadow Lake, and the 
country 108 CKSA radio for their hard work in this successful 
fund-raiser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

United World Colleges Scholarship 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I wish to pay 
tribute to a constituent, Ryan Bazylak, who is a recipient of the 
United World College Scholarship. 
 
The aim of the United World Colleges is to promote peace and 
international understanding through education. There are seven 
such colleges in the world, and only one scholarship is given in 
each province, making Ryan's achievement all the much more 
amazing. 
 
I understand the scholarship is funded through both private and 
public sources and is worth about $40,000 over a two-year 
period. The Department of Education provides 12,000 of this. 
The department also assists in coordinating the selection each 
year. 
 
Ryan is an avid sports participant and an accomplished 
musician. When applying for the scholarship, he noted how he 
wished to use his writing talents in the field of journalism to 
make a meaningful contribution to the world around him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ryan will be using his scholarship to attend Lester 
B. Pearson College in Victoria, B.C. (British Columbia). This 
fall he will begin a two-year international baccalaureate 
program. So at this time I wish to congratulate Ryan on his 
outstanding achievement and, on behalf of all members of this 
House, to wish him the very best of luck in his studies. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2329 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy 
once again to announce that the Cathedral Village Arts Festival, 
May 22 to 27, is once again just around the bend. It begins on 
the Queen's birthday observed and carries through to the 
Queen's birthday actual, but it has nothing to do with either. 
 
What it does have to do with is local people and local artists 
having fun, demonstrating their talents, and generally kicking 
off the spring in a fashion that particularly belongs to the people 
of Cathedral district. 
 
This year, as always, there will be a craft fair on 13th Avenue 
with 75 booths offering a veritable garden of affordable 
delights. And the arts will be widely represented. 
 
Regina poet Dave Margoshes, the poet laureate of the festival, 
will travel throughout the festival, commemorating it in verse 
for the ages. And throughout the week there's many concerts, 
performances, and a community art show. 
 
And on the final Saturday night, to close the festival down, 
there'll be a street dance featuring Off-Kicker, a Celtic band; 
and Blue Beard, a non-Celtic band. Throughout the festival, 
Noele Hall and the Stinky Sneaker Band will be singing for 
their supper to the children of all ages at the festival. 
 
These, plus literary postcards from the neighbourhood, which I 
made sure included at least one postcard from the legislature, 
will be on display, along with pancake breakfasts and a parade. 
 
And I understand that both Liberal and New Democratic 
representatives will be present at the dunk tank. 
 
So I invite all members to travel down to the 13th Avenue for 
an exciting and friendly time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

1991 Election Campaign 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, right 
at the beginning of the 1991 election campaign you held a news 
conference. At that time you made a fairly bold statement. You 
said, and I quote: we will make no promises we cannot keep. 
We will make no promises we cannot keep. That's what you 
said, Mr. Premier. 
 
Then you went out and made all kinds of campaign promises, 
got yourself elected, and then set about to break just about 
every one of them. 
 
Mr. Premier, how do you expect the people of Saskatchewan to  

vote for you in the upcoming election and believe you this time 
around, after going back on each and every single promise you 
made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, when it is election time, 
of course the people at that time will choose the members of the 
Assembly in their wisdom, and I have confidence in the public 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The basic assumption of course behind the Leader of the 
Opposition's question is breach of electoral promise. And the 
fundamental promise of the government or the party as it went 
into the government on that election was one of opening up the 
books, making sure that we found out the true fiscal situation in 
the province, and cleaning up the fiscal picture, which I'm 
pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, we have done for the first time 
in over 12 years in this province, and for the first time anywhere 
by any government, provincially or federally, in Canada in over 
five years. 
 
I think that this is a positive signature around the government, 
and the people of Saskatchewan accept it as such. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier would like 
everyone to forget all of the promises he made in the last 
election. Let me refresh your memory, Mr. Premier. The night 
of the leaders' debate, during the closing statement, you said, 
and I quote: the PST (provincial sales tax) is not going to be 
around after October 21 if we're in power. 
 
I know you naturally would like to say that you're just talking 
about the expanded PST, but that's not what you said, sir. That's 
not what you said. You said the PST is not going to be around 
after October 21. That's what you said on province-wide TV to 
thousands of Saskatchewan voters. 
 
Mr. Premier, not only is the PST still here, it's now at 9 per cent 
instead of 7. Mr. Premier, why did you make that promise to 
Saskatchewan people, a promise you knew you couldn't keep? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, may I offer just a little 
bit of word of advice to the new MLA — and I don't say this 
facetiously — the new Leader of the Opposition. And the word 
of advice that I give to him is that the easiest way to blow any 
chance of a political comeback on your part, sir, your party's 
part, is to get into an argument which lacks total credibility. 
 
The member knows that the debate with respect to the PST 
concerned itself about the harmonization of the GST (goods and 
services tax) and the PST and the repeal of harmonization, and 
that was exactly what those words intended to say and spoke to 
— and spoke to. 
 
And I tell you, if it was otherwise, the predecessor — his 
predecessor, not the immediate predecessor but the premier of 
the day — would have jumped on me and said, well, Mr. 
Romanow, or Mr. Leader of the Opposition, if you're going to  



May 17, 1995 

 
2330 

repeal the PST, where are you going to get the $720 million 
from? He could have made that as some sort of rebuttal or 
response issue. He never did. He never did. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was in the closing comments; there 
was no opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The member says, the closing 
comments. There were 10 days to go before the vote. Ten days 
to go before the vote; the member raised the issue once. And 
the member knows it opposite, and everybody, everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows about it. Stick to something that you're 
credible on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you like to 
give advice to everyone in this province. Well let me give you a 
little advice from the people of this province. They believe 
when you make a promise to the people of this province, they 
expect you to keep it, sir. And you haven't done that. 
 
Let me refresh your memory on another promise you made that 
night. We'll ease the tax burden for ordinary families. That's 
what you said, Mr. Premier. The Associate Minister of Finance 
said and promised, the NDP won't raise personal taxes for four 
years. That was his promise during the election campaign. 
 
Do you remember any of that, Mr. Premier, or does your 
selective memory not take into account those kinds of 
commitments you gave to the people of this province? 
 
How do you square that by saying we will make no promises 
we cannot keep? You raised income tax, you raised gas taxes, 
you raised utility rates. The only thing that's gone down in this 
province is the trust in the people within your government, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
How do you expect the voters of this province to believe 
anything you say in an election campaign after you've broke all 
of the promises you made in the last election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would say to the 
Leader of the Opposition that he is wrong. The only thing that 
has gone down has been voter support for the Liberal Party and 
the Conservative Party in the last little while. Everything else in 
Saskatchewan is looking up. The economic situation is looking 
up. For the first time, people are feeling optimistic. 
 
The reality is — I've said this before in question period — this 
is the same old line that the Leader of the Opposition is trying 
to advocate. I've indicated that in general terms there have been 
$220 million of tax reductions — I think that's correct; I'm 
looking at the Minister of Finance — since 1991. 
 
Roughly broken down, $110 million saving when we  

unharmonized the harmonization — that was the PST issue that 
you talked about — 50, 60 million roughly for personal income 
taxes, and 50, 60 million, roughly speaking, for corporate 
small-business people, which is the result of our economic 
activity. 
 
So there's been a reduction in the income tax, in the tax rates, 
just as we promised we would do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well if that is the case, 
Mr. Premier, then why did the Minister of Finance here a few 
short weeks ago say to us in the legislature in Finance estimates 
that taxation has gone up $225 million net since your 
government has taken over? 
 
Here's another one of those little promises that you made to the 
people of Saskatchewan. I'm quoting from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix  in quote, Mr. Speaker: Roy Romanow capped 
off the NDP annual convention pledging to eliminate poverty in 
his first term of office. 
 
Eliminate poverty, Mr. Premier, that's what you said. You 
haven't eliminated poverty. In fact you haven't even reduced 
poverty in this province, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Premier. Welfare 
numbers have sky-rocketed to 80,000 people in this province 
today. Child hunger and poverty have gotten worse under your 
administration. Just one more broken promise to the people of 
this province, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, what happened to your solemn vow to end poverty 
in your first term of office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this question is about as 
accurate as the previous two questions. I have here in front of 
me, Mr. Speaker, the absolute platform of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) in 1991 and it's called: "Let's do it . . . The 
Saskatchewan Way". It says: "First Things First — Common 
Sense Financial Management". I'll spare you the details. 
 
Next thing is: "New Directions, New Priorities." First bullet 
under the platform says this: 
 
 A commitment to save 7,500 jobs threatened by the 

expanded 7% PST. We will repeal this unfair tax. 
 
Now that's the black and white of the words. But you see the 
construction that is put on the words by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Look, there are many objectives which we have to continue to 
work for; many problems in our society which have not been 
solved. There's no doubt about that. But I'll say, in the three 
years and some several months of this administration, what we 
have done in turning the corner on the books of this province 
and restoring economic health in this province, has been 
nothing short of phenomenal. There is no other province which 
has the same record as we do. And I don't take credit for that; I  



May 17, 1995 

 
2331 

give the credit to the people of Saskatchewan for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact in Saskatchewan 
we have less jobs, more taxes, and more broken promises from 
you and your administration. Mr. Premier, pretty soon, pretty 
soon we expect we're going to have an election, and the voters 
of this province are going to have to decide — the NDP who 
has broken virtually every promise it made in the last election 
campaign, or a party who guarantees we will keep our election 
commitments or we will resign. That will be the choice, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, you started the election by saying we will make no 
promises we cannot keep — the 1991 election campaign. And 
then you made all sorts of promises you couldn't keep or 
wouldn't keep. Why should the people of this province believe 
you, sir? What guarantee are you willing to provide the people 
of this province with this election that you won't do the same as 
you did in the last election campaign and break every promise 
you made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the voters of 
Saskatchewan have long ago rejected and bypassed gimmicky 
election or other political tricks as the current Leader of the 
Liberal Party and Leader of the Opposition advances. We 
experienced in, 1989 was it? — no I guess it was 1987 — the 
signature of the then minister of Finance under the previous 
administration. I guarantee, was the words used. I, PC 
(Progressive Conservative) MLA, guarantee that health care is 
going to be absolutely secure and safe — and I guarantee. And 
he signed it and distributed it all over the place. 
 
Look, I say to the Leader of the Opposition, the name of 
restoring credibility to government is doing the very best that 
you can do on the major issues which face you. And the way 
you're doing it, which is to go back to the old days of the old 
minister of Finance, the old administration, with some signature 
— as if that's a guarantee — isn't going to buy you an ounce of 
credibility. What you have to do is make sure that you're in the 
position of making legitimate statements about legitimate 
issues. And I say the people of Saskatchewan say that we have 
done a very good job under very difficult circumstances. That's 
what I say they say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Advertising 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the Provincial Secretary. Mr. Minister, prior to 
the last election, the NDP promised to cut government spending 
by 80 per cent. And of course that never happened. And now 
the government is advertising like crazy just before the 
provincial election. And we can't even get a straight answer 
about how much money is being spent. 

Mr. Minister, one of the very few, actual responsibilities that 
you have in return for your big salary and your big fat pension 
is overseeing government advertising. Yet you won't give us 
any straight answers on the amount of taxpayers' money that 
you're spending. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is this year's overall advertising budget? 
How much have you already spent this year in the run-up to the 
election? And how does this square with your promise to cut 
government advertising by 80 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the last time I 
checked, there has been no election called. And there may be an 
election sometime this spring. There may be an election 
sometime later this year. There may be an election in 1996. So 
that's a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing that's a fact, Mr. Speaker — and I want to 
remind the member opposite if he would check the budget and 
the budgets of the years since 1991 — that the operating 
expenditures of the government in the year 1995-1996 is $267 
million less than the operating expenditures of the government 
of 1990-1991 when they were in power. 
 
We said we would reduce the expenditures of government. We 
said we would do it with compassion and sensitivity. We have 
delivered on that promise, and we're prepared to be judged on 
that record and that performance whenever that election is 
called. It may be this spring. It may be this fall. It may be in 
1996, but we're ready to be judged. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Contract 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there has been some labour unrest in the northern part of Regina 
during the past few days. It seems that SaskEnergy tendered out 
a contract to a Saskatchewan company who in turn 
subcontracted to an out-of-province firm to haul pipe to various 
communities around the province. This project seems to be 
plagued with problems, and the NDP's union friends are not 
happy with this decision either. My question to the Premier: 
what criteria was used in tendering this Crown project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I 
want to say in the outset I really am pleased to see at least one 
of the Liberal members stand up and at least purport to speak 
on behalf of working people in this province after his leader's 
been kicking the dickens out of them in this legislature for the 
past weeks. 
 
Let me say this. The process that was used to select the 
contractor in this instance was an open tender process, and it 
was based on low bid. The selected company was M & M 
Transport of Saskatoon which was much lower than other bids 
that were submitted. 
 
I want to say that there was a subcontract let which is not  



May 17, 1995 

 
2332 

unusual in many instances. They were asked to move . . . the 
moving of the pipe out of the Shaw Pipe's storage compound. 
Because of the size and the magnitude of the expansion of this 
pipeline, they didn't have room to store it, so a subcontract was 
let. 
 
I am told that the M & M will be having their people working, 
they expect, by Monday and Tuesday. I want to say as well that 
the contract was based on lowest price, it was based on 
technical merit, and it was based on Saskatchewan content. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
the minister stated, a Saskatoon-based company by the name of 
M & M Transport did receive the original contract. And I would 
like to table a copy of the tendering proposals setting the 
parameters required to complete this successful bid. 
 
Industry reps have stated that M & M Transport does not have 
all the required equipment or they would not have 
subcontracted a company from out of the province. 
 
My question again to the Premier: why did a company receive 
this multi-million dollar contract when they did not have the 
equipment available to even qualify for the project? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say the member 
doesn't listen. 
 
I indicated to him that they were asked to move the timing of 
the moving of this pipe up because of the magnitude of the 
contract, because of the fact that Shaw Pipe indicated they 
didn't have adequate storage. They then subcontracted for a 
short period of time so that this pipe could be moved out so that 
Shaw Pipe didn't have to lay off their workers and shut down 
their plant because they had no more storage room. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if the member from Shaunavon 
has problems with an open tendering process and if he has 
problems with the selection of low bids and if he has problems 
with the fact that on occasion there will be non-union 
companies contracted, then I'm afraid there's nothing we can do 
on this side of the House to satisfy them. 
 
Because on one day they're accusing us of being union-only and 
on the other day they come in here and they're upset as all get 
out because we happen to, on low bid, select a non-union 
contractor. I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, he can't be satisfied. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, we're not opposed to low bids. In fact we're not 
opposed to the open tendering process. But, Mr. Speaker, there 
have been numerous inquiries to our office suggesting the 
Premier is related to the owners of M & M Transport who  

received this million dollar contract. 
 
My question to the Premier: are you related in any way to the 
owners of M & M Transport — Mr. Morris Gabrush or Ms. 
Mary Gabrush? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I can say categorically I 
am not related to the owners of M & M Transport and I very 
much regret that the Liberal Party has stooped to this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI President's Contract 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Will the members please come to 
order. The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, please come 
to order. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the minister responsible for SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). Mr. Minister, when we 
asked you for the contract signed between your government and 
SGI president, John Wright, you said it was available through 
the Clerk of the Executive Council. All we had to do was ask. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we have asked, but all we got was a letter 
from John Wright claiming that his salary was $142,920 and a 
brief mention of a few of his benefits. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will ask you again: where is John Wright's 
employment contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the information, if the 
member has read it, provides all of the information as it pertains 
to the contract. And that is now available. It is within the range. 
 
I might add that the salary that the president of SGI is getting is 
probably 150 to $200,000 less than they would get paid in the 
private sector in a similar kind of corporation in the insurance 
business. 
 
All the information the member wants, it's there. All he had to 
do is go and ask for it. He did, when I reminded him that he 
could do that. And if he wants any further information he 
should ask. 
 
The contract itself will also be filed. If he's asked for the 
contract, I think he knows that he can get that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
we asked for a contract, and we got a letter back. And that's 
simply not good enough, although it's indicative of your recent 
initiative. 
 
Your Crown employment contract is very explicit. Section 5  



May 17, 1995 

 
2333 

says, and I quote: "Every permanent head . . . shall file with the 
Clerk of the Executive Council a true copy of his or her Crown 
employment contract." Not a vague letter outlining some 
arbitrary terms and conditions, but a true contract of the Crown 
employment contract — true copy. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems that you're hiding the actual contract in 
contravention of your own legislation. Can you tell us if one 
exists, or are you trying to find another loophole to allow you to 
break another election promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know what 
more I can say. The contract is available; the member is able to 
have access to it. He has all the information. We've provided for 
him in summary form, so he doesn't have to spend too much 
time looking at it. He says he's got that. He clearly understands 
it. 
 
All of the terms and conditions of that contract are there. It's in 
line with the policies of the government. It's a good agreement. 
It's a good contract. It's an exceptionally good president, and 
we're happy that he is able to continue in the employment of the 
government in such an important position on behalf of the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have a letter, not a contract. And it appears you're following 
the same strategy that you employed with your other NDP 
buddy, Jack Messer. You said at the time that all you had was a 
verbal contract with Jack. A verbal contract, Mr. Minister, isn't 
worth the paper it's written on. 
 
And you know full well that a verbal contract can be changed at 
the drop of a hat. You could go to John Wright or Jack Messer 
with a wink and a nod and double their salaries with little or no 
public knowledge. That's not accountability, Mr. Minister; that's 
smoke and mirrors. And you violated your own laws. 
 
Will you compel John Wright and Jack Messer to provide 
written contracts immediately, or will you void their verbal 
contracts as is provided under the Crown employment 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, for the third time, for 
the benefit of the member. He knows that he has all the 
information about Mr. Wright's contract, the president of SGI. 
He knows it's all there. Having asked the question originally, 
hoping that he would find something there that was out of line, 
he now has the information, finds nothing out of line, and so he 
goes on some kind of a fishing trip to find some other issues 
surrounding this. 
 
The contract that Mr. Wright has is in line with the policies of 
the government as it applies to any other employee of a Crown 
corporation or any other employee in the public sector in 
management positions. It's a good contract, it's a good 
president, and it's a good service to the taxpayers of  

Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question's to the 
Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, the people that you 
ducked out on in North Battleford a few weeks ago have had 
the opportunity, I understand, to finally corner you and have 
some discussions on the 9 per cent sales tax which you're 
charging this province, a sales tax which your Premier 
guaranteed the people of the province he would not impose 
upon them after the last election. 
 
I'm wondering if you could tell the Assembly today what those 
discussions entailed, and were you prepared to listen to the 
reasonable arguments that people are making, saying that that 9 
per cent is wreaking havoc in the province of Saskatchewan and 
preventing the employment numbers from coming true that the 
Premier promised in the last election campaign. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I'd be most 
pleased to answer that question. We had a very positive and 
constructive meeting. First of all, they clarified the fact that they 
had never wanted politicians at their first meeting. They had 
wanted to meet with me after. 
 
And what we did was we set in place a process whereby they 
could bring forward their ideas and their suggestions about how 
to deal with the E&H (education and health) issue. So I think 
the meeting was very constructive. We have agreed to have an 
ongoing dialogue. They have reassured the government that 
they have no partisan purposes here, but they want to look for 
solutions. 
 
And unlike the opposition, they don't just say, by the way we'd 
like to have some tax cuts. They say, before we talk about any 
tax cuts, we have to look for offsets. And so as I say, we have 
welcomed their ideas and we have set in place a process 
whereby their ideas will come forward and we will have an 
opportunity to look at them. So it was a very positive meeting. 
 
Thank you for the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, they naturally would 
ask you for offsets, because it was your party that promised that 
you could make do with less in the last election campaign. And 
instead, you haven't cut the size of government at all. They 
clearly understand that, Madam Minister. 
 
It's just like the way that you've handled the PST issue with 
natives in this province. One side says they're doing something; 
you say no they're not; it just goes back and forth. These people 
don't believe you, Madam Minister. That's why they invited you 
out, because they've got to pin you down because you always 
want to be on both sides of the fence. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2334 

Madam Minister, you promised in the election campaign in '91 
to remove the PST; instead, it went to 9 per cent. Madam 
Minister, what have you got to say to the families of this 
province that are paying $4,500 more each — $225 million net 
tax increase? What do you say to them, Madam Minister, when 
people say: please take off the PST? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, first of all on the 
spending side, you don't have to believe us in terms of what 
we've done to cut spending. What you should believe though is 
Ian Russell from the Investment Dealers Association of Canada 
who said this about the government and the people of 
Saskatchewan: 
 
 The deficit attack by Saskatchewan's NDP government 

is the most advanced in the country. They cut program 
spending by 3 per cent over the last two years, which 
compares to 6 per cent increases on average in the three 
years that preceded that. That's a hell of a turnaround. 
That's more than any other government has done in that 
period. 

 
And what I say to the people of Saskatchewan again and again 
and again is, with your help and cooperation we made the 
necessary decisions so that we could turn around the finances of 
this province, provide the first balanced budget in over 12 
years, and guarantee your children the kind of future that they 
deserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today to introduce to you 
and to all members of the Assembly through you, the Member 
of Parliament for Burnaby-Kingsway, who needs really no 
introduction, I don't believe, to this House or to the people of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. The member is sitting behind your rail, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that in an occupation where timidity often 
blankets principle, this member has exhibited a great amount of 
courage in standing up for the things that he believes in, even 
though they may be controversial, even though they may not be 
well accepted by some people. But he's been able to win the 
respect of all sections of this House, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure; in 
fact of a great many people all across the country. I would like 
to introduce Mr. Svend Robinson, the member for 
Burnaby-Kingsway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to beg leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, seated in the west gallery are 29 
students from Mayfair School which is located in my 
constituency in Saskatoon. And they're accompanied by 
teachers Barbaro Gallo and Ann Fofonoff, who actually are no 
strangers to this Assembly by now because they organize this 
trip every year, which is a really good day for the students. And 
good to see you here again. 
 
And I'm sure they've done some interesting things already, and 
now they've been in here. And they will be touring the building, 
we'll be having a visit, we'll be having our picture taken, we'll 
be having drinks, and we'll be having Dixie Cups. And I'm 
looking forward to meeting with the students and I'd ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them here today. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Enhanced 9-1-1 Initiative 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I'm truly proud, on this World Telecommunications Day, to 
announce two major steps to be undertaken by this government 
to launch the introduction of an enhanced province-wide 9-1-1 
system beginning in 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The introduction of an enhanced 9-1-1 
initiative is good news for everyone in Saskatchewan. This 
initiative will allow Saskatchewan to position itself among 
many other areas throughout the world which recognizes 9-1-1 
as a foremost method to receive emergency, ambulance, police, 
and fire help. 
 
Those who live in cities like Regina and Saskatoon have come 
to take this critical service for granted for almost 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's not good enough. This government is 
committed to the principle of universality and recognizes that 
our rural areas need and deserve the right to access help through 
9-1-1 as soon as we can begin such a linkage. 
 
This announcement represents a culmination of months of 
consultation and discussions with numerous groups which have 
identified common access to 9-1-1 as an integral process to 
improving emergency and protective service delivery. The 
enhanced 9-1-1 initiative is made possible as a result of 
SaskTel's already available computerized digital network. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2335 

SaskTel estimates the cost of developing the communication 
portion of an enhanced 9-1-1 system will be approximately $5.6 
million, to be invested over the next three to five years. 
 
SaskTel has committed to operating the communication portion 
of the 9-1-1 system on a break-even basis and will begin 
activating communities on a gradual basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, simultaneously 1.6 million 
of VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues will be made available 
so local communities can participate in a province-wide 
computerized electronic mapping system, which is a critical 
element to the delivery of emergency and protective services. 
 
Previously the cost of this mapping system, called Sask GIS, 
geographical information system, has limited some 
communities from participating in improving their database. 
Now many will be able to begin their mapping services for the 
first time. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, we will also establish a joint strategic 
planning committee to look at the recommendations coming out 
of the ongoing protective services review, to recommend 
enhancements in delivery of all emergency and protective 
services in Saskatchewan. This will complement the 9-1-1 
initiative. 
 
The strategic committee will include representatives from 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations). And ultimately we are seeking 
recommendations for a multi-year plan to address the 
integration, coordination, and delivery of all emergency and 
protective services in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1415) 
 
Mr. Speaker, reviewing these services on an integrated basis 
will build upon recent improvements to emergency and 
protective services, such as a first responders, emergency health 
communication pilot, and shared service agreements between 
municipalities. In addition, there are considerable savings in 
costs and efficiencies by managing enhanced 9-1-1 as a 
provincial initiative rather than seeing it develop on a 
community-by-community basis. 
 
Funding for enhanced emergency response services continues to 
be discussed with SUMA, SARM, and SAHO. This discussion 
includes the 10 per cent of the net VLT revenues which the 
province has set aside for the benefit of local communities and 
represents one example of a very tangible and responsible use 
of a portion of VLT revenues to the benefit of Saskatchewan 
communities and individuals. 
 
The process that we are establishing recognizes the actual 
coordination and delivery of services requires input from all  

stakeholders. It is our Saskatchewan way. Mr. Speaker, this 
represents the ideal combination: provincial coordination with 
local input and control. 
 
Through this announcement, our government strongly believes 
old and young alike, anywhere in this province, deserves and 
will benefit from a common way to access emergency and 
protective services. Mr. Speaker, this demonstrates our 
commitment to the safety and well-being of all Saskatchewan 
beings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister 
for sending across her statement, but that's all I will thank her 
for. I mean this is absolutely unconscionable, Mr. Speaker, just 
before a provincial election that they throw this bone out to 
rural Saskatchewan and hope that they're going to lap it up. 
 
I mean the party of medicare, after they gut health care in rural 
Saskatchewan . . . You know, there's people out there that are a 
hundred miles away from any kind of a medical facility now, 
and Madam Minister's going to give them the opportunity to get 
on the phone and phone what? I mean there's places out there, 
Madam Minister, where there isn't a ambulance within 50 miles 
of a lot of these people because you took their health care away. 
 
And now they can get on the phone, and they can phone up and 
say, I'm having a heart attack. It's a good thing the Minister of 
Health had his little medical emergency in the emergency room 
in Prince Albert because if he'd been in Mankota or some place 
else, he might have died. That's what's going on out there, 
Madam Minister. 
 
And now you say, I'm going to take some of my ill-gotten 
gambling revenue, which I've taken out of your communities 
with no say, and I'm going to feed it back to you just before an 
election campaign with 9-1-1. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, if this is the answer, maybe we should 
do it in some other areas too. Hey they can just phone up 9-1-1 
and get rid of some of the tax base, or maybe they can phone up 
9-1-1 . . . 
 
SaskTel made $88 million last year. You can't run it on a 
break-even basis. Why should you run this on a break-even 
basis, Madam Minister? The simple fact is this is nothing but 
pure, ugly politics from the party of medicare which is trying to 
cover their tracks before they go into an election campaign. And 
it's a shame. It's a shame you'd bring this before the Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I might also mention to the 
Government House Leader, if he wishes the Speaker to get 
involved, that the ministerial statements in the future ought to 
be brief and to the point and not as lengthy as this one was. 
 
The Government House Leader is constantly interfering with 
the process in the House, and I wish he would know the rules. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2336 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Tabling of 
Documents Act, 1991 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move first reading of a Bill, An Act to amend The Tabling of 
Documents Act, 1991. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act respecting the Interpretation of 
Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing Enactments 
/Projet de loi no. 69 — Loi concernant l'interprétation des 

textes et édictant les règles les régissant 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Interpretation Act, 1995. This 
Bill is being presented to this Assembly in English and French. 
The Government of Saskatchewan has made a commitment to a 
modest program of French translations of existing Acts, and this 
is the first translation to be presented. 
 
Under the terms of the federal-provincial agreement signed in 
1988, 75 per cent of the costs associated with the translation are 
being paid by the federal government. 
 
As the title of the Bill indicates, The Interpretation Act contains 
various rules respecting how Acts are to be interpreted by the 
courts. The rules set out in the Bill will also apply to orders, 
regulations, forms, rules, and by-laws made pursuant to a power 
conferred by an Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially identical to the Act passed 
by this Assembly in 1993. The 1993 Act, in turn, is largely 
based on the model Interpretation Act proposed by the Uniform 
Law Conference of Canada. Several new provisions have been 
added to deal with interpretation issues associated with writing 
laws in the French language. 
 
In addition, the Bill provides definitions in French for words 
and phrases commonly used in legislation. The Bill will provide 
a complete set of rules for interpreting and using both the 
existing bilingual Acts, such as The Language Act and The 
Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988, and any new 
bilingual Acts. 
 
Because of this Bill's central importance to interpreting 
legislation it is fitting that it be the first bilingual Bill to be 
introduced this session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the  

Interpretation of Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing 
Enactments. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Changes of Name/Projet de 

loi no. 66 — Loi concernant les changements de nom 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Change of Name Act, 1995. 
This is one of a number of Bills being presented to this 
Assembly in English and French. 
 
Like the other Bills translated and presented in both English 
and French today, Mr. Speaker, this was one of the Acts 
identified by the Saskatchewan francophone community as a 
high priority for translation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Changes of Name. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the keeping of Vital 
Statistics/Projet de loi no. 67 — Loi concernant 

les services de l'état civil 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Vital Statistics Act, 1995. This 
is one of a number of Bills being presented to this Assembly in 
English and in French. 
 
Like the other Bills translated and presented in both English 
and French today, Mr. Speaker, this was one of the Acts 
identified by the Saskatchewan francophone community as a 
high priority for translation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
keeping of Vital Statistics. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Regulations 
/Projet de loi no. 68 — Loi concernant les règlements 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to 
move second reading of The Regulations Act, 1995. This Bill is 
also presented to this Assembly in English and French. 
 
The Bill is essentially identical to the existing 1989 Act. It 
contains rules requiring the filing and publication of 
regulations. Because regulations are made under many Acts, 
including bilingual Acts, it is important that the rules respecting 
regulations also be in English and French. This Bill will be an 
essential part of the laws governing English and French 
regulations. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2337 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Regulations. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 70 — An Act respecting the Solemnization of 
Marriage/Projet de loi no. 70 — Loi concernant la 

célébration du mariage 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Marriage Act, 1995. This Bill is 
being presented to this Assembly in French and in English. 
 
As the title indicates, this Bill deals with matters respecting the 
solemnization of marriage in Saskatchewan. The Bill does not 
change the existing law; however, to facilitate the translation of 
the law into French, the drafters took the opportunity to 
modernize the wording of the English version. The result, I 
believe, is a Bill that will be easier to understand and to use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 
Solemnization of Marriage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 71 — An Act respecting Victims of Crime 
/Projet de loi no. 71 — Loi sur les victimes d'actes criminels 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to 
move second reading of The Victims of Crime Act, 1995. This 
Bill is also being presented to this Assembly in French and in 
English. 
 
As the title indicates, this Bill deals with matters respecting 
persons who are victims of crime in Saskatchewan. The Bill 
does not change the existing law. 
 
To facilitate the translation of the law into French, the 
provisions have been renumbered and the structure of a few 
provisions has been changed. There are, however, no 
substantive changes between the existing Act and this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Victims of Crime. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73 — An Act respecting Elementary, Secondary 
and Post-secondary Education in Saskatchewan 

/Projet de loi no. 73 — Loi concernant l'enseignement 
élémentaire, secondaire et postsecondaire en Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Education Act, 1995. This Bill 
is being presented to this Assembly in English and in French. 
 

As the title indicates, this Bill deals with matters respecting 
education in Saskatchewan. The Bill does not make any 
substantive changes to the existing law. However, to facilitate 
the translation into French, the provisions have been 
renumbered, and the structure of a few provisions has been 
changed. It also contains technical drafting changes that 
improve readability and makes the language gender neutral. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Elementary, Secondary and Post-secondary Education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting Non-profit Corporations 
/Projet de loi no. 74 -- Loi concernant les sociétés sans but 

lucratif 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, because that Bill is just 
being distributed now, I must ask the Assembly for leave to 
have second reading of that Bill today. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move 
second reading of The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995. This 
is one of a number of Bills that are being presented to this 
Assembly in English and in French. 
 
The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1995 deals with the 
incorporation, governance, and dissolution of non-profit 
corporations in Saskatchewan. This Bill does not change the 
existing law. It contains technical drafting changes that improve 
readability, and it makes use of gender-neutral language. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
Non-profit Corporations. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 
1995. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill deal with two issues. The 
first set of amendments address the age of retirement for 
Provincial Court judges. When The Provincial Court Act was 
passed in 1978, the age of retirement was set at 65. Any judges 
who were appointed prior to that date were allowed to retain 
their age of retirement at age 70. 
 
These amendments recognize that there is value in having some 
flexibility to retain judges appointed under the new Act beyond  



May 17, 1995 

 
2338 

the age of 65. Where judges wish to stay in office beyond that 
age, the amendments I am proposing today will make it possible 
for the public to be able to draw on the expertise of these 
seasoned decision makers for a longer period of time. 
 
The model proposed is based on provisions in the Ontario 
legislation. After canvassing legislation across Canada on this 
issue, it was determined that the Ontario provisions provide the 
most innovative model. The decision as to whether one of these 
judges remains in office after age 65 will be made by the chief 
judge of the Provincial Court. 
 
That decision will be made in accordance with criteria that are 
developed by the chief judge with the approval of the Judicial 
Council. These amendments were proposed by two judges of 
the Provincial Court who are approaching retirement age. Two 
other senior and highly respected members of the court have 
supported the concept. 
 
The second set of amendments will change the term of office 
for the chief judge and any associate chief judge, from seven 
years to five years. 
 
The Provincial Court judges association has suggested that this 
shorter term is a more reasonable period of time to expect 
judges to take on this demanding role. It is timely to make a 
change to the term of office now as the current chief judge has 
tendered his resignation effective on the appointment of a new 
chief judge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Provincial Court Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 62 — An Act 
to Maintain Financial Stability and Integrity in the 
Administration of the Finances of the Province of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
I stood to deliver a second reading speech on balanced budget 
legislation, the official opposition's Bill, Bill No. 11. Today, 
Mr. Speaker, I'm responding to Bill No. 62, the Bill that, 
brought forward by the NDP members opposite, that's supposed 
to address the issue of balanced budgets and accountability to 
taxpayers. 
 
Unfortunately there is little in Bill 62 to accomplish any of 
these goals. It's disheartening for Saskatchewan taxpayers to see 
Progressive Conservative governments to the east and to the  

west implementing real balanced budget legislation while 
taxpayers in this province are still waiting to be heard. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers have spoken clearly on this issue; in 
fact people voted 80 per cent in favour of balanced budget 
legislation on the plebiscite question back in 1991. The 
Saskatchewan taxpayers association says, and I quote: “The 
Romanow government is showing contempt for voters by 
continuing to ignore the strongest democratic mandate in our 
history.” That was from a news release, April 26, 1995  just a 
few short days ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Come to think of it, the NDP promised balanced budget 
legislation in their reform package released previous to the last 
provincial election. It's too bad they decided not to come 
through for the people of this province. But then again the 
Premier promised no new taxes, and that the NDP would make 
no promises it couldn't keep. 
 
And we all know how both of these promises made turned out 
for the people of this province. Each family of four is paying 
$4,800 more than they were in 1991 because of the NDP 
increases into provincial taxes, premiums, and utility fees. 
That's exactly the reason Saskatchewan taxpayers must be given 
the right to vote on whether taxes should be increased. Bill 62 
doesn't provide for that, Mr. Speaker. On the other hand, Bill 
No. 11 does. 
 
Just a couple of weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba citizens 
voted in a government that committed to outlaw deficits, 
penalize politicians who break the law, eliminate the debt over 
30 years, and not raise taxes unless approved by the people in a 
democratic reform vote. That's from a news release, April 26, 
1995. Sounds a bit familiar, doesn't it, Mr. Speaker? Manitoba's 
legislation sounds quite a bit like Bill No. 11, our introduction 
that we . . . on balanced budget legislation, the only true 
balanced budget legislation to be introduced into this Assembly. 
 
One of the most significant features of Manitoba's legislation is 
the taxpayer protection clause which states that any increase in 
sales tax, income, or corporate payroll taxes would have to be 
approved by voters in a referendum. This is a clause which is a 
refreshing show of democracy and one that is enshrined within 
Bill No. 11, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, in Alberta when a government fails to balance the 
provincial budget, there are penalties. They have had balanced 
budget legislation which was passed into law prior to the 
calling of the election in May of 1993 entitled the Deficit 
Elimination Act. 
 
The plan was based on reducing spending and reorganization of 
the way government does its business. The Klein government 
promised to balance the budget by the fiscal year 1995-96 
without raising or introducing any additional taxes. Not only 
have they accomplished their goal, Mr. Speaker, more recently 
introduced legislation that will force the government to pay 
down its accumulated debt. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2339 

Of course the NDP in Saskatchewan promised to balance the 
budget too. However they didn't say they're going to do it by 
raising taxes on a family in this province by $4,800, each and 
every family across this province. But that's exactly what 
happened, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 
 
And the worst part, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers have no vote on the issue. They can't say no to tax 
increases because the NDP government in this province refuses 
to allow them the democratic privilege of a vote. 
 
So when the general public takes a look at the legislation before 
us today, Mr. Speaker, the NDP should understand their 
disappointment, their cynicism. And they are disappointed, Mr. 
Speaker. People don't want a band-aid solution to this severe 
problem. And this government has failed miserably on this 
piece of legislation. 
 
After reviewing Bill 62, the taxpayers' association stated, and I 
quote: 
 
 This legislation is obviously a weak, a very weak 

political solution to a serious fiscal issue, and it doesn't 
measure up to the true principles of taxpayer protection. 
The proposed legislation gives no genuine guarantee 
that politicians will be forced to live within taxpayers' 
means. 

 
They're right, Mr. Speaker. They also stated that, and I quote: 
 
 Our province is falling way behind on these critical 

reforms. A balanced budget without the proper use of 
accounting, without proper protection from tax hikes, 
without penalties for politicians who break the law, and 
without a debt elimination plan, is worth little more than 
the paper it is written on. 

 
End quote, Mr. Speaker. That comes from a news release, April 
26, 1995. 
 
Bill No. 11, Mr. Speaker, our balanced budget legislation, 
provides more accountability, more input from the people of 
this province, and forces a balanced budget on an annual basis. 
 
It also requires that the provincial budget account for all 
government revenues and expenditures including those of 
Crown corporations. It also requires the Minister of Finance to 
table summary financial statements quarterly to ensure that the 
budget targets are being met throughout the year. 
 
It also requires that any balanced budget or any budget 
surpluses should be applied to reduce the accumulated debt, and 
any surpluses achieved after the debt is eliminated must be used 
to reduce taxes even further in this province. 
 
It also requires that if a government failed to balance the 
budget, the Premier, the cabinet, and every member of the 
government caucus would have to have their salary reduced by 
25 per cent. 

As I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 11 is the only, the 
only balanced budget, real balanced budget, legislation that has 
been introduced into this legislature for the people of this 
province. And if Bill 62 is any indication of the kind of 
balanced budget legislation Saskatchewan people can expect 
from the NDP, our Bill will remain the only true balanced 
budget legislation in this Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Vote 152 
 
Item 1 — authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Vote 150 

 
Item 1 — authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I wonder if the minister could give us a quick 
update. Because of all the flooding in eastern Saskatchewan, 
there's the east Langenburg project which has run up against 
environmental lobbyists from Manitoba and some local 
opposition. 
 
And I am told . . . and I've been there and toured that entire area 
and the people are really getting upset with the red tape and the 
monkeying around that's occurred out there. And I wonder if the 
minister could update us on this before we agree to his budget 
request. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
just briefly for the member from Thunder Creek . . . as he will 
know, a proposal was put forward by a group, the C&D 
(conservation and development) group from the Langenburg 
area. And one of the initiatives that certainly they would want  



May 17, 1995 

 
2340 

to achieve, from their perspective, is a reasonable system of 
drainage and water control. As you will know, we've had a 1 in 
25 year moisture problem in that area, and it certainly has 
created some problems for farms and for communities in the 
area. 
 
The Department of Environment had a look at the proposal and 
had indicated that there was need for an environmental impact 
study. As you will know, the Government of Manitoba's 
Department of Environment has also indicated that they would 
want to approve any project that might go forth there. So those 
two departments, as I understand it, are in the process of 
determining how that will happen. 
 
I would want to say with respect to Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, it's our role and it's our mandate to assist areas in 
flood areas and for water management. We act as facilitators, 
and when we are requested we will deliver technical advice to 
residents in an area where they're having a concern. 
 
So I guess just to condense and finalize my answer, it would be 
to say that right now it's in the . . . it will be a matter of 
environmental study. And I would assume before the project 
would proceed the environmental impact assessment would 
have to have taken place before approval of a project would be 
given. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, I understand that, but this 
situation didn't occur this year. This has been going on for years 
and years and years. And after touring that project, there isn't a 
ditch there deeper than 3 feet. My goodness, the Tisdale area in 
northern Saskatchewan and my area down here in the Regina 
plains, there's ditches all over the place that you can hide a Euc 
truck in and nobody complains at all about them. 
 
And yet these guys want to have a 3-foot ditch; it's a piddling 
little operation compared to most drainage projects in this 
province, and yet there seems to be the grand stall being put on 
by your colleague, the Minister of Environment. And I don't 
understand it. I mean common sense some place has to take 
over here. This is not Rafferty-Alameda. 
 
So what I want from you, sir, is that you give a commitment 
that this very important project on the east side of our province 
is going to get some attention from people that understand what 
it's like to be flooded out year after year after year. And I would 
think you would want to give that, even though there might be 
opposition from within your own government, to get on with 
doing the job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say to 
the member from Thunder Creek, it's not certainly the intention 
of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation to stall any proposals 
that get the green light after environmental concerns have been 
addressed. 
 
I would remind the member from Thunder Creek that it is not 
only the Saskatchewan Department of the Environment that is 
looking at this project, it is the Manitoba government and their  

Department of the Environment as well. 
 
As you will know, this drainage area flows across the 
Saskatchewan-Manitoba border. I can say to you that we at the 
Water Corporation are available in terms of technical expertise, 
water management, to assist with all of the technical things that 
are involved in that kind of a project. 
 
And our approach is, quite clearly, that once the environmental 
concerns and requirements have been addressed by both the 
Manitoba and Saskatchewan governments, if there is a 
determination for that project to go ahead, we will facilitate — 
as is part of our mandate, part of the Water Corporation's 
mandate, as you will know — we will facilitate that project if 
we are requested. 
 
There are some processes that need to take place. I understand 
the concerns of the farmers in that area. I'm familiar with the 
size of the drainage that is already there. 
 
I'm told many of the facilities, the drainage facilities, that are 
there were done on an ad hoc basis and over a period of 10 and 
20 and 30 years. And you're right — it's not a problem that's 
existed only for the last 3, 4, 5 years. This has been a problem 
for a long time. 
 
And we will do what we can to facilitate the resolve to the 
water drainage problems there once the two departments of 
Environment, both Manitoba and Saskatchewan, are convinced 
that the proposal makes environmental sense, as well as 
economic sense from the perspective of the farmers and the 
communities in that area. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 
 
Item 1 — authorized by law. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, if I could I'd like to 
thank the member from Thunder Creek for his questions. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank 
the minister for coming in today and answering a few questions. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Legislation 

Vote 21 
 

Ombudsman 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2341 

Freedom of Information and Privacy Commissioner 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Vote 21 agreed to. 
 
(1500) 

General Revenue Fund 
Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, I would ask the 
Provincial Secretary, please introduce the officials who have 
joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm 
pleased to introduce my officials who are here in the immediate 
vicinity of my desk; Mr. Greg Marchildon, who is the deputy 
provincial secretary to my right, and someone who I introduced 
last evening, Cathy Dermody, who is the director of 
administration in the Department of Provincial Secretary. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate, 
Minister, that you've sent over the global questions. Haven't had 
time to go through it so I may end up going over some things. 
And if it's in there, just point out it to me, and we'll let it go. 
 
Have you, in your written responses to us, have you detailed all 
changes in staff including any changes in title or pay range and 
also any detail on pay raises for staff and the reasons for those 
raises? Is that in there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, as I'm looking through them, 
Mr. Chairman, the answer to the question by the member from 
Thunder Creek is yes, all of the information that he has 
requested is provided for the information of the opposition and 
for the record. And if there are questions surrounding that, I'd 
be pleased to answer them. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, thank you, Minister. We'll quickly look 
through some of these things to make sure what we want is 
there. 
 
I wonder if you could explain, because you're sort of the 
ministry of patronage, I'm wondering if you could explain, 
given MAs (ministerial assistant) automatic 4.1 per cent pay 
increases every July 1 . . . Would you not think this is a little bit 
excessive given the fact that most people in this province are 
either staying the same or taking roll-backs? And our 
understanding is that is the case. So how do you justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that — 
Mr. Chairman — I'm not sure that the question of the  

remuneration from ministerial assistants is the responsibility of 
the Provincial Secretary's department, but I will to this extent 
respond. And that is that the level of pay for people in minister's 
offices, where in fact there is a limit to the number of people 
any minister can employ, which is six secretarial staff . . . three 
secretarial staff and three assistants — a junior, an intermediate, 
and a senior. They have pay ranges, they have increments, and 
when increments come, just as it is in the case of the public 
service, or for teachers who get their increments, they qualify 
for them. 
 
But there have been no increases for MAs. Beyond that there 
has been no increases beyond anything that people in the public 
service have received. I can't speak for individual MAs or for 
that, Mr. Speaker, because that is not a responsibility of the 
Provincial Secretary's department. But that's to the extent that I 
can answer that question, Mr. Speaker. Other than my assistants 
in my office, that's the answer. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I'm 
just quickly looking here, and you're the minister in charge of 
polling. And what you have shown us is very, very little here. 
Surely to goodness you wouldn't have this Assembly or the 
province believe that you're only responsible for one CanWest 
survey in September of '94. 
 
I mean it's under your auspices that most of the government 
polling and the splitting of the polls is done so that you ask your 
publicly funded questions on one side and your political 
questions on the other, which I presume your party should pay 
for. We're not absolutely sure of that. But you're the minister in 
charge of those things, and this isn't enough detail. 
 
I'd like to know from you, sir, how much you have expended on 
polling over the last year as a government, and I think you've 
probably got as much access to that as anybody; and which 
companies you have used, and a financial breakdown, by 
company, of the polling that you've expended in the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want 
to point out in response to the member from Thunder Creek that 
the information that has been provided with regard to CanWest 
is the extent to which the Provincial Secretary has been 
involved in the polling. 
 
Maybe it wasn't well enough explained, but the whole 
responsibility for communications and polling last April was 
transferred — a year ago was transferred to the Executive 
Council. So that I think those estimates are being considered 
later today and maybe tomorrow. And I would recommend to 
the member from Thunder Creek that he would be able to get 
his answers at that time. But that transfer was made a year ago, 
and therefore the Provincial Secretary does not have further 
ongoing responsibility for it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you're just talking 
yourself out of a pay cheque because if you don't do that, what 
purpose do you serve? 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2342 

I mean at least we were giving the Provincial Secretary his due 
because he was the political minister, the Deputy Premier, the 
guy in charge of polling. And that is a fairly onerous job 
because you have to keep up with things. But my goodness, if 
you don't even do that any more, I'm really wondering why you 
really need that big salary and that big pension. Because, wow, 
to carry around the provincial seal is not an onerous job, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Well if you don't do polling any more, I guess we'll have to ask 
the Premier those questions, and I suspect he'll be very evasive. 
He'll ask us  and he'll repeat the words of the Finance 
minister  when there's so many bigger things to talk about, 
why would you want to talk about polling? Or something to that 
effect. 
 
Can you explain to me, Minister, what the $85,000 increase to 
the protocol office entailed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I might have to ask the member to 
clarify his question because I have the estimates here for 
1995-1996. And in 1994-95 protocol office had a budget of 
457,000 and in 1995-96 it's 811,000. 
 
And the reason for the bulk of that, I think — probably for all 
of it — is that that is where the budget for the 90th anniversary 
for the province of Saskatchewan, that's where the budget is 
provided for. And therefore that is the reason for the difference 
between the two numbers between 1994 and 1995-96. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, would it be normal to lump 
protocol in with that type of an expenditure? That's only a . . . 
that's a once in a, we hope a least, a decade occurrence. Would 
it be normal to have protocol be part of that operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. There’s 
nothing unusual about that. The member from Thunder Creek is 
correct. It's a temporary allocation. This year is the end of the 
anniversary, and you will find that in next year's budget it'll 
come back to more or less the original number that we had for 
1994-1995. There's nothing unusual about that. And rather than 
create some category which is for temporary purposes, it's 
located in this particular subvote. 
 
The Provincial Secretary's department is not a huge department 
from the point of view of personnel or staffing. And we have to 
utilize whatever staff is there to administer any new initiative 
that we have, all in the interests of efficient government and 
cost saving. And that's why it's located there. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying is that come next year 
that that will be ratcheted back again and there will not be any 
of those expenditures associated with that office or any of the 
other ones that you've involved in this operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. In a general sense that's 
probably true. Now maybe there will be some other need that 
may arise, for which there have to be some allocation of budget. 
So I wouldn't want to say that the number will exactly be the  

same, but for the purposes of the 90th anniversary, yes, it will 
be scaled back because the anniversary will have ended by then. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Because I can tell you, Minister, that there's 
been a lot of people around the province write in to our "Mr. 
Premier, I want to know" initiative, complaining about this 
expenditure. And they don't see it as a wise move on the 
government's part. 
 
Now I'll read you a couple of them to give you a flavour of the 
issues out there that people write in about. I have a question 
here that comes from Eve Cross from Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 
And Eve says: 
 
 I want to know why you're wasting money on a 90th 

birthday party for the province. Maybe for a hundred 
years when the province will hopefully still be around, 
but 90 years is stupid when money is tight. Think before 
you spend. And this is only one example of wasted 
money. 

 
Another one by . . . similar questions were asked by Greg Nein 
of Regina, Mr. Diehl of Moosomin, Mr. McAuley of 
Moosomin, Mr. Nichol from Saskatoon, and Mr. McCullough 
from Yorkton, and Mr. Lawrence from Tisdale, and Mr. 
Matsalla from Saskatoon — people all over the province with 
the same kind of comments, Minister. 
 
They don't understand the need for this expenditure when we 
have seen the average family in this province paying 45, $4,600 
more in taxes over three years. We have a net tax increase in 
this province, on families, of $225 million in three and a half 
years. And they find it offensive, I guess, that you would be 
spending this kind of money on something that only seems to 
coincide with your need to have an election and not much else. 
 
So all of these people, I think, Mr. Minister  and I'd be happy 
to send across their names  I think would like a response 
from you as to why you've spent their money on this particular 
project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I would very much 
appreciate the opportunity to respond to the citizens who have 
written to the member for Thunder Creek. I have been doing 
that all along for people who have written to me. And I explain 
why it is important that we recognize the 90th anniversary of 
the province. And there are a number of reasons. 
 
The amount of money that is being spent that is actually new 
money is not a great deal of money, considering what the return 
will be. It's been reported to me, Mr. Chairman, that already, as 
of today, there are 811 communities and organizations who 
have set up an event to commemorate the 90th anniversary. 
 
Many of these would not have done this . . . And there's no 
provincial taxpayers' money involved in this, the government 
doesn't provide any grants. They do it on their own. And they're 
doing it partly because they are seeing the whole province  



May 17, 1995 

 
2343 

getting involved in the excitement of the anniversary, in the 
excitement of the Grey Cup. They recognize the tourism value 
and the contribution that it can make to the economy. 
 
Eight hundred and eleven communities and organizations 
putting on an event, homecomings bringing family and friends 
back from wherever they may be living today, out of the 
province or out of the country, I think can make a very 
significant contribution to the economy of the province and the 
economy of those communities. 
 
I remember anniversary celebrations that I was involved in in 
1980, I believe it was about then. And I can remember going to 
communities of population of 150, and 1,000 to 1,500 people 
came for a weekend celebration. That's a big boost to the 
economy. And that's what's happening here today. 
 
(1515) 
 
All that we're doing, from the provincial government's point of 
view, is acting as a facilitator, like a promoter of tourism. If you 
can show people who want to take a trip for a holiday the whole 
Saskatchewan package, you're more likely to attract them to 
come than if you just show them one event. That's what we're 
trying to do — show them the package, promote the province, 
and invite them to Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think in this province we have a lot to celebrate and this 
is an opportunity to do it. And most people in the province want 
to take advantage of it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well certainly I'll provide the list of 
individuals, Mr. Minister, and you can come up with whatever 
story you wish for them, but they are concerned or they 
wouldn't have taken the time to write in about it. 
 
A couple of questions. Your former deputy provincial secretary, 
Mr. Leeson, resigned. Were there any . . . and could you give us 
the severance package that Mr. Leeson got when he resigned. 
Was there any severance or any compensation to him at all 
when he left the services of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Leeson 
resigned to go back to the university from where he had taken a 
leave of absence to serve in the public service. He resigned and 
returned to the university without severance because that was a 
decision of his. 
 
And I think we were fortunate to have him for the time he was 
able to make available to us and to the Provincial Secretary's 
department and the government. But as it is with leaves of 
absence, one has to go back when they are up. 
 
And there is also questions of superannuation in your previous 
job that have to be considered, and all of those things I'm sure 
Mr. Leeson must have thought about. But he resigned and 
therefore there was no severance. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me  

about the process for hiring your new assistant deputy 
provincial secretary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the government was 
searching for someone with Mr. Marchildon's qualifications to 
fill the role of Provincial Secretary. We did an extensive search. 
We had in the Department of Economic Development the 
deputy . . . the present deputy provincial secretary had done 
some contract work on trade-related matters. His expertise in 
trade, his particular expertise with regard to the FTA and — the 
Free Trade Agreement — and his extensive knowledge of the 
constitutional questions in Canada, which is something . . . 
although we don't talk about it in the context of the constitution, 
we're talking in a context of Canadian unity and some of the 
issues that are ahead of us. 
 
Some of his qualifications were extensive and exemplary and he 
was the kind of person that we were looking for in order to be 
able to pilot some of the very extensive work that we're going to 
have to be doing with regard . . . particularly dealing through 
the intergovernmental affairs side of the Provincial Secretary's 
department. There are many other responsibilities as well. But 
the government sought out Mr. Marchildon, who was at 
university in Washington, D.C. (District of Columbia), Johns 
Hopkins. And we're fortunate to have been able to entice him 
back to Saskatchewan from where he had originally originated. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Had Mr. Marchildon worked in the public 
service in Saskatchewan before at anything? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — No he had not, Mr. Speaker. I think he 
had practised law in Saskatchewan, but had not worked for the 
public service. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you. Well I haven't had the 
opportunity to formally meet him before today. But welcome 
back and I hope you enjoy your stay in the public service of 
Saskatchewan. It can have trying moments attached to it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Minister, that's all the questions I have now. 
Evidently everything else I had for you has to be asked in 
Executive Council, that you no longer do polling and you no 
longer have anything to do with patronage so therefore we 
should not ask you those questions. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you ask him all the travel stuff? 
 
Mr. Swenson: — No I didn't. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and officials. A couple of questions on computers 
first. You purchased eight new computers, I believe, for your 
office out of 42 employees. Do all the employees in your office 
have computers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The answer is yes; we are in the 
information age and we are . . . that's not got directly a lot to do 
with it. But we try to equip our employees with the best 
possible equipment to make them more productive, more  



May 17, 1995 

 
2344 

efficient, so the answer to the question is yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you purchased seven 
new computers for almost $22,000 from Professional Western. 
Was that tendered to start off with? If so, how many tenders did 
you receive and what were the computers that you purchased — 
what speeds and what model? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am pleased to be able to inform 
the member from Souris-Cannington that everything in the 
Provincial Secretary's department that is purchased of this kind 
of magnitude is tendered. These computers were tendered. 
 
The information that you ask about how many tenders we 
received, we don't have it here but I will undertake to provide it 
for you. But the major thrust of the question is, were they 
tendered? The answer is, yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What kind of 
computers were they? Were they 486's and how fast? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The answer to the question, Mr. 
Chairman, is they were 486's. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, do you happen to know 
what speed they were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am informed — I would not ever 
pretend to be the expert in all of this but I have people with me 
who are — that they have eight to twelve megabytes of RAM 
(random-access memory) memory, which is sort of the area in 
which it is necessary in order to be able to access and utilize the 
Internet. And the lowest speed that any would have would be 
about 33 megahertz. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well 
approximately 3,000-plus dollars for a 33 megahertz machine is 
paying high end again. 
 
I'm thinking back to the Minister of Labour who wasn't sure 
how many computers he bought but he got . . . or monitors I 
believe it was. It was five monitors he thought he'd got for 
$2,000 each, which is a high price. He's not sure what he 
received so he's going to get back to me on that. 
 
But I'm just wondering if you purchased these also through 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Once again I remind the Chair and 
the member and the House that these were tendered. These were 
low tender. And all of the purchases are made through the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. They're 
tendered through the SPMC. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd like to ask 
you a few questions dealing with your travel and the ministerial 
travel. 
 
Could you please give us the information on your personal  

travel — where you went, what were the purposes of the 
meetings and the length of stay, and who accompanied you on 
those trips? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — It would take . . . all the travel . . . I 
could read it to you but it would take some time. Can I just 
provide it? We will send it to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope you're 
sending that over quickly so that I can ask you some questions 
on it, because you have spent almost a quarter-million dollars 
on travel in the last year. I wonder if you could give me some 
information as to how that compares with last year's travel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I believe . . . you're talking about 
last year's travel? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Right. And this year's. How does that 
compare to this year's? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay, the last year . . . because we 
don't have last year's travel because we sent it over to you last 
year, and this year's . . . So I can't sort of look at two sheets and 
compare that. But we'll provide it to you and show you that. I'm 
going to ask to see whether somebody can tell me a range of 
change that there might be there. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I can provide — although we will provide more 
detail — but I can provide the following. 
 
In 1993-94 the out-of-province travel was at a cost of 
$94,717.83, and in 1994-95 — and we can only compare this 
fiscal year we're in now to that, and that's the range you should 
be looking at — the travel was $156,649.60. And the reason for 
that is because the department incurred a greater number of 
responsibilities and we had some rather very substantial issues 
that we were pursuing. For example, the internal trade 
negotiations in which I was involved in intergovernmental 
affairs; it was involved very extensively; it required more travel 
than the year before. 
 
The Primrose Weapons Range, we were on some very extensive 
negotiations, both at the officials' and the ministerial level, 
which actually as a result of those effective negotiations 
brought to the province from the federal government, $9 million 
of additional compensation which for some time the federal 
government had resisted in paying. So the increased . . . the 
modest increase in travel to gain $9 million seems like, I think 
nobody would disagree, was a good investment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well you are 
claiming you gained $9 million that was owed to us. In actual 
fact, is it not that you received a payment of $9 million that had 
been owing to us? You said that the federal government has 
been holding off on this for awhile. We must have had a 
legitimate claim against something on the Primrose Range to 
receive some compensation. So it was coming. 
 
Now you spent $156,000 on this travel. Surely it didn't take  



May 17, 1995 

 
2345 

$156,000 worth of negotiating, travelling back and forth, to 
accomplish this Primrose Weapons Range finalized 
negotiations. 
 
And what did you gain out of the intergovernmental trade 
arrangements across the country? What improvements have we 
seen in Saskatchewan that have actually benefited it? 
 
(1530) 
 
I don't see any change in my corner of the province when it 
comes to the interprovincial trades in meats, as an example, 
where we can't ship processed meat or cut meat across the 
border into Manitoba unless it's first gone through a federally 
inspected plant. And most of the butcher shops right along the 
border, in a lot of cases, are buying their meat from Manitoba 
and can't turn around and sell it back into Manitoba. 
 
So what benefit have we had, Mr. Minister, in that particular 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that I can 
sort of put a number value on it but it is indeed very extensive. 
The role of the Provincial Secretary's department, through 
intergovernmental affairs, is to be a central agency to assist 
other departments in the roles that they play in their respective 
contacts with federal government, with other provincial 
governments, with international governments. 
 
And some of the major things that have been accomplished is 
some very extensive agreements, very important agreements, 
dealing with overlap and duplication between the Government 
of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan in the area of 
environment, in the area of fisheries. Quite a large number for 
Department of Economic Development, for example, and the 
federal government, similar department in the federal 
government, saved I think a considerable amount of money by 
establishing one office for access by business people for the 
purposes of advice and any information they get for assisting 
their business. One office in the city of Saskatoon rather than 
two different offices, which used to be the case. 
 
And we are continuing to work to try to make the government 
more efficient, more effective, and eliminate duplication and 
overlap. We have had some extensive international work that 
has been done. Recently the Premier announced in Saskatoon a 
memorandum of understanding . . . and what we haven't fully 
concluded it with, but with some things we can do with The 
Ukraine. 
 
We renewed the twinning with the province of Jilin in China. 
Everybody knows that the market in China for Saskatchewan 
export is very extensive and a very important one. And if you 
recognize that when you deal with a country like that you have 
to have some personal contacts  there's an element of trust 
you have to develop  that means that you should be prepared 
to invest some money to do the travelling that is necessary in 
order to be there. Because if you're not, somebody else will be. 
 

I know when I was there in June, the Australians were 
practically claiming that whole region of the continent as their 
territory, even though it is Canada, and Saskatchewan in 
particular, from where the Chinese buy a good chunk or a good 
portion of their grain, wheat, potash — all kinds of things. 
These are very important contacts that one has to have in order 
to be able to keep ahead of the rest of your competitors. 
 
So I think the benefits are extensive. You can't . . . one of the 
problems we've had in Saskatchewan is that we've been the 
greatest kept secret in North America. And I think we have got 
to put an end to that. We have got some assets and some 
advantages here that are worth marketing, and this government 
has made a commitment to go out there and market this 
province and show the investors who may be prepared to come 
here that this is a good place to invest. And we've had some 
results. 
 
So I can't give you a list of 1 to 20, but I can give you these 
kinds of ranges and feel very confident that we have had some 
pretty significant successes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You gave, I 
believe, all the arguments as to why there were trade offices in 
Hong Kong and Minneapolis and New York and London  to 
make Saskatchewan available to the world and to put our 
products before the people that we wanted to sell them to. 
 
And yet when that was going on, you and your colleagues of the 
day were complaining that that was a total waste of money, that 
we had no business being out in the world trying to set up trade 
missions, trying to set up trade offices to promote 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan's products. 
 
And yet today you're the very person that's running off to China 
to do exactly those same kind of trade missions to sell those 
very same products that the trade offices were doing, Mr. 
Minister. And the trade offices that were so wrong, your 
government has now turned around and is again setting up trade 
offices in various locations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the twinning with Jilin province came about, I 
believe, during the 1980s under the previous administration. 
And it is indeed a very valuable contact for the people of 
Saskatchewan and for the Government of Saskatchewan. And 
indeed we should carry on with that contact. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, it's important that we do so, but it's 
important that we also not be hypocrites when it comes to 
saying on one hand when in opposition, that those types of 
trade missions and trade offices are wrong, and then when you 
become government, establish those very same contacts because 
now that you're in government they're good because you're 
doing it. 
 
If it was wrong before, Mr. Minister, it's wrong today. So if it's 
right today, then it was right before when it was happening. So, 
Mr. Minister, while I think that it is indeed proper that we carry 
on with those contacts, I think the question that has to be asked  



May 17, 1995 

 
2346 

is what direct benefits that are new because of your trade 
mission did you get from China? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm glad the member 
answered that question because I think I can enlighten him and 
the House as to the benefits that are there. The fact of the matter 
is that travelling — the way we do the contact internationally — 
is more effective than it was done before because we can put 
the priority where it needs to be at any particular time. 
 
Furthermore, it is less costly to send trade missions, which will 
involve, as we always do, people from the private sector and the 
public sector, targeted to particular areas to pursue certain 
objectives and get results. 
 
Let me give you this example. With the work that was done in 
China, some of the immediate economic results of the 
Saskatchewan business mission are valued at over one-quarter 
of a billion dollars of new business. This was the work that was 
done in June and the work that was done by our Premier as part 
of the Canadian delegation that went over to that part of the 
world later this last year. 
 
For example, AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), a $20 
million contract; Canpotex, $88 million; Lateral Vector, $88 
million direct investment; future profit-sharing of incremental 
oil revenues — there are many such examples which were made 
possible because of the relationship that was established by the 
trade missions that were made, the work that has been done by 
various officials, and the work that has been done by the private 
sector. That is very important. 
 
But it's important to understand that you have to recognize the 
governmental structures; you have to recognize the business 
cultures of any particular nation you do business with. And in a 
place like China, for example, it is important that you deal at 
the governmental political level with appropriate levels of 
similar people in that country. 
 
I can relate that one of the things that was significant when I 
went there in June was that we were able to help the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool successfully negotiate its 
participation in a World Bank grain system project in Beijing. 
There had been some difficulties in the project, and the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool could not get to see the appropriate 
people in the hierarchy of the Government of the People's 
Republic of China. 
 
And I don't take any credit personally — it just happened that I 
have this particular position — because of my position, was 
able to make those people in their administration accessible to 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool people. They were able to solve a 
problem, and they were able to get a further contract. 
 
I think that's pretty good — both from the point of view of 
future possibilities . . . because once you establish a reputation 
and some trust, all kinds of things open up for you. 
 
And where we can help companies like the Saskatchewan  

Wheat Pool or AECL or Canpotex or Lateral Vector, I think it 
benefits everybody in Saskatchewan because of the spin-off in 
economic development that comes back to us. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, I'm glad you brought up 
AECL because the AECL program that you put a stop to in this 
province, that was going into Saskatoon, would have meant that 
the people of Saskatchewan, industry in Saskatchewan, would 
have had both the certification and the technical expertise to 
work on nuclear facilities. 
 
As the case is today, we have a limited research facility in 
Saskatoon, whereas the mechanical expertise continues to 
reside in the main in Ontario, where we would have been 
building up that expertise within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So when a large deal is signed or is in the works, such as the 
AECL agreement with China, we have lost that portion which 
would have been available to Saskatchewan had the AECL 
project gone forward here. 
 
Now when the machine shop is looking to build parts and 
pieces for a CANDU (Canadian deuterium uranium) reactor, 
that work is going to go in all likelihood to Ontario because our 
machine shops don't have the certification and the experience of 
working on nuclear reactors. That work and experience is done 
in Ontario and we've lost that. We could have had that  and 
we lost it because of your government decisions  based on 
the AECL agreement signed by the previous administration. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, certainly the AECL agreement is good for 
Canada. I think it has a limited benefit for Saskatchewan or at 
least certainly a much more limited benefit than could have 
been received for Canada. 
 
Canpotex has been selling into China for a significant number 
of years. They have built up their trust and their level of access 
into that nation. And while certainly you may have been there to 
take some of the credit when another deal was signed, Canpotex 
has been dealing with China for a long time. 
 
Lateral Vector, from what I've talked to the people involved 
there, that this is more of an informational exchange, and that 
while certainly of benefit to Lateral Vector to be involved in the 
Chinese oil industry, there is going to be very limited spin-offs 
for the province of Saskatchewan because the work and the 
people employed are going to be in China, and it's information 
that is going from Lateral Vector to China to participate in this. 
 
So we've lost some of the benefits because of your 
government's decision on AECL. Canpotex was already there 
and had developed these markets. And the Lateral Vector one 
has only a limited benefit to Saskatchewan, while it may have 
indeed a very large benefit to Lateral Vector as a corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, let me begin by 
responding to the reference to Canpotex. I want to indicate that 
the political contact is extremely important as it applies to 
future contracts for the purchase of potash and the interests of  



May 17, 1995 

 
2347 

our potash industry here in Saskatchewan. That's just the way 
business is done in countries like China. 
 
And so it was important that we re-establish that contact, and 
then we maintain it and that we continue to nourish it into the 
future because the possibilities for Saskatchewan . . . and 
remember that almost all of the potash in Canada comes out of 
Saskatchewan. So to say that somehow there's no benefit in 
Saskatchewan is not correct. But the opportunities are very 
significant. 
 
Now one of the significant breakthroughs that was done in this 
particular contract, it is now a long-term contract. What used to 
happen before is that it was short-term contracts on certain 
amounts or certain tonnage that was bought, and then Canpotex 
and therefore the Saskatchewan companies would be uncertain 
as to what production levels they could have because they never 
knew for sure what they would be able to ship next year. 
 
There now is a long-term contract as a result of the work that 
was done there. That has provided stability. That is important to 
the industry and therefore is of benefit to Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to clarify something else on AECL. AECL not only 
has its research component here in Saskatchewan, in the city of 
Saskatoon; it's also got its marketing. Now that's very, very 
important because marketing means that it provides very 
extensive procurement opportunities for Saskatchewan 
businesses. We have now got the window into providing 
supplies and goods because the marketing arm of AECL is here 
in Saskatchewan. That is not insignificant. That is extremely 
significant. 
 
Now the member may say we should have built a reactor. I 
think that's what the original deal . . . The fact of the matter is 
that in Saskatchewan we have more generating capacity for 
electricity than right now is required. It would not make sense 
to spend a billion dollars, when we've got all kinds of other 
needs and obligations, to build a nuclear reactor for the 
generation of electricity. 
 
We have research being done, again at the University of 
Saskatchewan, to determine what are the future energy needs of 
this province. They will tell us what they are, so we'll be able to 
make the right decisions rather than simply pursuing one 
option, which was the case before, and by doing that possibly 
making the wrong choice. We want to know what all the 
options are so that we can make the right choice. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, indeed we don't have a 
shortage of electricity right now. But I believe that there have 
been reports coming out of SaskPower that because of the lead 
times in building up a new generation capacity that we are 
approaching that point in time where we either have to start 
building a new facility some place or start getting into the 
market to buy electricity at some point down the road from 
somebody else. And perhaps we can buy some electricity from  

the limestone generation plant in Manitoba. And perhaps that is 
what the government has in mind; I don't know. 
 
But when you talk about the marketing arm of AECL, when it 
comes to purchasing in Saskatchewan, you have to be certified 
to supply a nuclear reactor. You have to meet certain 
engineering requirements. In most cases, those machine shops, 
those companies that have that certification, are in Ontario. 
They could have been here because we were building a plant. 
But we're not building a plant, so they remain in Ontario 
because local industry has very little contact with AECL in 
providing that kind of a service to them. There are certainly 
some. But we would have had a lot more, Mr. Minister, had that 
been built here. And we could have benefited then in turn from 
the development of AECL CANDU reactors in China, which 
we have missed out on. 
 
Mr. Minister, a question on fisheries. You mentioned that part 
of your travel dealt with fisheries. What was your involvement 
with the fisheries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — We had some discussions with 
regard to aquaculture. And a technical fisheries mission from 
Jilin, I think, has already been to Saskatchewan recently to 
develop further plans to introduce wildlife fish from 
Saskatchewan into Jilin, which provides an opportunity for us. 
And I think there was some success in that. 
 
And there's some continuing work being done because there's 
potential for a commercial joint venture in Jilin involving the 
province of Saskatchewan and the Jilin people. That's what the 
main thrust of our discussions were. And there seems to be 
some further development, which we're optimistic about. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. This was 
mainly then on the same trip that you went to China dealing 
with all the other issues. So where did you spend the rest of the 
$156,000 that wasn't spent on the China trip? I thought your 
officials were going to prepare a list of where the trips are. Will 
those be available today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think, just while we're getting 
some information, I want to clarify something because I think 
the member misheard me. When I talked about the $156,000 — 
that was not the ministerial travel. That was the global travel of 
the whole department, just to show you how frugal we are. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's out of province, though. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, yes. So that was the total 
travel budget for the Department of the Provincial Secretary, 
and as I said, we will have to put together that information for 
you so it's broken down where those trips were and that's no 
problem — we'll get it for you. 
 
I'm not sure we can get it for you within the next half hour or 
so, but we'll make sure that it's available. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I'm  



May 17, 1995 

 
2348 

disappointed that you wouldn't have the travel broken down and 
available, because that is one of the questions that we ask on a 
regular basis. 
 
And I'm sure that you were aware that it was coming up and it 
seems to be a pattern that has developed within your entire 
government, that while you have supplied us indeed with the 
travel expenses, that whenever you come to the House to 
provide the answers — which is what estimates is supposed to 
be about — all of a sudden, sorry, we don't have that 
information available but we'll get it to you at some later date. 
 
And I look back at last year, the travel information that was 
provided in April, we didn't get the final numbers of that until 
December — eight months later. And I realize that you guys are 
used to dealing with union employees and perhaps that's the 
speed at which they work; but it's been my impression, having 
worked with a number of them, that they are good employees 
and can do their work fairly quickly. 
 
So I have to assume that it's some other reason that's taking 
place that your information is so slow and so scanty that you 
can't even provide a list of where the minister went in the year, 
of which some portion of the $156,000 that was spent in your 
department — a department that seems to have very little 
employment opportunities, or very little to do — that you can't 
supply even a list of where the minister has travelled to in the 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — As the member knows, I like to 
provide precise information. And we'll make sure that we get 
that to you with all of the things that the member wants and it 
won't take till December. I don't think the information last year 
took till December to provide. 
 
An Hon. Member: — One department did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I can only speak for my 
department, and I like to think that we're very efficient and very 
forthcoming in the information. But I will give you an 
indication of the travel and the locations to which I travelled as 
minister. And then we'll provide you, sort of, the costs of each 
one when we provide you with the information. 
 
But I did attend the internal trades ministers’ meeting in Halifax 
in April; internal trade ministers’ meeting in Winnipeg in May; 
the trip to China, Korea, and Toyko in June; a meeting with 
ministers responsible for francophone affairs in Moncton, New 
Brunswick in August; the annual premiers' conference, which I 
attend as the Deputy Premier on a regular basis, in Toronto in 
August; the commissioning ceremony for H.M.C.S. (Her 
Majesty's Canadian Ship) Regina which took place in Victoria, 
B.C.; and the installation of the Governor General in Ottawa. 
 
So as you see, the travel of the minister of Provincial Secretary 
is not particularly extensive because we try to priorize our travel 
to where we think it's important to be. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister; will you also  

provide the information as who accompanied you on those trips 
as well as the other information related to in-province and 
out-of-province travel? Who was travelling where and at what 
cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, as a matter of fact it just 
struck me that in fact I have already provided that on the trip to 
China at the request . . . even though the House wasn't sitting. I 
don't know whether it was from this member who's asking the 
question or someone else. But that's already been made 
available to you by letter from me. But we will do it one more 
time and add all of the other trips that were involved so that you 
have that information. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I 
certainly want to extend my appreciation to my officials, the 
officials from the Department of Provincial Secretary, for being 
with us here today and assisting me in providing the answers to 
the good questions that were asked by both the member from 
Thunder Creek and the member from Souris-Cannington. And I 
want to extend to them my word of appreciation for their 
involvement and for the scrutiny which they have provided and 
continue to provide. 
 
And I say that sincerely, because although I think, sometimes 
wrongly, some people conclude that simply because opposition 
ask a question, that somehow that's done in a negative way, 
that's not necessarily so. It's important that people do question 
us so that we are continually diligent and are in a position to 
provide answers that the public has a right to know. So I want 
to extend my thanks to the members of the opposition for their 
role in that process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and his officials for their cooperation 
today and for answering our questions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would  



May 17, 1995 

 
2349 

move: 
 
 That notwithstanding the rules and procedures of the 

legislature, this House do adjourn at 5 p.m. this 
afternoon and reconvene later this evening at 7 p.m.; 
and further, that this House sit on Thursday, May 18 — 
that being tomorrow, Mr. Speaker — at 10 a.m. to 12 
noon, and reconvene later that day at 1:30 p.m. for 
routine proceedings. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Churchill Downs. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Motion moved by the Government 
House Leader, the member from Regina Elphinstone, seconded 
by the member from Regina Churchill Downs, the Speaker has 
taken the prerogative to make a slight amendment, and I will 
ask the House agreement to that. Instead of adjourn at 5 p.m., 
recess at 5 p.m. if the members agree to that amendment. 
 
The motion therefore will read: 
 
 That notwithstanding the rules and procedures of this 

legislature, this House do recess at 5 p.m. this afternoon 
and reconvene later this evening at 7 p.m.; and further, 
that this House sit on Thursday, May 18, from 10 a.m. 
to 12 noon and reconvene later that day at 1:30 p.m. for 
routine proceedings. 

 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
(1600) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
The Chair: — I would ask that the Premier please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to introduce to the House, to you, sir, the officials who are 
assisting me today. 
 
I have here to my immediate left, the deputy minister to the 
Office of the Premier, Mr. Frank Bogdasavich. To my 
immediate right is the director of operations and executive 
services, Mr. Don Wincherauk; he's seated across the aisle. 
Behind him is the manager of administration, Ms. Bonita Heidt; 
and behind me is the executive assistant to the deputy minister, 
Mr. Jim Nicol. There may be others coming in depending upon 
the nature of the questions, and if so I'll try to identify them to 
the members of the House. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome to the 
Premier and to his officials here this afternoon. We are looking 
forward to the opportunity to hold the Premier of this province  

accountable for all of the things that are happening in 
Saskatchewan, and for all of the departments that he's 
responsible for as the Premier of this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, we'll start off relatively easy here and just ask you 
a few questions. Have you submitted the answers to the global 
questions to our office yet? And if not, we would hope that 
you'd do that as soon as possible with regard to the global 
questions that we provided each department. 
 
As well, Mr. Premier, we're a little bit concerned about the lack 
of cooperation from a number of your departments with respect 
to the global questioning of the various other departments that 
you ultimately are responsible for, specifically with regard to 
the travel costs of each one of the departments. We received 
them from a few of the various departments. Unfortunately the 
others did not see fit to provide us with those answers. And we 
would appreciate it, through you, who are responsible for all 
government departments, to provide us with that information. 
 
As well, Mr. Premier, we received nothing with respect to the 
legal actions of any department that may have legal actions 
ongoing. We would appreciate it if you would provide us with 
that information as well. And I would just ask for your 
cooperation and your commitment in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, thank you to the 
Leader of the Opposition. With respect to the global questions 
and the specific global questions, if I may describe them that 
way, I'll undertake to have Executive Council global questions 
over to your office, if the leader will consent, within the next 
few days. 
 
We are a little bit trapped, so I'm advised, by the — how should 
I describe it? — the fact that we're dealing with my executive 
estimates today. But we'll get them to you in the next few days, 
maybe even earlier. They're being cleaned up and worked on. 
 
I have no information about the travel costs, but I will 
undertake to review these with the ministers. I'm advised that 
they're part of the motions process of the government in any 
event. I know you want them right away. We will try to 
undertake to get those to you too in the next several days, as 
well as legal actions. 
 
Unfortunately I have to rely on the Department of Justice for 
the tabulation of all the legal actions. So my commitment to 
you, both for myself and for the ministers, is to try to get 
something back in the next 24 or 48 hours — three or four days 
at the most, beyond that. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. We would like specific 
details on all of those if you could provide them as well, with 
respect to the travel, who accompanied them, all of the details 
that you normally would ask for in that situation. 
 
Moving on to other areas, Mr. Premier, recently  well just 
moments ago  we completed the Provincial Secretary's 
estimates; the sum granted was some seven and a half million  



May 17, 1995 

 
2350 

dollars approximately, a total of $350,000 more than last year. 
Previous to the NDP taking office, the title of the Provincial 
Secretary was little more than a symbolic ministry in a lot of 
respects. Under the NDP, the massive reorganization took place 
in order for, firstly, the member from Cumberland to become a 
cabinet minister, and secondly, in order for the member for 
Regina Dewdney to maintain some degree of responsibility and 
maintain his cabinet status. 
 
Mr. Premier, how do you justify such a massive expenditure 
and such a massive increase in an office that is dedicated solely 
to politics? It's mostly dedicated towards polling, things of that 
nature. And the Provincial Secretary's office spends something 
in the magnitude of $16,000 per month on political staff. In 
fact, under the guise of reclassification, your political workers 
continue to receive massive raises outside of your own 4 per 
cent increase. I wonder if you could speak to that for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, with 
respect to the Provincial Secretary, there is a lot of confusion at 
large — I don't say of the Leader of the Opposition — 
respecting the Provincial Secretary. There always has to be a 
Provincial Secretary for constitutional reasons if nothing else, 
the keeper of the great seal. 
 
I know that you could argue that could be doubled up with 
another minister, but in this case, the Department of the 
Provincial Secretary, the largest expenditure item — I'll try to 
put a finger on it if I can — relates to intergovernmental affairs. 
There used to be at one time a free-standing department called 
the department of interprovincial affairs. We have done away 
with that. Actually I think the former administration, of which 
your party of course was the governing party, did away with it. 
 
And here's the breakdown. Intergovernmental affairs for '95-96 
spends — it's projected they spend — $886,000. Protocol 
office, $811,000 and I think the member would agree that this is 
not a political office, which is the case. There is the expenses of 
Lieutenant Governor, 248,000; office of the French language 
coordinator, 230,000; telecommunications and broadcasting, 
243,000  that relates to the functions generally in government 
at large. That's roughly the accommodation. 
 
So that . . . there's not much you can do with that. You're going 
to need an intergovernmental affairs branch somewhere. You 
can either house it in the Premier's branch or assign it to some 
other minister but you're going to need this. I felt that a 
Provincial Secretary in charge of intergovernmental affairs — 
just that function alone, given what's happening in Quebec, 
given what's happening with the federal Liberal budget, namely 
offloading — was warranted and that is the situation. 
 
Now with respect to the other matters, namely people in the 
staff of the Premier. We have reduced the numbers, something 
in the order of about 16 per cent from where they were in 
1990-91. And in terms of actual dollar savings, they amount to 
about a million dollars if my memory serves me correctly; I'll be 
corrected here by my officials not to mislead the House. 
 

So we are doing, I think, over the last three years, quite a 
credible job in reductions. So that's how we justified the 
Provincial Secretary and how we justify the, what I think, is a 
pretty tight ship in the Premier's office. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I think a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan would disagree with you when you're spending 
that kind of money, a lot of it going towards political polling, 
advertising, in spite of the fact that you made a lot of 
commitments during the election campaign to reduce the 
amount of political polling as well as substantially reduce, I 
think it was something as well as advertising, something in the 
magnitude of 80 per cent was a figure as I recall that you 
committed to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
If you remember the election campaign, sir, your commitment 
to the people of Saskatchewan was that you were going to clean 
up the waste and mismanagement and that would deal with all 
the problems associated with this province. And indeed, I don't 
think that has happened, Mr. Premier. I think people still 
believe that there is lots of spending by the Provincial 
Secretary's office and many other departments that you're 
ultimately in charge of in terms of government advertising. 
 
It's been difficult to get any answers out of the Provincial 
Secretary on terms of political advertising. And when we've 
asked it, the minister . . . the Provincial Secretary from his chair 
is saying that we've never asked it. We've asked it repeatedly in 
question period and he has always dodged the question. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, we would ask you now to commit to 
providing us with the answer with respect to the costs of 
political polling that your department, the Provincial Secretary's 
department, has come forward with in the last few months, 
particularly in the amount of budget that has been allocated 
towards what we would consider, and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would consider, nothing more than political ads 
that you and your government and departments have been 
running over the last about a month. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to 
emphasize very strongly with respect to advertising that this 
government has implemented — I think we were the second in 
Canada, but that was by chronology; Ontario did it first — what 
I would call is a fair tendering process with respect to 
advertising services. 
 
And I will not take up the time of the House to tell you the 
details of it. These can be certainly provided to the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
And that was a first in Saskatchewan — ever. Whether it was 
under the Liberals or the Conservatives or the old CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or the old NDP, in 
the context therefore there is a fair bid situation. And while in 
advertising low cost doesn't necessarily always win because you 
have a subjective judgement as to the quality of what your  



May 17, 1995 

 
2351 

message is going to be, on balance there's been some 
improvement, some considerable improvement. 
 
For example, we are told that the savings on communications 
spendings . . . and I'll break them down for you in three figures. 
Advertising agencies, from 1991 to '94-95, the year recently 
concluded, total savings of 24.9 million. 
 
In the case of printing, there have been reductions from the 
same time frame, 1991, '94-95, over the four-year period, of 19 
million. It's actually a little bit over 19 million. 
 
The polling in 1990-91, was $939,000. That's almost a million 
dollars. In '94-95 the polling will be slightly over 300,000. But 
none the less in the four-year period the total savings on polling 
just come in a shade under 2 million — or 1.9 less. 
 
Now if you total up the 24.9 on advertising agencies, actual 
dollars spent less, the 2 million on polling, actual dollars spent 
less, on the printing, $19 million actually spent less, what you 
have is a saving of $45 million over four years. 
 
Now if the member opposite says we should try to do more by 
way of savings, I concur. The constant task of government, 
especially these days, is to make sure that we can in fact do all 
that we can do to be as efficient as we can be. But we have 
done fairly good over the last three years and some several 
months, and we intend to continue working away at it and 
limiting our advertising, our printing, our polling, in a way that 
makes it quite efficient. 
 
May I make one other last point before I take my place. I don't 
know if the hon. member will have met, in his capacity as 
Leader of the Opposition, with the Saskatchewan Weekly 
Newspapers Association or the Saskatchewan broadcasting 
association, but I do from time to time. 
 
And in fact their concern — I won't say complaint — their 
concern is that the decrease in advertising and these kinds of 
functions is so great that they actually see a little bit of an 
impact on their bottom line. They argue that the government has 
lost a lot in just the communication of some of its programs. 
 
So what we're trying to do here is to balance two competing 
interests — tell government programs in a fair and open and 
responsible way, and do it in a way in which we can find 
efficiencies in less, given the fact that everybody has to do with 
a little bit of less. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, within the 
Provincial Secretary's office there's been a . . . we were 
wondering how you justify the patronage positions that the 
Provincial Secretary's office has been engaging in, such as 
Dickson Bailey who is receiving, we understand, something in 
the magnitude of $6,031 per month compensation. Mr. Bailey 
was on a contract to the . . . is on a contract with the department 
of Provincial Secretary's office until a real position could be 
found for him. 
 

Before being elected as Premier, you claimed you'd eliminate 
patronage. You said that you would set up an independent 
commission to oversee appointments to ensure individuals were 
hired on a basis of merit rather than on political affiliation. And 
as you know, Mr. Dickson Bailey has a long history associated 
with you and your party. 
 
And I'm wondering how you can justify an action of hiring Mr. 
Dickson Bailey compared to . . . when you take into account the 
kinds of commitments you made to the people of Saskatchewan 
in the last election campaign with regard to patronage 
appointments, saying that if you're hiring people who are past 
MLAs, who are all of those kinds of things, that would be 
something that you wouldn't be engaging in, Mr. Premier. 
 
And it seems very clear in this situation that Mr. Dickson 
Bailey, by I think most accounts, most people in this province 
would fairly judge him as very much a political appointment 
type of a process that he went through. And I'm wondering how 
you justify a position of that nature, particularly for a salary of 
that level. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, what I want to say is 
three things in response to the question, because I think again 
it's important to put this in a global picture. 
 
First of all, as I explained with respect to advertising agencies, 
we really revolutionized the appointments of members to what 
we call the ABC's — agencies, boards, and commissions. 
People now actually apply. They make out applications. And 
they are screened in the applications and then they serve, as 
appointed by a recommending minister and approved by 
cabinet. 
 
This is also not new. Other provinces have followed and 
implemented. But I do think it's a significant reform. 
 
My second point that I wish to make is that in Executive 
Council, staff reporting to the deputy minister . . . And 
Executive Council is roughly divided into two portions, One is 
the deputy minister, Mr. Bogdasavich, who's been a long-time 
civil servant federally and actually in other provincial 
administrations. These were advertised. 
 
And again I won't take up the time of the committee, but in 
March 1992, to give you an example, five senior policy advisors 
were all advertised and were hired by competition — 
administrative officer and so forth. I could go down the list as is 
required. 
 
So we do try to advertise very much, where possible. Now the 
specific question that you refer to is related to Mr. Dickson 
Bailey, and Mr. Dickson Bailey was a 50 per cent employee, in 
effect, of the federal government and the government of the day 
here in Saskatchewan because he was in charge of the 
infrastructure program. And that's what he did. He put together 
the 178, 179 million — I don't mean alone, but he was 
responsible for it. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2352 

When that program was more or less nearing completion, as it 
is more or less now nearing completion — and I might add very 
successfully administered and his competence demonstrated 
long before that time, but in this area — his next task was 
health district boards. He's had experience in this because he's 
been involved in the electoral office, been involved in that, and 
knows how election and the mechanics of elections are to take 
place. 
 
So the issue here for all of us is not whether or not a New 
Democrat can assume an office, or a Conservative or a Liberal 
— that will invariably in a small province take place. The issue 
is whether or not for regular civil service functions, as much as 
possible, with some exceptions, you can follow the processes of 
hiring and you hire incompetence, whether it's NDP, PC, or 
Liberal. 
 
I think Dickson Bailey is a very competent person. He happens 
to be a New Democrat. You don't agree with politics of it; that's 
fair enough. But we have people who work and advise on 
government with politics I don't agree. For example, Mr. Ken 
Krawetz, to name a name, is the Liberal candidate in the 
upcoming provincial election, this year or next year, for Canora 
constituency. He is on the board of teacher education and 
certification. 
 
We've picked Ms. Linda Trytten, Liberal candidate for 
Rosetown-Biggar — I don't want to be advertising these people 
but — as the multi-type library development committee. And 
one could go down the list. I'm sure there are Conservatives 
there as well. 
 
So if you take a look at the level of the civil service and you see 
that 98, 99 per cent are Public Service Commission appointees, 
they have to follow all the tests, and the 2 per cent or less, the 
ABCs of which there is some discretion which is involved, 
we've instituted a lot of checks and balances to cut out 
patronage. 
 
Can we do more? Yes. Will we do more? Yes. 
 
Dickson Bailey, I think, is a bad example, if I may say so, for 
you to use; but that's my personal view of Mr. Bailey. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Premier, I think a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan would disagree with you. I think they would say 
he was hired none other than the reason why is simple — he is 
an NDP partisan and that's the fact of the matter, and he's been 
hired at a very handsome salary of $6,000 per month. Most 
people in Saskatchewan don't earn that kind of money in two 
months, let alone one, Mr. Premier. And the fact of the matter is 
is he is clearly identified with your party and I think people 
across this province recognize that. And I think during the next 
election campaign they'll hold you accountable for things of that 
nature. 
 
Because you made the promise to the people in the last election 
campaign that there would be none of this type of thing 
happening. And I think that's why people across this province  

are beginning to question you and your government in a whole 
range of areas with respect to these types of things. You say on 
one hand you won't do it, and then you turn around and do it 
just as blatantly as you can possibly do it. And I think the 
people of Saskatchewan are getting very, very tired of that type 
of attitude from you and your government, sir. 
 
That's why I think we're getting these kinds of questions 
constantly being asked of us as we travel around the province, 
about the commitments that you made to the people of 
Saskatchewan during the last election campaign, and why to 
date you haven't fulfilled those commitments to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Moving on to another issue, Mr. Premier, we want to deal with 
a little something that has come up with respect to the Minister 
of Labour, and that's a company that he's dealing with up in 
North Battleford, called PDN. 
 
And as you're aware, there's been concern about the financial 
arrangements surrounding the Minister of Labour's constituency 
office in North Battleford, which has been leased at an 
exorbitant rate by something called PDN Ventures, a non-profit, 
so-called non-profit company owned by some of the minister's 
closest supporters. 
 
This non-profit corporation has built up a cash reserve of 
something in the magnitude of $32,000, which is supposed to 
have been turned over to a charity. And we wonder if you 
endorse that type of activity that the Minister of Labour is 
engaged in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I don't want to prolong 
unnecessarily estimates. But as some people say, the member 
opposite . . . and I hope that he will not take this offensively, 
I'm not going to let it slide by, the comments that our promises 
are not fulfilled. 
 
I will when I sit down and there's a page available, give to him 
what was our platform card in 1991 — The Saskatchewan Way. 
I have it here. And I will not take the time, but he can judge for 
himself. 
 
Our first promise was: First things first — common sense 
financial management. Open the books. Open the books. Yes. 
The PST — "New directions, new priorities. A commitment to 
save 7,500 jobs threatened by the expanded 7 per cent PST. We 
will repeal this unfair tax." 
 
Which is what we did. That was the promise that we made. And 
work with manufacturers and processors for value added. I 
could go down. A better quality for life, and so forth. 
 
Actually I think I'll save this although anybody is entitled to get 
it because I've sent them so many copies. It doesn't seem to 
matter . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, please send it over. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2353 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, fine. It doesn't seem to make 
any difference. They still continue to do it and make the 
statements. 
 
Now with respect to the question of members, whether they are 
in cabinet or MLAs, in the submission of their accounts. Those 
are submissions of accounts which the members are responsible 
for. They know the rules. They know how those rules are to be 
applied, and they are vetted as best as possible by the 
Legislative Assembly. I am not here in the position of judge of 
any member. That is not my function. 
 
There are avenues for complaint. Those avenues for complaint 
of course involve the Board of Internal Economy. And I believe 
the minister himself, in question period three or four days ago, 
said that's not the only option that's open. Any options are open. 
 
But the minister has assured me, as he has the House publicly, 
as you heard his assurances. And in the absence of other 
evidence or other concerns, I take those assurances. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. In the last election 
campaign, I find it absolutely amazing that you would have the 
people of Saskatchewan believe that your entire platform was 
on a baseball-card-size little thing that you passed around to the 
people of Saskatchewan. Indeed you made a number of 
commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. There was a lot 
more than what was on this little baseball card that you had 
suggested are the only commitments that you made to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Open the books. Yes, that's what you said all right. You talked 
about opening the books. And the Gass Commission clearly 
said the books were open the entire time for anyone to see. That 
was part of what the Gass Commission said. 
 
As well, Mr. Premier, in addition to what is written on the 
baseball card, the NDP's baseball card of what they were going 
to do . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's not a baseball card; it's our platform. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — It was about the size of a baseball card, a little 
bigger than that, but that's about what it was made up of. There 
was a whole host of other things that you promised the people 
of Saskatchewan. There was a whole range of issues that you 
talked about, Mr. Premier, things like the PST was not going to 
be around after October 21 if we're in power. That was one of 
the commitments that you made to the people of Saskatchewan. 
But we'll deal with that. We'll deal with that a little bit later and 
try and hold you accountable for the people of Saskatchewan 
with respect to those. 
 
With respect to the Minister of Labour and his little escapade 
that he's got going, that little venture  nice, little, cosy 
arrangement  he has going on with his friends in the NDP 
Party and campaign manager up at North Battleford, the  

$32,000 that have been built up that supposedly is going to be 
turned over to a charity . . . In the legislature, under questioning, 
Mr. Premier, he said to the opposition and indeed to the people 
of Saskatchewan that you endorsed it, that you had 
communications back and forth, that he had written you a letter, 
and you had corresponded back with him with respect to this 
issue and said that it was okay. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, if you would care to share 
some of that correspondence that you had back and forth with 
the Minister of Labour with respect to this issue because I think 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve some answers on this very 
important question of whether you agree with a non-profit 
corporation being set up and set up under the circumstances that 
the Minister of Labour has set it up. The campaign manager, as 
part of that non-profit corporation, being set up to administer 
and somehow or another turn over money to charities . . . and 
indeed none of that money has been turned over. In fact what 
has happened with that money, Mr. Premier, it's actually bought 
the building that they're in now. 
 
We wonder why this is some kind of . . . is acceptable. Most 
people in the . . . in fact I understand everyone, with the 
exception of the Minister of Labour, rent at arm’s length from 
other business people in this province. And we are wondering 
and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, I think, are wondering 
whether this, in your view, is an acceptable action and if you 
had . . . And according to the minister, he says that you 
endorsed this type of action. And we were wondering if you 
would care to share the correspondence that you had with the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the answer that I have 
to give is the answer which I have given to the hon. member, 
and that is this. The rules with respect to the expenditures are 
set by a committee of this legislature of which you or some 
representative of your party is on. 
 
If you don't like the answers given by the minister publicly to 
you in question period, which answers he has given provided to 
me, you have a recourse of action. That is the situation which 
takes place. And that is the position that I adopt, and that is 
where I think the hon. member should pursue his concerns. 
 
I would also say to the hon. member, he can diminish the 
baseball card approach to the platform, but he can't get around 
the fact that that is the platform. That's it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well this is what we campaigned on. This is 
what we promised. We have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Here's some of the things you 
campaigned on too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well the hon. member says there are 
other things we campaigned upon. Let him produce those 
things, and let's get on to that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — There it is right there. 
 



May 17, 1995 

 
2354 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I don't know what you've got in 
your hand, but let's debate it and get on to it. 
 
But I tell you, you take a look at what we've done here. And if I 
had to say that this is a record of accomplishment, a big record 
of accomplishment . . . I got to tell you about the baseball card 
and the history of the CCF and the New Democratic Party, just 
on this point. 
 
This is not something that we pulled out of the air in 1991. It's 
been a facet of every CCF campaign since 1944. And the hon. 
member says baseball cards; that's a lot better than putting a 
platform card on disappearing ink which is what the Tories do. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Disappearing ink, as the Premier calls it. I'd like 
the Premier to explain this away then. The PST is not going to 
be around after October 21 if we're in power. Talk about 
disappearing ink. Talk about disappearing promises, sir. That's 
the kind of thing that the people of Saskatchewan expected for 
you to hold to your promises, and yet none of them have been 
fulfilled. 
 
We'll ease the tax burden on ordinary families. That's what you 
said; $4,800 more today in 1991  the tax load on the average 
family of Saskatchewan  than it was in 1991. Is that not 
correct? The Minister of Finance has said that the . . . under 
questioning here in terms of department estimates, has said that 
there's been $225 million net increases in taxation in this 
province — net increases. 
 
And yet we'll ease the tax burden of ordinary families. That's 
what the Premier's commitment was to the people of 
Saskatchewan in the last election campaign. The Associate 
Minister of Finance said the NDP won't raise any personal taxes 
for four years. Well, Mr. Premier, has that happened? No new 
taxes? No, it hasn't. And that's why, Mr. Premier, I think that 
commitments that you made on the baseball card back in 1991 
are something that the people of Saskatchewan do not believe 
any longer. 
 
They don't believe your commitments in this regard, just as they 
don't believe the Minister of Labour and his response with 
respect to PDN. They don't believe him. We would like to know 
from you, sir, did you have communications, written 
communications, with the Minister of Labour with regard to his 
arrangements for his office in North Battleford? Did you have 
communications with him? Did you approve it? The Minister of 
Labour says you gave approval for his arrangements at his 
constituency office in North Battleford. And we would like to 
know  and I'm sure the taxpayers of Saskatchewan would like 
to know  whether you gave approval, written approval as he 
said you did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I make my position 
clear on this. What I communicate with my ministers is a matter 
between me and my ministers — full stop, period. I have said 
and I will repeat again, what the minister has assured me is 
what he has told the House. I've gone that far in breaking the 
rule which is the proper rule of government. 

If you don't like that, then what you should do is follow the 
avenues which are open to you. Those avenues range all the 
way from the Board of Internal Economy to official other 
authorities. And if I may say so, this is an area which, of all the 
people, the Leader of the Conservative Party ought not to be 
raising in the belief that he can be doing it with any credibility. 
 
Now I want to come back to the tax decreases issue. The tax 
decreases issue here is very simple. We repealed the 
harmonization of the PST tax as we said in The Saskatchewan 
Way. That's a net saving of approximately 110 million. We have 
announced the personal tax decrease for the child tax reduction 
from 200 to 250; that's a $4 million reduction, $150 reduction 
to the debt reduction surtax, $55 million or a total of $59 
million for individuals. 
 
On top of that, business tax decreases have been as follows: 
reduced the small business tax rate from 10 to 8 per cent, 
second lowest west of Quebec; exempt direct agents from E&H, 
11.3 . . . Well it's going to take too much time. You know what 
they all are. They total up to 51.6 or  in the term of this 
administration  $220.5 million in tax breaks. Now this is 
nothing short of phenomenal, given the circumstances which 
we inherited. I remind you what we inherited. We inherited a 
deficit of $900 million in the year '90-91 — a deficit. 
 
And while we're talking about credibility and promises, you 
might just be kind enough to tell us, if you will, how it is that 
you're going find — I think the easy technique is the 5 per cent 
elimination of fat from government which amounts to $250 
million — how you're going to find that. And on top of that, 
how are you going to find the roughly $500 million you're 
going to need each and every year in order to eliminate the debt 
that you and your people racked up, a debt of $14 billion on top 
of all of that? You might just let us know how you do that while 
all the while giving us a tax break. 
 
Talk about voodoo economics. This is the Liberal leader's 
game. I didn't think it was the Conservative Party leader's game 
as well. But I tell you, it doesn't add up. It doesn't sound 
credible. It isn't credible. The people are not going to be bought 
because back in 1982 they had politicians of the right saying, 
elect us and we'll do away with the sales tax. Elect us, and we'll 
reduce 10 per cent of personal income tax. And we now, the 
people of this province, are getting ourselves out of that 
tremendous hole. There is where the tax relief comes into place. 
 
What we had to do with respect to cuts, what we had to do with 
tax increases on the other side of the ledger are occasioned by 
the fact that the legacy of the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan has been to put this province on the brink of 
bankruptcy. Thank goodness the people of Saskatchewan have 
had the fortitude, the wisdom, and the courage to pull together 
and to stay together to get ourselves out of the hole, not out of 
the woods, and now see the dawning of a new day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, for that enlightenment  



May 17, 1995 

 
2355 

for the people of Saskatchewan. I would like to continue 
dealing with the PDN situation that we've raised with you. The 
simple question, sir, is did you approve the arrangements that 
the Minister of Labour has with the people who he is renting an 
office from, office space from in North Battleford or not? 
Simple as that. Did you give approval for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — As simple as that, I've said this now at 
least twice during this session. I repeat again. It is not my job to 
approve or disapprove no more than it is yours because I'm 
going to ask you whether you approved. Did you approve about 
some of the expenses that have been tabled by some of your 
members — yes or no? And I want you to table your writings, 
all that you've had. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, the idea of estimates, as I recall, is 
for us to ask you questions — ask you questions, hold you 
accountable and your government accountable. We'll be happy 
when we're on that side of the House to answer any questions 
you have. 
 
And then I'd expect the people of Saskatchewan now would like 
to hear . . . the Minister of Labour says he had discussions with 
you on it. He says that you gave approval. He said there was 
written correspondence between you and him on this issue. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan would simply like to 
know from you, sir, whether you gave approval for the Minister 
of Labour to be engaged in a cosy, little arrangement so he 
could be the sugar-daddy at election time in North Battleford 
and spread $32,000 around in North Battleford. 
 
It was only under intense questioning from the opposition did 
he finally . . . did the PDN finally decided they were going to do 
something with that amount of money that had been built up 
over the last number of years. And then they went and bought 
the building. And somehow or another, that's supposed to be 
comforting to the people of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again, sir, did you have discussions with and did you give 
approval for the Minister of Labour to be engaged in this type 
of operations with PDN? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have given my 
answer, and that is the answer which I cannot further elaborate 
upon. That's the only position I can take because I've said it. I've 
given you the answer that you wanted, and there it is. So you 
can continue to ask all you want. That is the position. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I don't think the people of Saskatchewan are 
satisfied with your answer, sir. You can say that; oh yes, you 
talked to him about it, or you didn't talk to him about it or 
anything else. The fact of the matter is, sir, is you have a 
minister of your government, a minister within your 
government who is renting office space from his campaign 
manager and a few other friends of his. 
 
And they've set up a non-profit corporation and have built up  

$32,000 within that non-profit corporation, and who knows 
where that money was going to end up? It was only under the 
questioning from the opposition that the minister and his 
friends finally relented and bought the building that he lived in . 
. . that he was operating his office out of, pardon me. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan have the legitimate 
right to know whether or not, as the minister said, you gave 
approval for that. Is the minister not telling the truth? Or are 
you not telling the truth, sir? The people of Saskatchewan 
would like to know that. They would like to know whether you 
believe that this is an appropriate expenditure, an appropriate 
expenditure for a minister or anyone else to be making  
simple as that, sir. Did you give approval for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have given the 
answer which I shall give again. Listen to me carefully, will you 
please? 
 
I neither give approval, nor do I reject individual MLAs 
expense accounts. Have you heard me on that? 
 
Now will you, while you get up there . . . because I'll want to 
know from you to what extent were you privy and to what 
extent do you have correspondence in your file respecting the 
several matters which affect your caucus? Will you table those 
because the people are telling me they're not satisfied. You tell 
me. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan would 
like to deal with PDN; that's who they'd like to deal with. They 
want to know the answer to the question. The minister said in 
question period here, that he had discussions with you and you 
approved it, and I just want you to confirm that. Is the minister 
misleading the House or are you misleading the House? Which 
one is it? Can't be both ways. Either he misled the House or you 
are today misleading the House, Mr. Premier. And I think that's 
a very simple question. 
 
He says that there was correspondence back and forth. He 
talked about it with you. He had written correspondence with 
you. And the people of Saskatchewan believe that there's 
something funny about those arrangements, Mr. Premier. And 
I'd like you to, for the people of Saskatchewan, to shed a little 
light on this issue in terms of your discussions with the Minister 
of Labour. 
 
Because I don't think it's an appropriate expenditure and I don't 
believe the people of Saskatchewan would think it's an 
appropriate expenditure for $32,000 to be built up in some kind 
of fund, non-profit corporation that is at best — at best — 
bending the rules as far as they can possibly be bent. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, if you don't think it's a 
proper expenditure, then I challenge you to take it to the police. 
I challenge you to take it to the Board of Internal Economy. I 
challenge you to take it to those agencies. Do that. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2356 

You're responsible for your accounts. Every individual MLA is 
responsible for their own individual accounts. I neither accept 
nor approve or disapprove of any MLA's accounts. I've said this 
to you before. 
 
Now while you are on your feet, will you be kind enough to tell 
us a little bit of the history of what you know and what is in 
your office and what correspondence there is in your office 
pertaining to the several matters, which I cannot talk about 
obviously, the several matters that you're facing. Because the 
people of Saskatchewan are telling me that they don't think 
you're telling the whole story there about what's going on with 
the Tories. So why don't you do that? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman. I think 
the people of Saskatchewan expect nothing less from the 
Minister of Labour then if he is indeed saying that you had 
correspondence, and you gave approval for it. And now you're 
essentially denying that, that you did not have any 
correspondence with him or that you did not discuss it with 
him. It's clear to me — and I think it is to the people of 
Saskatchewan — that the minister is not telling the truth, that he 
has misled the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
If that is the case, Mr. Premier, would you not think that the 
appropriate action for the Minister of Labour would be to 
resign? I think the people of Saskatchewan would think that the 
appropriate action for the Minister of Labour with regard to 
such a serious issue as this . . . has to be held accountable. 
 
And he said that there were discussions with you, sir. He said 
that there was approval from you. And I don't think the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to accept anything less than for you 
to either confirm it or deny it. Which one is it? Do you confirm 
it or deny it? Or is the minister not telling the truth? And if he 
isn't telling the truth to the people of Saskatchewan, we should 
expect his resignation, and so should you expect it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the 
Conservative Party is very, very easy with his words of 
resignation. But how silent he is in the last several weeks about 
calls for resignation. How silent he is. How silent. There's a 
standard . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well no, you're talking 
about members of my caucus. Let's talk about members of your 
caucus and zero tolerance. Where's your standards? 
 
I'm telling you, Mr. Leader of the Conservative Party, what I've 
said before. I do not approve or disapprove of any MLAs’ 
accounts. That is the responsibility of each individual MLA. 
Those accounts go to Legislative Assembly, and they're handled 
in accordance to that. If you have evidence to the contrary, then 
you take it to the police, or you take it to the other authorities. 
That is what I am saying to you. That may not be a good enough 
answer for you. I think that's an honest answer, it's the correct 
answer, and it is the proper answer. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And I think it's an answer that the people of 
Saskatchewan won't accept, sir. I don't think that they believe 
the Minister of Labour and I'm not sure they believe you on this  

either. I think the people of Saskatchewan deserve an answer to 
this. It's a very simple question. 
 
The Minister of Labour says that his arrangements are proper 
and that he discussed them with you and you gave approval for 
them. I think it's appropriate then to ask the Premier of this 
province whether indeed you feel that this is an appropriate way 
of leasing a constituency office. It's as simple as that, sir. I think 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve that from the Premier of 
this province. 
 
Just look at it from a hypothetical situation if you don't want to 
deal with him specifically. Do you believe that, in a 
hypothetical situation, that a person renting an office from a 
non-profit corporation, building up some $32,000, is an 
appropriate expenditure for a member of this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I am not here in the 
course of my estimates to answer hypothetical questions. I will 
be here to answer factual questions. I'll be here to answer 
factual questions about departments of government, particularly 
my department of government. If the member opposite is not 
happy with the Minister of Labour's answers, which have been 
as clear and as forthcoming as I have heard them on the 
particular day of the question period, I repeat again he has other 
courses to take, other routes to follow, other positions that he 
can advance. 
 
My position here is as I have stated. It is to explain the 
Government of Saskatchewan Executive Council, to defend 
government policy, to indicate where government expenditures 
should or shouldn't be made, to debate with the Leader of the 
Opposition in this regard. If he's got a beef about 
communications allowances or anything else involving an 
individual MLA in cabinet or out of cabinet, take it up with 
those authorities. I do not approve or disapprove. That is not my 
job, not my power, not my duty. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, thank you 
then. It becomes extremely obvious then that the Minister of 
Labour has misled everyone in this legislature, as well as the 
people of Saskatchewan, because he said that he did have 
approval from you. He said that there was correspondence with 
you. He said that you did give him the assurance that you 
believed that that was an appropriate leasing arrangement for 
his constituency office. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan . . . My view is that the 
people of Saskatchewan do not accept that as an appropriate 
expenditure. And I'm surprised that the Minister of Labour 
would rise in his place in this legislature and say that the 
Premier of this province did give him approval when the 
Premier of this province now rises in this House and says that 
there was no such thing happened, and no responsibility for it. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan don't believe that this 
is an appropriate expenditure, I think. When the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . And you want to talk about the facts. And we 
can deal with the facts, if you like. 



May 17, 1995 

 
2357 

The arrangements were such, as I understand, that a company 
set up under the name of PDN — which is NDP backwards — 
PDN Ventures, a non-profit company owned by some of the 
minister's closest political friends, including his campaign 
manager in the last election campaign, have set up a non-profit 
corporation to administer the offices that he leased, his MLA 
office that he rents from them, leases from them. The 
arrangements are such that there has been $32,000 built up in a 
cash reserve over the last number of years. And since that time, 
$32,000 or something in that magnitude has been used to buy 
the building by this non-profit corporation that has been set up 
to lease an office for him from his political friends. 
 
That's the arrangements that have been set up. And the minister, 
under intense questioning in this legislature, stood up and said 
to you and to the people of this legislature and to the people of 
this province that there was nothing wrong with that and that he 
had correspondence with you, sir, and that you approved it. And 
now we see — and now we see, sir, you stand in this legislature 
and deny that there was any such thing happen. 
 
Well who's telling the truth? That's all I'm asking, Mr. Premier. 
Are you telling the truth or is the minister not telling the truth? 
The point is we have to have some answers on this. And it isn't 
good enough for you to stand up and say, whatever anyone 
wants to do, it's up to them. Because the message is clear here, 
sir — either he isn't addressing this properly or you aren't 
addressing it properly. 
 
And I think the people of North Battleford and the rest of the 
taxpayers of this province and the Assembly is owed an apology 
by either you or the Minister of Labour. And at the very least, if 
it's the Minister of Labour who has misled this House, he 
should do nothing less than the honourable thing, and that is to 
resign his position. 
 
That is what he should be doing if you indeed will not confirm 
that there was correspondence and that there were discussions 
about this matter. Do you not think that that is an appropriate 
action for the Minister of Labour to give his resignation under 
this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, it is ironic and I might 
also add tragically inappropriate to hear the Conservative leader 
talk about the right thing to do. I don't mean as an individual. 
This is a new person who assumes office, new to his position as 
official opposition leader. And it gives me no pleasure to say 
what I'm going to say. 
 
He is labouring under very difficult circumstances by the public 
record. But I don't think the people of Saskatchewan are going 
to very long consider or take seriously the observations of the 
hon. member with respect to this particular standard which is 
involved there. 
 
The question here is approval or disapproval. And I have given 
you my answer in this regard. This is not the job of the Premier 
or anybody else. This is the job of the MLAs. And significantly 
you won't take it up with the Board of Internal Economy or  

other agencies, if that doesn't satisfy you. All the other agencies 
that the minister has himself in effect suggested are open to 
you. 
 
I think that all you do here is continue to in effect somehow 
mitigate the unfortunate circumstances in which you find 
yourself. You're not going to do it in this case, I'm sorry. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, then it 
seems very obvious to me and I think to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the minister did not have the approval of 
you. He did not have correspondence with you. I take you at 
your word that he did not have correspondence with you and 
that he did not have written approval from you as he has 
suggested. 
 
On April 28, in Hansard of 1995, and I quote, the Minister of 
Labour said: 
 
 Because of the controversy the member opposite caused 

to the media, the Premier (the Premier) has also 
questioned me in regard to whether or not there was any 
problem with the rental of my constituency office. 

 
 And I've assured him in writing that there is none. The 

members can check that out as well. 
 
And that's what we are doing here this afternoon, sir, is simply 
checking it out. We are simply asking you whether or not you 
had discussions with him, whether you questioned him about 
the leasing arrangements, and whether then you gave approval 
for those leasing arrangements or not. Did you or did you not 
approve it, and did you have discussions with him, with the 
Minister of Labour, and did you question the Minister of 
Labour as he has suggested you have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, now comes the truth 
of what this questioning has been, and now comes the proof of 
the — how should I use my words to make sure that they follow 
the parliamentary rules — the gross exaggeration of the line of 
questioning. 
 
The line of questioning for the last 20 minutes has been that the 
Minister of Labour gave me correspondence, discussions, and 
that the Minister of Labour told the House that I had approved 
it. That's what you said. And by your very reading of the answer 
of the Minister of Labour, upon which then you fabricated this 
House of cards that he should resign, collapses by the words — 
the very words that you read. Oh yes, and you shift off those 
words because your researchers gave it to you. And now it is, 
oh well, I'm not making an allegation that either he should 
resign or I should resign. I believe you, sir, Mr. Premier . . . 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Oh yes, of course you will because that's the way 
you operate. But you told the House that that's what the 
Minister of Labour said. Were you misleading the House? Were 
you doing the dishonourable thing? Will you resign for 
misleading the House? 



May 17, 1995 

 
2358 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Now comes the truth, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan says, now comes the truth. He stands up and says 
all kinds of things about what we are asking questions about. 
 
The simple question that we have asked you and repeatedly 
asked you this afternoon is, did you or did you not give 
approval for this scheme? Did you or did you not give approval 
for this scheme? 
 
The Minister of Labour says that you questioned him about it. 
Did you or did you not give approval for it, sir? He talked to 
you about it. He says he had written correspondence with you 
about it. And I think the taxpayers of Saskatchewan would want 
to know the truth in this matter, Mr. Premier. He says that there 
were discussions. He says that there was written 
correspondence with you. He says . . . and we would like to 
know whether or not there was approval for. Simple as that. 
 
After questioning the Minister of Labour, as he has suggested 
that you did, he said that you questioned him about this matter. 
I would simply ask you, sir, then did you give approval for this? 
Did you believe that this was an appropriate thing for the 
Minister of Labour to be doing? Or what was the nature of the 
questions that you asked him with regard to this whole affair? 
Did he say anything about the leasing arrangements? What 
questions did you ask the minister with regard to this whole 
incident? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again, the 
parliamentary word here which I'm searching for is difficult to 
come by, because here is the member for the last half hour 
saying that the Minister of Labour told the House that I'd 
approved the arrangement. And then he concocted from that 
straw case, one of us was not telling the truth. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Absolutely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Absolutely, you see — this is the 
member. 
 
Here's what the member said to the House. These are the 
quotes: 
 
 The Premier has also questioned me in regard to 

whether or not there was any problem with the rental of 
my constituency office. 

 
 And I've assured him in writing that there is none. 
 
The members can check that out as well. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. It now being at the hour of 
5 o'clock, the Committee of Finance will stand recessed until 7 
o'clock p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


