






















































February 22, 1994 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 22, 1995 

 

 
347 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to present 
petitions today from the Prelate area and the town — a very 
small town in my constituency — and the prayer that they offer 
today reads as such: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And as I've said, from St. Angela's Academy; we have all of the 
sisters and the priests up there along with all of the community. 
I think everyone in town must have signed this petition, and I'd 
be happy to table it on their behalf today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
petitions pertaining to the same subject that I would like to lay 
on the Table today, and I will read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these come from across the south of the province, 
and at this time I'll lay them on the Table. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today from constituents of the Shaunavon constituency. 
The prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing stiffer 
penalties on abusers, and urge the federal government to 
recognize that gun control and crime control are not 
synonymous. 

  

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition, 
and the prayer says: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I have signatures here from Maple Creek, Golden Prairie, and 
Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to present a petition 
to the Assembly, and I'd like to read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Maple Creek 
area, and I so present it. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan petitioning 

the Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated 
toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
two sets of questions today. I give notice that I shall on day 18 
ask the government the following question: 
 
  



February 22, 1995 

 
348 

 Regarding the Department of Health: (1) how much has 
been paid this fiscal year to Phoenix Advertising Group 
by your department; (2) what were the services that 
were purchased or commissioned; and (3) were all of 
the services paid for actually received?. 

 
My second set. I give notice that I shall on day 18 ask the 
government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Finance: (1) how much 

has been paid this fiscal year to Phoenix Advertising 
Group by your department; (2) what were the services 
that were purchased or commissioned; and (3) were all 
of the services paid for actually received? 

 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have two 
notice of questions. I give notice that I shall on day 18 ask the 
government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Economic Development: 

how much has been paid this fiscal year to Phoenix 
Advertising Group by your department; what were the 
services that were purchased or commissioned; were all 
the services paid for actually received? 

 
The second one, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day 
18 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Provincial Secretary: 

how much is being paid this fiscal year to Phoenix 
Advertising Group by your department; what were the 
services that were purchased or commissioned; and (3) 
were all the services paid for actually received? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, two young gentlemen who are seated up in the 
Speaker's gallery. They, along with three other friends, are here 
to observe the proceedings today. They most recently attended 
the convention of the Saskatchewan New Democrats and were 
very interested in a small-business forum that was held at that 
convention. 
 
Mr. Michael Curtis is himself a small-business person. He has a 
business dealing with first-aid technicians. And also Mr. Cory 
Diemert is here. And I would ask all members to welcome this 
next generation of strong Saskatchewan citizens to the gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
have guests I'd like to introduce through you and to you to all 
members of the Assembly. These three young people are sitting 
with the two gentlemen who were just introduced. 
 
There's Darrick Lutz and Conrad Lutz. Darrick is a student of 
history at the University of Saskatchewan. They're both from  

Saskatoon. And Nikki Hipkin, who is a young woman I know 
quite well, who is a student of political science at the University 
of Saskatchewan. She also happens to be president of the 
Saskatchewan Young Liberals and has done a terrific job 
around the province. 
 
So if you'd all join with me, please, and warmly welcome these 
young people today, I'm sure they would be very appreciative. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Record-breaking Balloon Journey 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, today I want to bring to your 
attention the story of a remarkable journey that concluded right 
here in our very own province. 
 
Steve Fossett, an American balloonist, made a record-breaking 
journey across the Pacific and decided to break another record 
for distance. His amazing trek of 9,300 kilometres shattered the 
old mark of a thousand kilometres. 
 
And where, Mr. Speaker, did Mr. Fossett choose to end his 
globe-trotting mastery? Well it was right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Many people may wonder why he chose the village of 
Mendham, Saskatchewan. I can think of several reasons why he 
chose this site. It may have been because of the previous day, 
Leader was the hot spot in all of Canada. Or perhaps he heard 
of Scotty, the dinosaur, and wanted to check out the tremendous 
tourism potential for himself. It also must be because he feared 
an accident and he heard that Saskatchewan had the best health 
care system in the world. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the real reason Mr. Fossett travelled here: 
because he knew that our province was the first one to balance 
its budget and thought there was no better place to land and 
secure a heavy burden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Mendham, our newest star. I also 
hope I won't be blowing too much hot air when I say, in 
Saskatchewan we're really truly up, up, and away. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the past three 
years, Mr. Speaker, this government has been throwing enough 
hot air around to drive people out of Saskatchewan, and I'm 
pleased today to join with the member in congratulating Steve 
Fossett from Chicago on his landing in Saskatchewan. I'm 
pleased to see that hot air actually has brought somebody to 
Saskatchewan instead of driving them all out. 
 
It was in fact into my constituency that this gentleman landed 
and last night the world record journey across the Pacific from 
Seoul, South Korea, did end just north of Mendham, 
Saskatchewan. I understand that one of the first things that he  



February 22, 1995 

 
349 

asked for was a Canadian beer. And the second thing that he's 
reported to have said was that, boy, have you guys ever got high 
taxes up here. 
 
I've always maintained that Canadian beer was better than 
American beer, but I've never seen anybody go to quite this 
much trouble to get one. We of course hope that he will come 
back again. 
 
But I would like to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, Steve Fossett on 
his remarkable journey. I'd like to congratulate the people from 
Mendham for giving him the royal Canadian welcome that he 
got. And congratulations. Welcome to Mendham. Welcome to 
Saskatchewan and to Canada and to my riding. Come again any 
time. There's another beer where that one came from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Timmy's Snowarama 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm very 
pleased to rise today to respond on an amazing fund-raising 
event that was held this past weekend in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Yorkton Timmy's Snowarama, which began 18 
years ago, raises money each year for Camp Easter Seal. The 
money is used to send young people from across the province to 
summer camp. This year the Yorkton Snowmobile Club had 
400 snow riders. Mr. Gibert Hryski was the oldest at 66 years, 
and Mr. Devon Hrywikiw was the youngest. Participants were 
mostly from the local area; however four riders travelled all the 
way from Creighton, 300 miles by snow machine, to participate. 
 
The trail is 140 kilometres long, is well signed and maintained, 
and supervised at all times. All vehicles are licensed, and once 
again this year's event was incident free. 
 
Eighteen years ago, the Yorkton Snowmobile Club raised 
$8,000. Mr. Speaker, the Yorkton Timmy's Snowarama this 
year raised $60,000, with the highest single pledge of $2,300. 
Mr. Speaker, this is an outstanding accomplishment by the 
Yorkton Snowmobile Club. The $60,000 they raised this year is 
not only the highest amount ever raised anywhere in the 
province; it is more than was raised in Regina and Saskatoon 
this year collectively. 
 
Congratulations to the event organizer, Mr. Barry Bradshaw, 
and the Yorkton Snowmobile Club for leading the way to 
ensuring that yet again memorable experiences for 
Saskatchewan youth can be enjoyed at Camp Easter Seal. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Boy Saves RCMP Member 
 
Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, a young man from Buffalo 
Narrows has recently acquired the status of hero after saving the  

life of an RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) constable in 
north-western Saskatchewan. 
 
On the night of January 30, 15-year-old Murray Clarke was 
working as a gas attendant at a service station when he heard 
cries for help. 
 
He dropped what he was doing and ran towards the call for help 
while his uncle drove his car in the same direction so he could 
point his headlights towards the constable whose snowmobile 
had gone through the ice. His Uncle Max tied together two 
extension cords and about 25 feet of rope. He then tied it 
around Murray who ventured onto the ice. 
 
After several tries the RCMP constable was able to hold onto 
the rope; Murray pulled him to safety. The constable suffered 
no injuries in this mishap other than a minor case of 
hypothermia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the circumstances of this accident could have 
turned out a lot different if it wasn't for the quick reaction and 
courage displayed by Murray Clarke and his uncle. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Lotteries Winsday 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in this 
Assembly, the Premier said that in Saskatchewan we strive to 
achieve a balance between the various competing and legitimate 
needs of our society. One of those needs, the primary one of 
course, is health care. 
 
But also for a society to be alive, we have to have a vibrant 
quality of life, to be able to recognize its own character, its 
needs, and an active and varied culture, recreational and artistic 
presence. And those activities need to be funded. 
 
For over 20 years Saskatchewan Lotteries proceeds have been 
used to support activities for people of every age and ability. 
There is no system like it in Canada, maybe even in the entire 
world. 
 
Today over 12,000 community groups all over the province 
receive funds from Saskatchewan Lotteries including the 
Saskatchewan Writers Guild, the Girl Guides, recreational 
centres, seniors' aerobics, art workshops. The list is endless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is Winsday. In recognition of the unique 
contribution to our community made by Saskatchewan 
Lotteries, everyone who purchases lottery tickets will receive a 
button to show they support culture and recreation. When you 
buy a ticket, you have the chance to win a lot of money, to give 
to Mr. Martin. And we can all dream, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we are actually doing is showing our confidence in 
the value of distinct Saskatchewan life, the definition of which 
comes from the way we express ourselves through our art and 
recreation. 



February 22, 1995 

 
350 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Beechy Pig Farm 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask you to 
join me today to congratulate the Beechy community for the 
establishment of a new, diversified agricultural operation which 
will be producing economic benefits in my riding. 
 
It's a new 600-sow, farrow-to-finish pig operation unit located 
south-west of Beechy, Saskatchewan. This energetic venture is 
a good example to follow for other communities hoping to 
establish similar projects in their areas. 
 
Beechy Pig is owned jointly by Beechy Stock Farm Ltd,. which 
is the general partner, and a group of other local investors who 
are the limited partners. These people have invested at least 
$5,000 each into this 2 to $3 million project — further proof of 
the optimism about agricultural diversification which has taken 
hold in my constituency and throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This operation near Beechy consists of about 64,000 square feet 
of buildings, including breeding, gestation, farrowing, weaning 
and grower barns, manure storage, as well as offices and a feed 
mill. This facility will produce 13,000 pigs per year in a high-
health environment, using superior breeding stock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many benefits arising from this pig 
production operation. It has created 30 to 40 new jobs during 
the construction phase. It will use about 3,600 tonnes of feed or 
about 150,000 bushels per year, providing a significant new 
local market for these grains. 
 
Construction of the unit has led to substantial spin-off benefits 
to community businesses. The operation will employ five full-
time employees as it also creates significant indirect 
employment in the local economy. 
 
I want to congratulate the community and the investors of this 
new business and wish them all the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Surgery Waiting-lists 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, although 
you claim your health reform is better than ever and we should 
be proud, every day examples are brought forward that prove 
otherwise. 
 
Can you confirm that even though the waiting-list for cataract 
surgery averages 17 months, that you have placed caps on the 
number of cataract surgeries that can be performed in our 
province; and that as a result of that cap, cataract surgeries in  

Saskatchewan were closed for two weeks in December and are 
presently closed from February 20 to March 6? Will you 
confirm this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will not and I cannot 
confirm those figures. Mr. Speaker, we've known in question 
periods in the past, as we discuss them and debate some of the 
health issues, that members of the opposition have made some 
claims in the House and that, upon research and evaluation, the 
claims are not always entirely accurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm what the member brings to the 
House this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, we 
trust that you will be taking a real serious look at your 
department, so that you know what is going on. We have been 
receiving calls from concerned patients who are on the waiting-
list for cataract surgery in this province. 
 
In fact, an Emil Korizone has already waited 18 months before 
being placed on the emergency list. Even on the emergency list, 
Mr. Minister, he was told to expect a three- to four-month 
additional wait for surgery. Mr. Minister, patients have phoned 
your office, your department, and the Saskatoon Health District 
Board, and have been told that if they didn't want to wait they 
could get their contract surgery performed by Dr. Gimbel. 
 
Mr. Minister, if Saskatchewan's health system is so superior, 
why are your officials referring patients to Calgary for cataract 
surgery? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, obviously I will take what 
information the member's bringing in and laying it on the floor 
of the legislature today, and we'll find out the facts of the 
matter. 
 
Let me say this, Mr. Speaker. I think it is widely known that 
when we're talking about waiting-lists for cataract surgery, and 
indeed for some other surgical procedures, those waiting-lists 
will vary, community by community and specialist by specialist. 
In some cases, Mr. Speaker, a certain specialist may have a long 
client list and therefore will have a long waiting-list. Other 
specialists performing the very same surgery, the very same 
speciality, may indeed have a much shorter list, Mr. Speaker. 
That's the way it is; that's the way it has been. 
 
I am fully aware that both the Saskatoon District Board and the 
Regina District Board, where most of these speciality surgeries 
will be performed, both boards are taking the matter of waiting-
lists very seriously and taking steps, as they are able, to lessen 
the length of wait as much as we possibly can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 22, 1995 

 
351 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure Mr. Korizone is 
going to be happy to hear your assertion about the long waiting-
lists. The fact is, Mr. Minister, we all know; yes, there are 
waiting-lists and that health is under a severe problem in the 
province 
 
We're also talking about caps — caps that are encouraging even 
longer waiting-lists. Two Saskatchewan doctors, Dr. Underhill 
and Dr. Blackwell, opened a badly needed eye clinic in 
Saskatoon to perform cataract surgery. In fact to address this 
waiting-list problem. You shut them down after four days. 
 
Mr. Minister, this clinic would be employing nurses that have 
been laid off because of your cut-backs, they would be 
providing necessary cataract surgeries for hundreds of 
Saskatchewan people, and they would be lessening the waiting-
list drastically for other patients waiting for the surgery. 
 
Question, Mr. Minister: how can you possibly justify shutting 
this clinic down when Saskatchewan people are waiting years 
for this necessary surgery or being told to head to Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member through his 
question takes us into what is perhaps one of the most 
fundamental debates in health care delivery in our province and 
across Canada. Obviously what the member opposite and 
members of his party are promoting here is a two-tiered system, 
a system of private clinics for those who can afford and a public 
system for those who may not be able to afford. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this province, the people of our province, 
and in this government, this government has said we fully 
support universally accessible, publicly funded medicare so that 
we are not interested, Mr. Speaker, in any sort of two-tier 
medicine for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, it's unfortunate that you talk about a 
two-tiered system because that's exactly what we have in this 
province already. And you've created it. 
 
Mr. Minister, for a good example, one patient has been more 
persistent than others. This patient phoned the Premier's office 
for answers. Guess what? He was told by one of the assistants 
in the Premier's office that he could go to Dr. Gimbel's eye 
clinic in Calgary. But did that happen? Instead, a phone call 
was made from the Premier's office and suddenly this patient 
was bumped in front of all the others on the waiting-list, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Obviously we already have a two-tiered health care system in 
this province. One where patients wait on a very long waiting-
list, and the other where the Premier bumps some patients in 
front of others. 
 
Mr. Minister, instead of shutting eye clinics down in  

Saskatchewan, instead of sending Saskatchewan patients to 
Alberta, instead of bumping your preferred patients up the list, 
why won't you allow eye clinics to open in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear 
to the member, very clear to members of this House, and very 
clear to the public, what that member has just said by way of 
accusation  that friends may in fact be bumped  is simply 
and literally not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, either the member is being 
misinformed, and I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, under the 
administration of this Minister of Health, the former minister of 
Health, under the administration of this government, that kind 
of procedure is simply not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Tax on Lotteries 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is directed to one of the ministers, and I'm 
willing to gamble that it may be the Minister of Finance that 
gets up to answer this gambling question this time. 
 
But in either case, Madam Minister, as you know, the federal 
Liberal government is considering taxing lottery winnings in its 
upcoming budget. I submit to you, Madam Minister, that this 
would have a devastating effect on many Saskatchewan 
charities, particularly those that are lotteries with merchandise 
prizes. For example, like the hospital foundation, or the 
Children's Wish Foundation. Many of these charities, Madam 
Minister, are already having to compete with your government 
VLTs (video lottery terminal). 
 
Now in addition to that, a further attack by the federal Liberals 
is, quite frankly, going to be very devastating. Madam Minister, 
could you tell this Assembly what your government is doing to 
oppose this tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member opposite for the question. I made it clear to Mr. Martin 
in our meeting last week — the Finance ministers' meeting — 
that we did not support the idea of a tax on lotteries. We saw it 
as a tax on volunteerism, a tax on charities and other groups 
that do very worthwhile work in our community. And we 
believe that in the long term the results would only be negative. 
So we have made that point, we have supported the charities, 
and we would oppose a tax of that kind. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
another twofold question, I suppose, to the same minister. 
Madam Minister, this plan was endorsed — I read here — last  



February 22, 1995 

 
352 

year by a parliamentary committee, that all winnings over $500 
would be taxed in varying amounts. So question number one to 
you on this two-part question is: is it your understanding that 
this is an income tax on an income-tax basis, or is it a specific 
tax based entirely on the winnings themselves — nothing to do 
with the total amount of income of that individual? 
 
And, Madam Minister, while you're on your feet then, would 
you commit yourself that regardless of the answer to my first 
question, that you will commit your government, that your 
voracious appetite for gambling dollars will not be satiated on 
the backs of Saskatchewan people in addition to those things 
that the federal government is planning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I note that the 
parliamentary committee did support this tax on lotteries. I note 
the same parliamentary committee said that transfers to the 
provinces should not be cut. I'm not sure the parliamentary 
committee is going to be taking that seriously. I think you really 
need to be directing your questions to the Liberal Party here, 
asking them what they have done with respect to saying to the 
federal government what they should be doing about transfers, 
and what they should be doing about taxes on lotteries. 
 
What I've said to the federal minister publicly and privately is 
this: they simply have no mandate to be increasing taxes. We 
were elected in 1991 to clean up the financial mess. They were 
elected to eliminate the GST (goods and services tax). They 
have not followed the advice of provinces that have said 
consistently, review the tax system, overhaul it. Reform it. Lay 
everything on the table. They haven't done that. They have no 
mandate to increase taxes so I would ask you to address your 
questions to your Liberal colleagues as to what the counterparts 
in Ottawa are going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My last question to 
you, Madam Minister, and that is this: that you have traded off 
to farming individuals in this province with GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) to the federal government; have 
you also made a deal that you're going to trade off something on 
the lottery situation with the federal government as well so that 
this offloading will not occur? That is a very simple question, 
Madam Minister, and then I will turn it over to the Liberal 
leader to answer your question. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, we have made no 
deals at all with the federal government. But I would ask that 
. . . members, there is no deal of any kind. I want to ask the 
members opposite to start thinking about what might happen to 
agriculture in this province with the new Liberal budget, and I 
would . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You've already done it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I'll tell you, if you think we've  

done anything to agriculture, you wait until next Monday. 
 
I would ask the members opposite to join with us and other 
farm groups, to begin to ask our colleagues in this legislature, 
are they Liberals or are they not Liberals? Will they meet the 
challenge in terms of agriculture? And what about the other 
challenge that we have given to Mr. Martin? We said, Mr. 
Martin, begin at the top. Start by eliminating the Senate. That 
would be a symbolic cut that the average Canadian could 
identify with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Income Tax Revenues 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
only reliable way to eliminate the debt and fund the programs of 
the future is through thousands more taxpayers and fairer tax 
levels. The temporary associate minister of Finance disagrees, 
Mr. Speaker. Last week he told this Assembly and I quote: 
Income tax revenues have absolutely nothing to do with the 
number of jobs. 
 
Despite the government's claims that there are more jobs, the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) continues to lower and to miss its 
income tax targets every year. 
 
My question to the Finance Minister: do you support the 
statement of last week's associate minister of Finance that 
income tax revenues have absolutely nothing to do with the 
number of jobs in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — . . . question from the Liberal 
member opposite. I would point out that who does the income 
tax estimates are her colleagues in Ottawa, so you may want to 
ask them why they have been off for so many years. 
 
But I'm glad the Liberal member is up because I'll be interested 
as we proceed here to see which Liberal member I have. Do I 
have the Liberal member from the last session who added $300 
million to the deficit by her big spending practices in the last 
session, or do I have the Liberal member of this session who's 
talking about reducing the cost of government? Will the real 
Liberal member stand up? We cannot, in this province, have 
flavour-of-the-month finances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don't know 
what this particular minister and all the others, particular the 
Premier, are so afraid of that they have to create myths instead 
of answering questions in this legislature. If there's any 
confusion in this House, Mr. Speaker, it's the Premier of the 
province. At least I'm not confused about what party I belong 
to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason the NDP will not deliver part two of 
their jobs plan any better than they did part one is because 
they're moving Saskatchewan in entirely the opposite direction  



February 22, 1995 

 
353 

from the rest of the provinces with growing economies. 
 
In other words, other provinces know that more jobs and more 
taxpayers and therefore lower taxes are the key to long-term 
debt reduction. This NDP government keeps decreasing the 
amount of money it expects to get from income tax and doesn't 
even meet those lower targets. 
 
New Brunswick presented a budget yesterday, and I quote: New 
Brunswick is projecting an increase of more than $100 million 
in personal income tax because more people are working than 
ever before. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance: can the Finance 
minister explain why her budget indicates that the NDP plan 
will not generate any growth at all in income tax but yet you 
expect to create jobs? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
loves to use New Brunswick as an example. So do I. Let's look 
at some of the statistics about New Brunswick. Last year our 
retail sales increased by over 9 per cent. What about New 
Brunswick? One of the few provinces to have a decrease in 
retail sales. Our unemployment rates hover around 7 to 8 per 
cent — usually lower than that, usually at the low end. What 
about New Brunswick's? Twelve and a half per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal member doesn't like our new plan for 
the province. I'm not surprised. But she has a record; let's hear 
what she said about our first plan. 
 
 Mr. Speaker, parts of this budget may look good on 

paper, but it's not going to happen in the real world. The 
tax revenues are not going to be there. All you have to 
do is look at the facts. This budget is based on some 
very, very major leaps of faith. It has asked people to 
accept the word of politicians that these numbers will be 
met. 

 
We put out a plan. We achieved our first target. She didn't 
believe us then; I'm not surprised she doesn't believe us now. 
But the people of Saskatchewan believe us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's 
most interesting that this Finance minister says that she has a 
plan and that they actually reached their taxation targets. You 
missed your income tax revenue targets every single year, 
Madam Minister. Read your own books. 
 
If you take out the budget items that had absolutely nothing to 
do with any planning whatsoever — take out the $250 million 
in resource windfalls; take out the increased transfer payments, 
Madam Minister; take out the money from the GRIP, and let's 
see how well your government really did in its planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that promised economic 
development. They promised jobs. They promised the people a  

future. When you take away all the luck they've had, the 
government was unable to do what other provinces have done. 
 
My question to the Premier: Mr. Premier, in 1991 you said you 
had a plan for job creation but your Finance minister planned 
for less income tax revenue than the year before. This year you 
claimed thousands and thousands of new jobs, but even after a 
$17 million rebate factored in, you still don't have new 
taxpayers contributing to income tax. What kind of jobs do you 
claim to be creating if you have no new income taxpayers in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 
member opposite to listen to the answer of the first time. I said 
it's the federal government that does the income tax estimates 
for the province. Why does she know better than Wood Gundy, 
Nesbitt Burns, saying we have done an excellent job of meeting 
our targets? 
 
But the Liberal member opposite has a record. And this is what 
she said a few weeks ago at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). She wants a government that 
would do this: that will commit to real targets; that will tell you 
in advance how we will reach them; how long it will take; and 
most importantly, explain clearly the way in which you or 
anyone interested can measure our progress. 
 
There are some pivotal places in the North American continent 
that are doing this. Yes, member opposite, right here in 
Saskatchewan. Will she join us and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that we have come up with exactly the kind of 
plan that she has been asking for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, it is most interesting what 
Nesbitt Burns says, and I think you should read the most latest 
publication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future of Saskatchewan depends entirely on 
having more people — more taxpayers and more young people 
especially. On television on Sunday night, the Premier told 
people that out-migration had stopped, that young people were 
no longer leaving Saskatchewan. And the direct quote is: young 
people are no longer leaving Saskatchewan. End of quote. 
 
Yesterday the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) economics 
professor, Eric Howe, said, and I quote: the lack of jobs creates 
an exodus of young people. Right now, people are 
Saskatchewan's greatest export. To get zero out-migration we'd 
have to see an increase of some 50,000 jobs. The out-migration 
will increase every year. End of quote. 
 
My question to the Premier: Sir, there is no evidence 
whatsoever to support that young people have stopped leaving 
Saskatchewan. What evidence can you table today to support 
your comment that young people are no longer leaving, that we 
aren't losing those potential taxpayers from our province, the 
4,000 young taxpayers who have left since you came into  



February 22, 1995 

 
354 

power? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I think that this 
question says a lot about the mentality of the Liberal Party. 
They go through the newspapers today. Let's tell people what 
they passed over. 
 
"Sask. budget encourages bond market" — that wouldn't be a 
good story. "Twinpak likes Regina atmosphere" — that 
wouldn't be a good story. "Canadian airlines optimistic" — 
terrible story. "Air Canada will be fuelling up" — no good for 
them. "Brokerage firm impressed." "Saskatchewan budget on 
the right track." 
 
But luckily for the Liberals there was this one story, economic 
growth to stall, in which somebody goes down to Midtown 
Plaza — this isn't the Conference Board of Canada — and he 
says, by the way, I think people are still leaving this province. 
He needs to update his lecture notes. They're coming in; they're 
not leaving. 
 
And then he has wonderful logic. He says in 1993 when taxes 
were going up in the province, the province grew more than 
Alberta. Now in 1995 when taxes are going down, it's clear to 
him that the province will decline in terms of growth. 
 
This says legions about the Liberal Party. What they're looking 
for is gloom and doom, the bad news bears. And they're 
confused. All they care about is the bottom line: a bad-news 
story. They don't care about the logic. I'll tell you the people of 
Saskatchewan are not going to fall for this kind of logic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Polling 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for polling, the Provincial Secretary. 
Mr. Minister, the other day you said that your government does 
not pay for political preference polling, and you went on to say, 
and I quote: if somebody else has paid for them, that would not 
be something we would be knowledgeable of. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a copy of the contract between yourself  
the Provincial Secretary  and CanWest. The contract says: 
 
 The consultant may add up to four questions provided 

the information obtained is not made available to any 
other party without prior approval of the province. 

 
That, Mr. Minister, means that you have the right of first 
refusal. That means in anybody's language that you own the 
poll. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did you say that you have no knowledge of 
somebody else adding questions on a government survey? Don't 
you know what's in your own contract? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
respond to the member from Morse, to his question. And I want 
to say again that, as the pollster himself has said — and that has 
been in the press — that the pollster, as any other pollster, will 
do an omnibus poll on which they will ask a series of questions. 
Some of the questions on the poll will be purchased by some 
people, as the Government of Saskatchewan does. 
 
And we make those public every three months for the benefit of 
the public, the media, and the members of this House, and that's 
been done. And in April, which will be the next three-month 
cycle, all of the polling for which the Government of 
Saskatchewan paid for will be made public again. 
 
But in an omnibus poll, pollsters will ask other questions as 
well, as this pollster has done and as every other pollster does, 
and they will use those to sell to whoever might be interested  
because they're in the business of doing so  to receive that 
kind of information. 
 
That is the status of this poll and there is very clearly . . . as I 
said before, the only questions which the government pays for 
are those which we table for the public and for the legislature 
and for the media every three months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Minister, you have the right of first 
refusal, and it's pretty hard to believe that CanWest, the 
company that does most of your government's polling, would 
add on four blatantly political questions for their own internal 
use. It seems more likely that these questions are added on as a 
result of a favour to a good customer, namely your government. 
 
Questions like: if a federal election was called, who would you 
vote for? Questions like: who did you vote for in the last 
provincial election? Questions like: who would you vote for if 
an election was called today? 
 
Mr. Minister, isn't it the case that you can ask CanWest to tag 
these questions on in return for small businesses that you do 
with them? Isn't this simply a case of your government using 
taxpayers' money for political polling, something you 
specifically promised not to do, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The only part of the question, Mr. 
Speaker, that is accurate is that the government specifically 
promised not to use government revenues to pay for polling 
which was political polling. And that's why the Government of 
Saskatchewan as it is today, since 1991 of November, does not 
do that any more, as was done by the former administration. 
 
The polling, Mr. Speaker, that the pollster does . . . He has 
made that clear, — it's has been reporting in the press — that 
the polling that he does, other than what has been asked by the 
government, is his business, it's the polling firm's business, it's 
available for whatever purposes somebody may want to  



February 22, 1995 

 
355 

purchase it for. The government has not paid for any of that nor 
does the government have any interest in any of that because 
the New Democratic Party, as is the appropriate way to do it, 
does its own polling and paid for by the New Democratic Party 
and the people who contribute to that party. And I might say 
there are tens of thousands of them in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Business 
Corporations Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Business Corporations Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Co-operatives Act, 1989 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Co-operatives Act, 1989. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to make my address in reply to the budget before the 
members of the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan this 
afternoon. 
 
Managing precious tax dollars is a very serious and important 
responsibility for all elected members from all parties. And it is 
an honour for me to bring the Liberal perspective to these 
discussions for consideration by members of the government 
and the official opposition. 
 
Before I begin today, I want to spend a few moments in 
discussion of process versus outcome. In layman's terms it's 
called having more than one way to skin a cat. In politics it all 
boils down to one party might achieve the same results as 
another by using a different approach; in other words, 
employing a different philosophy. 
 

This is important because it forms the basis of the fundamental 
discussion taking place all over Saskatchewan with respect to 
the provincial budget. The Finance minister is correct. There are 
few people who would disagree with the need to balance the 
budget. In actual fact the government was given little choice in 
the matter, because obtaining credit is entirely contingent on the 
deficit getting under control. 
 
Liberals have had a consistent history of fiscal responsibility in 
Saskatchewan and we campaigned on our commitment to 
balanced budgets and reduce the debt. Thus the government 
members opposite wonder what possible disagreement there 
could be over this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is considerable disagreement. Disagreement 
about what constitutes a sustainable approach to balanced 
budgets and to long-term fiscal success. The fundamental 
disagreement centres on whether the government has set targets 
that are first sustainable, and second, in the best interest of the 
long-term economic health of the province. 
 
The debate over this budget is not just a debate about the 1995-
1996 fiscal year. It becomes a debate about the future. The 
debate over this budget is not about whether it is a good thing 
that the government came into enough money to balance the 
budget once; it is a debate about whether they have been 
credible in their planning and having things happen according 
to that particular plan. 
 
For example, when this government announced in 1992-93 in 
its budget, it implied that it had a plan to raise $1.14 billion in 
income tax. Assuming that there was a plan, then the policies 
and the economic measures the government undertook should 
have produced the desired results. But when the government 
missed the planned income tax target by $65 million, it raised 
questions about the credibility of their plan, the effectiveness of 
their policies. It raised questions about why that particular plan 
failed. 
 
Should we ask if they had a bad year in predicting income tax? 
Should we ask if they failed to create the jobs they predicted? 
Should we simply be asking if the taxation policies of the 
government, the cost of utilities, the changes to labour law, had 
an effect on investment and job creation? Well I think those are 
fair questions to raise. 
 
If this government is going to make predictions, we must 
assume their predictions take into account the overall climate 
created by the government itself. The government cannot be 
blamed for falling short of its predictions because of unforeseen 
changes to weather or world markets or interest rates. If, 
however, the provincial government simply fails to deliver what 
it says it will deliver, then people have a right to hold the 
government accountable to explain the deficiencies of its own 
plan that caused its plan to fail. 
 
But the NDP has not hit that critical income tax target once. Not 
once since taking office in 1991. And because of that, we can 
only assume that their own plan did not work. 



February 22, 1995 

 
356 

It is a commonly held belief that past behaviour is a good 
indicator of how a person or a group of people will behave in 
similar circumstances in the future. Applying this theory then, 
we have evidence from the past with Liberal governments in 
Saskatchewan that they have consistently demonstrated fiscal 
responsibility. Therefore people have good reason to expect 
similar behaviour from a future Saskatchewan Liberal 
government. 
 
The Conservatives have shown what they will do or say or 
spend. And I think that their record stands on its own — that 
they are a government that perhaps . . . or people in government 
that one should not trust to run the fiscal affairs of the province. 
 
The NDP have provided irrefutable evidence that they will 
spend every dime they can wring from the taxpaying public 
regardless of the consequences. This budget is consistent with 
their spending legacy, with 18 out of 28 departments with 
increased expenditures this year yet again. 
 
When they were elected, the NDP wanted everyone to believe 
that they were a new and a different kind of government. This 
government rode into power on a wave of moral outrage against 
the Conservatives. 
 
The $14 billion debt was created by 20 years of big-spending 
government, not just the Tories, but the New Democrats before 
them, Mr. Speaker. And it was many of those New Democrats 
of the 1970s who still sit in the front benches who grew big 
government, who continually urged the Conservative 
government to spend, spend, and even spend more in the 1980s. 
 
So the Premier painted only half the picture on Sunday when he 
absolved himself and his NDP colleagues of the 1970s and 
1980s from responsibility for Saskatchewan's debt. The 
Conservatives spent us, yes, into billions of dollars of debt, but 
the NDP kept up a daily barrage of requests for increased 
spending on this program or that program for the entire time the 
Conservatives were in power. And they got into one bidding 
war after another on the election trail, particularly in 1986. 
 
The Premier spent a lot of money on television time last 
Sunday, Mr. Speaker. He spent that time to defend his record. 
Today I want to give people a different perspective, backed up 
by the facts as they are written in the government's own 
Estimates documents over the past two and three years. 
 
Let's talk about the provincial government's track record on 
meeting targets. What has been the impact of this Premier's 
policies on creating a climate that we need for stable economic 
futures? 
 
In 1993 the government had a great deal of confidence in its 
ability to create jobs, to create economic growth. They had put 
forward the Partnership for Renewal a year earlier, and the 
minister was proclaiming that new companies, 700 new 
companies, were going to come here and create jobs. The 1993 
budget produced an $8 million increase in income tax from new 
taxpayers. 

The budget planned to make $43 million more in corporate tax 
revenue from those new companies that were going to rush into 
Saskatchewan. So if the plan was working, the money should 
have come, Mr. Speaker; it should have come from the very 
places that they planned for it to come from. 
 
But let's look at the 1994 budget. We see further evidence that 
the plan didn't work the way that it was supposed to. The money 
wasn't coming in the way the NDP plan promised, so people 
had to pay for the failure of the NDP plan to create jobs and 
new taxpayers. 
 
The government had to achieve its predicted outcome, so they 
did the following: they raised utility rates, they expanded 
gambling, they jacked up the sales tax and fuel tax and every 
other tax, hoping that people would only look at the bottom 
line, the projected deficit. 
 
But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that the NDP still 
couldn't do what they planned to do: to create an environment 
for more jobs and more companies to come into our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members of the government have never 
been told this side of the story. So let's document the evidence 
for them, of how badly the plan is really going for this NDP 
government. It's just astonishing to me that the members of the 
government have so little interest that they won't go and do their 
own research. They just take what's given to them verbatim, and 
then go forth and spew it out, like people who have been 
programed instead of free-thinking individuals. In 1994-95 they 
thought they were creating jobs, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
claims they were creating jobs, but let's look at the real 
evidence. 
 
People who have jobs pay income tax. If there were more jobs it 
stands to reason there would be more income tax. But was 
there? No, sir, there was not. The plan was not unfolding as it 
ought to. The government had high hopes for 1994-95, that 
their income tax would be $1.1 billion. They had missed their 
target by $64 million from the previous year, Mr. Speaker. So 
they lowered it. They lowered it because they knew their 
Partnership for Renewal strategy wasn't working. But even the 
lower target evaded them. 
 
The NDP missed again. Another year, another miss. They 
estimated $1.1 billion in income tax and missed again — this 
time by $32 million. The jobs they planned just didn't happen. 
 
The government also had a plan to collect more corporate tax 
revenue. It was part of the Economic Development minister's 
plan to attract new companies and to create thousands of jobs. 
But that isn't really what happened because the plan didn't 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The resource boom took more capital tax and corporate tax 
from mining and resource companies who had no choice at all 
but to stay and pay. You can't pick up a mine and move it 
somewhere else, Mr. Speaker. The upsurge in prices meant the 
companies that were here paid more in taxes and royalties but  



February 22, 1995 

 
357 

overall, overall, you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? In this 
province we lost 1,331 employers since 1991. 
 
There is no evidence, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP plan to attract 
new companies or create new jobs really worked. Last week the 
NDP got another chance  they had another budget. This year, 
after three years of failing to hit the targets that would convince 
us that their plan for the economy was working, the NDP failed 
again. The 1995-96 income tax targets are what? They're even 
lower, Mr. Speaker. They're even lower than last year. Despite 
all the new jobs the NDP claim to have created, there does not 
seem to be more people creating more income tax revenue — 
the fairest tax of all. Everyone is paying fuel tax, utility tax, 
gambling tax, but the government has no plans to collect 
income tax from all of these new taxpayers they claim to have 
created. Why is that? 
 
Could it be that they don't really believe there are new jobs or 
new taxpayers? Do they believe that themselves? Could it be 
that the NDP has no real confidence in their plan either? I think, 
Mr. Speaker, that this must be the case, because on page 32 of 
the budget address booklet, the Finance minister tells us that the 
NDP now plan to create — and I emphasize this number, Mr. 
Speaker — only 12,000 jobs by 1998, even though their 
Partnership for Renewal plan plans to create 30,000 jobs. 
 
(1430) 
 
Personally I think Saskatchewan should have higher targets, 
that we should be stretching our limits and doing the things that 
will grow our economy. But it seems the NDP have accepted 
the fact that their plan for economic renewal is not working. 
And what's even more astonishing, they actually support the 
fact by their own numbers that it's not likely to even work in the 
future. 
 
That is where we are today, Mr. Speaker, with the NDP and 
what it calls its plan for the future. So the questions remain 
about whether this budget will be the desired results according 
to a plan any better than the last ones have. Will it have the 
desired results? 
 
Not one year have they met their so-called forecasted results. 
Will the actions being taken by the government, through its plan 
and through its policies and its budget, have a long-term 
positive effect on society, on our economy? Or is it all that 
matters that balancing one pre-election budget and then 
crossing our fingers for the future, is that simply good enough? 
I think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is the NDP content to balance the budget with a few golden 
eggs in gambling, a few golden eggs in resource windfalls, even 
if their tax policies and labour policies kill the goose that lays 
those eggs in the process? Let's take a closer look at how the 
1994-95 budget was balanced just to see if there are answers to 
those particular questions that I've just posed. 
 
The budget of this fiscal year, 1994-95, will be balanced 
because the royalties from oil poured in at $249 million more  

than they anticipated in their own estimates. Potash raked in an 
extra $29 million. And the extra money from coal revenues was 
enough for the Premier to give his whole office a pay raise. The 
NDP got lucky, lucky beyond their wildest dreams, never mind 
their plans. That is a good thing. It is a lucky thing. It is 
especially lucky for the people of this province that there was 
some luck, and it wasn't left up to them. But it was not part of 
their plan. 
 
That means government should take no credit, nor should they 
count on this good luck to continue for the future. If everything 
had gone according to the NDP plans, the picture would have 
looked quite different. If the NDP had not struck oil, they 
would be standing in this House today, trying to explain why 
their policies failed to create more taxpayers to share the 
burden. 
 
Oil revenues weren't the only thing that covered up the NDP's 
bad planning. They got more — not less — more money from 
Canada Assistance Plan than they had planned on. And they got 
more money from established programs financing than they had 
planned for. They of course never give credit where credit's due 
on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while the members opposite like to rant and rave about 
Ottawa, they remain pretty darn silent when it comes to the 
extra kicker that they got for these programs. They planned on 
an extra $30 million from equalization payments too. But the 
Finance minister can surely explain to you just how she liked to 
explain to the minister of Macklin, that increased economic 
activity like higher oil prices upsets the NDP plans to capture 
federal welfare payments — just like reducing the sales tax gets 
the economy all stimulated and we lose money from Ottawa. 
 
The budget of 1994-95, the current budget, and the budgets for 
the next three years, they claim will be balanced in part because 
of the federal government, because the federal government has 
given to Saskatchewan more revenue in the short term. We 
don't hear the Finance minister saying that in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What this budget does not acknowledge is that Saskatchewan 
has had fair warning about the trend for future transfer 
payments. Ottawa has told provincial governments what to 
expect down the road. That is a responsible thing to do. 
Knowing that transfer payments were guaranteed for five years 
makes it more important than ever that we abandon the welfare 
mentality indicative of this particular government. Knowing 
that we cannot rely on hand-outs for ever should encourage this 
government to create real growth and an economy that is not 
hamstrung by transfer payments or boom-and-bust resource 
cycles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing the government doesn't like to talk too much 
about are revenues from video lottery terminals — interesting 
how much it was missing from this particular budget, Mr. 
Speaker. The budget of this fiscal year, 1994-95, will be 
balanced because this government will have earned $90 million 
from gambling revenues. This was money that emerged from an  



February 22, 1995 

 
358 

activity that was not planned well by the government. Anyone 
engaged in this, anyone, lays claim that this was one of the most 
incompetent undertakings in the province's history. 
 
It is an activity that is happening without the consent of the 
people of Saskatchewan, an activity which will have effects that 
the government never even thought to predict or to measure 
adequately. VLT machines take money away from where it can 
do the most good — the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan, 
local economies — and then to take it away and put it into one 
of the most inefficient places: government coffers. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, communities have no way of 
really getting this money back into their local economies. The 
other problem is that once the government becomes addicted to 
this kind of revenue, it will never learn to do without it. 
 
The enormous cash cow has had an extremely negative effect 
on the communities of this province and her people. Moreover 
it is a policy, this gambling policy, which has blind-sided the 
electorate and has eroded the foundations of charities that the 
minister so discussed today as if she had some concern, concern 
for charities in this province when they raised the licence fee to 
charities in Saskatchewan by 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Only 
after recognizing that charity after charity and non-profit 
organization after non-profit organization were having to close 
their own doors did they decide to give them some of that 
money back which nobody has even seen yet to date. 
 
Eroded the foundations of charities -- a disgraceful legacy, Mr. 
Speaker; eroded communities and local economies to the point 
where some of them may not ever recover. At the same time 
this government now has $90 million more to spend, more to 
spend than it would be able to if the revenue was not there. 
Thus gambling has made it easy, easy for government to avoid 
closer examination of its own spending, and that's disgusting. 
 
VLT money has allowed the government to bring its revenue 
levels up to meet its spending habits rather than getting 
spending down to a level where people could afford it and 
sustain it through the traditional tax base. 
 
The budget of this fiscal year will be balanced in part as well 
because the provincial government has not returned all the 
GRIP surplus to the people who actually paid for it. Again an 
assumption by the NDP that it can do things better with people's 
money than they can, has driven their decision to balance the 
books by taking more cash into the government coffers rather 
than spending less. 
 
As part of this change in attitude, government must redefine its 
role. It must become smaller; it must become less expensive; it 
must become less intrusive. But the NDP will never — and I 
repeat never — accept that philosophy. The basic problem with 
the NDP approach is that government spending always expands 
to absorb the amount of money available. 
 
There's proof positive of this in the era of the 1970s that they 
love to proclaim as the era, the golden era of Saskatchewan,  

where similar economic circumstances existed in the province 
when we talk about oil and gas prices, and potash and uranium, 
and oilseeds and grains in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP took office in June of 1971 from a Liberal 
government which was delivering services to approximately 1 
million people in Saskatchewan. The Liberals were doing that 
job, Mr. Speaker, for approximately $463 per person in our 
province, because that was the amount of money that 
government was raising, raising from a traditional tax base 
during tough, recessionary times. 
 
When the NDP were elected, Mr. Speaker, the economy entered 
this natural cycle of high resource prices experienced all across 
the prairies. By the time that NDP government had left office 
they were spending six times what the Liberals had spent, and 
were raking in six times the revenues from the good times in the 
province; the things over which they had no control. The only 
thing over which they had control was their own spending, and 
they spent every dime. 
 
One can only imagine what things would have been like if the 
NDP had resisted the urge to spend every dime during that 
booming economy and what it generated. And between the 
Conservative's irresponsible management and the constant 
urgings of the New Democrats to spend more all through the 
1980s, we now have the biggest, most expensive government in 
the history of Saskatchewan. What a marvellous legacy for the 
people of our province. The largest, most expensive, and the 
member from Prince Albert is proud. Isn't that most interesting. 
 
Today, thanks to luck, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has created a 
surplus by riding the wave of luck and high taxation. The 
bottom line is that balancing the books has been relatively 
painless for the government, but the people have paid a very 
high price indeed. 
 
The budget shows in the tables on page 83 of the budget 
address, that Saskatchewan is not tax competitive for 
individuals compared to other provinces. All they have to do, 
Mr. Speaker — they don't have to listen to the Minister of 
Finance, who paints real fabrication for the people of 
Saskatchewan, creates her own myth — all they have to do is 
read their own, page 83. All they have to do is take what's 
happened in other provinces and do their own comparisons, but 
not one member opposite wants to know the real facts. 
 
What they want to do is promote fabrication. The budget shows 
in the tables on page 83 of the budget address that 
Saskatchewan is not tax competitive. Not tax competitive for 
individuals compared with the other provinces with whom we 
have to compete. Taxes are a big part of life today, and people 
make decisions because of that. They make decisions about 
where to move, where to invest, where to raise their family, 
based on those very factors. 
 
As a result of this budget, Saskatchewan ranks last, last of the 
four provinces in western Canada. For $25,000 incomes, 
Saskatchewan is 38 per cent above the lowest tax location -- 38  



February 22, 1995 

 
359 

per cent above for those earning $25,000. For $50,000 incomes 
we're the last again of four, Mr. Speaker, and 40 per cent above 
the lowest tax location. For $75,000 incomes, look at page 83 
— we're last again, fourth again. Last of fourth, and 44 per cent 
higher than the lowest tax location. 
 
In this budget we looked to the government to show leadership, 
to give us a reason to believe that this might be the final phase 
of their so-called plan, a phase that would deliver smaller, less 
expensive, less intrusive government. We were hoping to see 
the NDP who created extraordinarily bloated government that 
they would put themselves on a diet. 
 
But all they've done is to gorge themselves on more revenue 
than any government in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. By their own numbers, Mr. Speaker. All they 
have to do is look at their own numbers. The most expensive 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1992, four NDP government budgets have increased 
revenues by 27 per cent. Do you want to know how much they 
reduced expenditures by, this government? One per cent. They 
increased revenues by 27 per cent; they've reduced their own 
spending by 1 per cent. This election budget presented by the 
Finance minister reduces revenues by 2 per cent and increases 
expenditures by 1 per cent. They've increased their spending yet 
again. 
 
(1445) 
 
Since 1992, Saskatchewan families and businesses have handed 
over the equivalent of $2,000 per family of four in extra taxes. 
And that has meant that people have really had to make some 
sacrifices — difficult, difficult choices. It has meant that people 
have had to examine every line of their household budgets to 
see where they could save money. Businesses have cut staff; 
families have foregone simple pleasures to do their part. In fact 
in some cases people have had to make choices between the 
basics and necessities, Mr. Speaker — something not 
particularly funny. Choices between quality food and expensive 
medication. And those are very real and very painful choices for 
people to make. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier says one day that he needs 
— and I emphasize he said needs — all of his 88 staff to run his 
Executive Council, when he really doesn't care if other premiers 
do the same job with half the people, what he is really saying is 
that he thinks he is different, that he shouldn't have to sacrifice. 
What the Premier is saying is that it's okay for ordinary men and 
women and their children to make tough choices, to go without 
in order to make his so-called plan work, but the Premier has a 
different set of rules for himself and his chosen few. 
 
This is a Premier who has chosen to take important things from 
people, just to make sure that he and his colleagues didn't have 
to do with less. This Premier would rather have an expensive 
political department, like the Provincial Secretary, or a Crown 
corporation like the new casino corporation, rather than give up  

those things to keep nurses in our hospitals. And that's the 
difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's the difference between what is going on across the 
country with governments who are trying to set an example and 
do without from the top down, and this government in the 
province of Saskatchewan, which says, don't do as we do; do as 
we say. A government that says, you little people can do with 
less so the Premier and his friends don't have to give up any of 
their political toys. 
 
I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
been increasing taxes, increasing utility rates, adding VLTs, and 
increasing fees and costs across the board and they haven't 
fooled anyone. They can come up with mythical comments 
about how I would be spending $300 million. Nobody buys that 
any more. They don't buy into the myths created by these people 
anywhere in the province. 
 
Not the 400 people who turned up in Saltcoats for one of our 
nomination meetings, not one of those people. None of them 
bought it because they don't believe this government; they don't 
trust them any more. And everyone of every political stripe was 
willing to give these people a chance in 1991 and they found 
out they're just more of the same: don't start with yourself, don't 
set an example, don't show real leadership. Just put 
Saskatchewan in less and less of an advantageous situation. 
 
Every single possible place that they saw an opportunity to get 
more money, they went after it. They never did any planning to 
see what the effects would be of their cash grabs, what those 
cash grabs would have on real people. As long as the money 
came in, the rest didn't matter. And they talk about being a 
compassionate, socialist government. They didn't even care 
about what happened as a result of their policies. 
 
But it does matter. It matters because the decision to radically 
change our health care system, to compete with charities for 
scarce fund-raising dollars, to pass legislation that makes it 
harder for businesses to compete, all of those things, Mr. 
Speaker, have changed the foundation of our economy. In fact 
they've changed the fabric of our communities. The long-term 
effects of those changes will make it impossible, impossible for 
the government to sustain whatever plan it claims to have in its 
own budget. 
 
The budget we have before us shows that there have been 
serious flaws in the planning done by this administration. We 
cannot just isolate this one budget because people have had to 
live through this confusion since the NDP was elected. 
 
And health care is a perfect example. In 1992 the government 
decided they should spend less on health care but they didn't 
have the guts to say we will spend less on health care. No, they 
did what movie studios in Hollywood do. They built a façade 
around wellness  which they didn't even define for about a 
year and a half. They created this false sense that there was a 
plan, that the plan would save money, and would give us better 
health care in the process. Once again, Mr. Speaker, we see the  



February 22, 1995 

 
360 

real evidence roll in. 
 
Do we have better health care? Well the 52 communities who 
no longer have hospitals are not convinced that they do. The 
1,500 people who lost their jobs in health care, they don't 
believe it. The doctor after doctor after doctor who has left 
Melfort recently, they're not buying the NDP line. Surgeons are 
not buying the line; the taxpayers are not buying the line; and 
the patients are most certainly not buying the line. They don't 
see it either. 
 
I find it most interesting that we have people calling from 
around the House. I would suggest that he call Dr. Crowe in 
Alabama who was in Melfort for many years, when he says that 
no one left the city of Melfort. Perhaps he'd like me to name 
some other doctors' names, this individual who likes to spread 
truth around the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the system is not better, Mr. Speaker. But let's examine one 
other thing. Is it even cheaper? Let's examine if it's even 
cheaper. Not that saving money would legitimize the erosion of 
the system that this government has initiated, but have all these 
painful changes at least shown up with a less costly bottom 
line? 
 
Let's look at health care spending to see if there really is a plan 
or if there are really any results. In 1991-92 the government was 
spending $1.5 billion per year on health care. In 1992-1993 they 
spent $1.55 billion on health care. Too expensive, they cried. 
Save money, they cried. Change the system, they said. 
 
In 1993-94 the NDP government spent $1.47 billion. They 
closed 52 hospitals, they gutted the drug plan, and they laid off 
health care workers. Now one would expect with all of these 
radical changes that the government would consider to save 
considerable money. But what is today's reality? In 1994-95 the 
NDP spent $1.54 billion on health care, virtually the same that 
they spent before they closed hospitals, cut staff, and introduced 
us all to wellness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year, would you like to know what they are 
predicting? They're projecting it and it's in their print with their 
name on it, Mr. Speaker. They project spending 1.56 million 
. . . billion dollars. Pardon me, $1.56 million, actually more 
than they did than they fixed the system. 
 
I've not found a person in Saskatchewan who thinks that the 
health care system is better. I think the only person I've ever 
heard speak positively about it is a New Democrat university 
professor of health administration. 
 
I talk to people everywhere who are dismayed by what has 
happened and who are looking for some justification for what 
the government has done. They could probably buy into this if 
they thought it was costing them substantially less and helping 
the province overall. But that hasn't even happened. There is no 
plan. And the results of the changes have been less accessible, 
lower quality care for the same or more money, to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan people have gone to the wall to help this 
government and they've not seen the results that they were 
promised. The results that have emerged cannot be connected 
even loosely to any kind of real plan whatsoever. The only 
identifiable plan that this government has had is to get more and 
more money from the people. This budget is another classic 
NDP tax-and-spend presentation. 
 
Since this government took office, Saskatchewan people have 
generated almost $1 billion in profits for the Crown 
corporations through utilities and gambling revenue. But there 
is no evidence — none — that the bloated bureaucracy of the 
Crowns has made do with less. The government has been quick 
to pass along rate hikes, slow to rebate money, when their 
gouging has become too obvious for even the members 
opposite to bear. 
 
What government does not realize is that people cannot always 
wait for rebates, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes the last utility bill is 
the one that makes the decision for someone to close their 
business or sell the family home because people cannot afford 
to make their ends meet. A rebate is no good to those people 
and there is no rebate in the world to substitute for fair pricing 
policies at the outset. 
 
In fact the people of Saskatchewan are always last on the list for 
this government when it comes to getting something back for 
their efforts. In the frigid month of January 1994, when the 
Saskatchewan people were asked to dig deeper for an increase 
in power rates, the Premier made the case that rate increases 
were necessary, despite impressive profits in SaskPower. 
 
That very same month, Mr. Speaker, he gave all of his staff an 
increase in pay. Apparently the Premier's staff are still unable to 
keep up with the high cost of living under his administration 
because no sooner has this year's budget come out, than pay 
increases for $118,000 are being divvied up to Executive 
Council once again. 
 
Perhaps they'd like to explain that to the professional civil 
servants in this province, the unionized professional civil 
servants who have settled for zero increase and 1 per cent next 
year. So, Mr. Speaker, there is very much a double standard 
here. What's good for this government is far different from 
what's good for the people, as far as the NDP is concerned. 
 
The entire budget is based on the premiss that people endorse 
the idea of putting every surplus dime in the Saskatchewan 
economy in the hands of the government. It is based on the 
premiss that people will be content to keep paying through the 
nose so that this government doesn't have to make any tough 
political choices. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the government has it wrong. I think 
people want to see savings to the health care system, but they 
want to be told exactly what will be saved and where. They 
don't want to trade a hospital for a district health boardroom 
with a fancy table and chairs and a room full of government 
appointees and bureaucrats. 



February 22, 1995 

 
361 

But that's what they've gotten, and that's what they think they've 
gotten. Every dime that has been cut out of operating budgets 
and front-line services seems to be gobbled up by the newly 
devolved health care administrators. 
 
People want answers to very fundamental questions about 
where these budget choices are going to take their province of 
Saskatchewan, what the underlying assumptions of this budget 
will do to their communities. And they want the government to 
consider some different options for the future. 
 
The Premier would have us all believe that things are very rosy 
in Saskatchewan. He's so intent on having us believe that that 
he spent more on a half-hour program of televised propaganda 
than some families live on in this province in a year. He's so 
anxious to have us believe in his miracle that he left out 
important facts and edited the big picture just to serve himself 
and his political party. 
 
The Premier told this province on his TV Sunday address that 
there were lots of new jobs for young people. He didn't even try 
to square that with the fact that we have doubled the number of 
young people on welfare that we had in 1991. He told us that 
out-migration had stopped, without bothering to explain that we 
are still losing some 20,000 people per year from Saskatchewan 
— more people than we have coming in. 
 
If Saskatchewan is going to grow and prosper, we have to 
answer the question about who is leaving and who is coming to 
our province. The Premier cannot claim that young people have 
quit leaving Saskatchewan because it simply is not true. The 
goal should not be to have inflow matching outflow anyway, 
Mr. Speaker. The goal must be to keep our young people here 
and attract even more people in the future. 
 
It seems to be an NDP myth that as long as you aren't losing, 
you're winning. Well, Mr. Speaker, I say that breaking even isn't 
good enough. It's simply not good enough for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and we can do better with a government that 
puts itself last and the people first for a change. 
 
The Premier and the Finance minister and — yes — the 
minister in charge of Economic Development are all telling us 
that there's a plan for jobs. They're even telling us that there's a 
plan for investment. But they told us that in 1991. The Premier 
told us that they had a plan, but the results didn't happen. The 
results didn't happen the way they said they should if there 
really had been a plan at all. The results did not happen because 
Saskatchewan has fewer jobs today than in 1991. 
 
Whether you're using the new StatsCan numbers, the old 
StatsCan numbers, the number provided by the province, 
anything, it comes down to one irrefutable number — we have 
fewer jobs in the province of Saskatchewan today than when 
they took power. There are fewer jobs now than before his 
government spent $112 million on the plan to create jobs in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 

The fact is that the economy will not keep pace with other 
provinces in the long run, despite our wealth of resources, 
because we cannot diversify under the tax and labour policies of 
this NDP administration. Almost all of the job creation in this 
budget is in the public sector — in the public sector, Mr. 
Speaker. Once again, the government will invest scarce tax 
dollars to try to meet the targets in its own plan because it failed 
to create the climate that should produce jobs without 
government money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, luck is a good thing. And hope is an important 
element in people's lives. But hope is not a strategy. The people 
. . . the problem, pardon me, is that other provinces are not 
willing to count on luck. Well our Premier and his government 
can think of no other strategy. They won't cut their own 
spending; they won't get rid of restrictive legislation; they won't 
make Saskatchewan a competitive place to do business. As a 
matter of fact, they don't know how, has become very evident. 
 
The incentives held out in this budget are done in desperation 
— desperation of a government that has failed to create the 
climate being created in Manitoba, in New Brunswick, and in 
Alberta. And I suggest to the members opposite that they 
actually do their own research. Don't buy, lock, stock, and 
barrel the people that try to brainwash you. Go and find out for 
yourself. 
 
Just look at the evidence. What's so frightening about the truth? 
These provinces elsewhere are tearing down the barriers, 
extending a hand to investors, an invitation to people to move 
to their provinces, and it's working. It's working in these other 
places because jobs are up; government spending is coming 
down — almost every single province but this one. 
 
Saskatchewan is last, last in job creation. It's lowest in 
population growth, and it's leading the way in high taxation and 
leading the way in government spending. What a proud record, 
they say. They cheer themselves on, but they're not willing to 
even discover the truth. All they have to do is look at their own 
numbers relative to other places. Not the political spin, have 
them do the government one. Focus on good governing for a 
change and find out for themselves, Mr. Speaker, is what each 
and every government member should do. 
 
Yes, this government is spending more; it's also delivering less. 
Given the increase to the Department of Economic 
Development one might expect to see some confidence in what 
they were planning, some acknowledgement in the budget that 
the $112 million invested over the last three years was hitting 
the targets that they set. But that is not the case. The 
Partnership for Renewal predicted 30,000 new jobs by the year 
2000. The Minister of Economic Development has provided 
absolutely no measurability in his estimated job numbers — 
zero. No way of measuring this. 
 
He got a stroke of luck with the StatsCan numbers being 
rebased; they were simply rebased but they were rebased across 
the country. But the bottom line in the new numbers still shows 
this, Mr. Speaker, and they don't even want to read about it —  



February 22, 1995 

 
362 

458,000 people were working in Saskatchewan in 1991 and 
457,000 were working at the end of 1994. Take the old numbers 
from StatsCan, the new numbers from StatsCan — if you can 
subtract, you can figure out we're still 1,000 fewer working 
since 1991, no matter which way you slice it. 
 
So after four years of planning and $112 million being invested 
in job creation by the Department of Economic Development, 
the NDP almost has us back to where we started from. So 
whatever plan they're using, we've gained and lost and gained, 
but the further we go, the behinder we got. 
 
I think taxpayers have a right to expect that the minister should 
be able to back up these estimates and claims about these new 
jobs. We haven't seen any evidence of this. It simply is not good 
enough to spend $112 million — as his department has done — 
talking about jobs, talking about economic development, and 
then not produce concrete evidence as to exactly what direct job 
creation has resulted from his plan. 
 
It's quite possible we aren't seeing those detailed lists of 
companies and jobs for one reason — because they aren't there. 
Even the Finance minister doesn't believe they will come 
anywhere near the numbers the Economic Development 
department has been promoting. How do we know that? Well 
it's in their budget, Mr. Speaker: the budget forecast for the 
Saskatchewan economy, on page 32. What does it predict? It 
predicts 13,000 jobs between 1994 and 1998, which is a far cry 
from the Economic Development minister's commitment of 
30,000 more jobs in the year 2000 than we had in 1991. Since 
we are 1,000 less than we started with, I figure that we have 
31,000 to go. 
 
But the Finance minister has already pulled the plug on the 
partnership plan because she sets the target at one-third of what 
the Economic Development minister is shooting for himself. 
Maybe that's what one-third, one-third, one-third really means, 
Mr. Speaker: creating a third of jobs they promised, adding a 
third more people to welfare, and keeping another third on 
unemployment. 
 
When we look carefully at the rhetoric versus the numbers, 
things simply do not add up. And when things don't add up, we 
have to wait for the evidence to come in to see how the 
predictions match what actually transpires. 
 
The problem is that this budget, and more importantly the 
budgets down the road, are based on predictions, things the 
government assumes are likely to happen. It is the same tool 
that they've used in past budgets, except they have consistently 
been wrong because their policies in labour, in gambling, in 
government spending, keep shooting their budget plans in the 
foot. 
 
This is my number one criticism of this particular government, 
Mr. Speaker. They keep claiming to have plans and strategies, 
when all they have is luck. The NDP did not plan a huge 
upsurge in resource prices. What they did plan was expensive 
changes to labour legislation, to workers' compensation, and so  

forth. They planned increased taxes and higher government 
spending and higher utility rates. They planned to take hundreds 
of millions of dollars from local economies to fuel their 
spending plans. The fact is, if luck had not entered into the 
equation, the NDP plans would have been seen for the farce 
that they really are. 
 
I cannot stress enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the future 
would be in serious jeopardy if this government were to 
continue for another four years. If the government's first plan 
got us 1,000 fewer jobs than we had four years ago, how can we 
take a chance on their second plan? Saskatchewan would be at 
risk if the NDP were able to continue spending as much as it 
spends today. And they've told us they intend to keep on 
spending. The debt reduction plan of one-third, one-third, one-
third implies that they will be spending 33 cents on every tax 
dollar collected for debt reduction on increased spending. Very 
interesting thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot afford to have a government that is 
obsessed by spending. Taxpayers need to know that the money 
that comes to government by luck will be slapped on the debt, 
not frittered away by adding more political staff to government. 
Taxpayers need to know that every lucky penny that the 
government finds will be applied to paying down the debt so as 
to reduce expenditures on interest. 
 
But we cannot trust this government to do the responsible thing. 
Because the NDP has shown time and time again they simply 
cannot resist the urge to spend money on more government. 
 
The NDP has already admitted to its spending addiction by 
holding funds aside in piggy banks for a rainy day, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This government believes that it has a right to keep 
undisclosed amounts of money hidden in the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, in SaskTel, or SaskEnergy. Why should 
people trust a government that is selective in what truth it will 
share with the people of the province? 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not saying that any government 
should operate without reserves and without contingency plans. 
What I'm saying is that this particular government asks 
taxpayers to pay all the bills for deficit reduction, expects the 
taxpayers to pony up as much money as the government says it 
needs, and then insults the people of Saskatchewan by holding 
back information about how much is really in the piggy banks, 
how it got there, and under precisely what conditions it will be 
spent. 
 
The debt reduction plan in this budget is just not good enough. 
The NDP plans to reduce the debt by $620 million by the year 
1999. Let's just examine this for a minute, these people who 
think they are fiscal wizards. 
 
That equates to $155 million in debt reduction per year. A 1 per 
cent reduction is hardly taking a bite out of things, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This very government has created almost $1 billion in 
extra debt itself by running deficit budgets. The $620 million 
that it'll pay by the year 1999 is only 65 per cent of the debt that  



February 22, 1995 

 
363 

it created on its own. Like take a basic math class here. 
 
People are tired of trying to dig the truth out of budgets and 
annual reports produced by past and present governments. The 
NDP have chosen not to be open and accountable as they say 
they have. We haven't even seen their audited caucus 
allowance, let alone seeing the real realities of what this budget 
means. They've chosen to hide money in the Crowns before, 
knowing that annual reports will not likely surface until long 
after an election. 
 
There are a lot of people in this province who feel duped. They 
feel duped by this government. They feel as though they are 
being played for fools, and again where government has 
overcharged people, has taken more in taxes and fees than it 
really needed to take. They feel the government has not been 
honest with them about how much extra money they're setting 
aside for a rainy day or what will happen to money if the 
government gets another lucky break on interest rates or 
resource revenues. 
 
The timing of this budget is very, very much tied to an election 
call, I suspect. The basis for my suspicions is that no one knows 
the real numbers yet from 1994-95, and I would imagine they're 
darn worried when the people really do find them out. 
 
Until March 31 we will not know what the real debt is. We will 
not have a clear picture of the actual spending in 1994-95 until 
after June or July. We know that the spending will surely 
materialize, but we cannot be certain what will happen on the 
revenue side until all the forecasted spending is in for the entire 
year. 
 
So the government is more or less safe with any predictions it 
wants to make at this time because there's no way of holding 
them up against the evidence. It is possible that Saskatchewan 
under ideal conditions might sustain the revenue side of this 
particular budget. But there is a difference between possible 
and probable. Regardless of whether the government can 
scavenge enough revenue, there is still the basic debate over 
whether taxpayers should have to support the size and cost of 
this government that has been created on the expenditure side. 
 
Frankly, I am unconvinced that an NDP government can or will 
create the ideal conditions that will be required to fuel their 
spending habits. The fact is that it has taken them two years to 
see the folly in having an aviation fuel tax that was so high that 
it drove business and tax revenues out of the province of 
Saskatchewan. That, in and of itself, is evidence that the NDP is 
philosophically opposed to creating a healthy economic 
environment for jobs. 
 
Obviously the government does not create the weather, it 
doesn't create world prices for agricultural products, it doesn't 
have any influence over natural resources, and they cannot set 
the interest rates. So those things are outside of their control, 
just as they are for any government. 
 
The NDP is making predictions, however, based on  

assumptions that the economy will continue to grow and 
function at levels predicted by financial analysts. The part of the 
equation that's being left out, however, is the predilection of the 
NDP to impose policies its very self that choke off the growth 
that should be happening this time in this country in each 
government. We will be at far greater risk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
at risk as a society, trying to keep up with or surpass expected 
growth levels if our government cannot control its spending in 
its desire to curry favour with its political supporters at the 
expense of jobs and investment in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1515) 
 
Repealing the labour standards legislation would make us more 
competitive. Open tendering would make us more competitive. 
Why can't we do what other provinces have done? Give real, 
equal power to business and labour where they sit together and 
they make the decisions about what will in fact ensure that we 
have quality jobs in our province. 
 
And what will impede that from happening? This is happening 
in other provinces. Why can't it be done here, Mr. Speaker? We 
don't have to have enemies. We don't have to create adversarial 
situations between business and labour and between rural and 
urban people. That doesn't have to happen. But that's what 
happens under NDP administrations. 
 
Frank McKenna is an example. And I don't mind speaking 
about him at all and I would suggest they take the numbers 
from the budget that came down yesterday in New Brunswick 
and do some comparisons. 
 
Frank McKenna is an example of a Premier who knows how to 
create the climate that business is looking to invest in. He is 
successful in a province with far fewer resources than we have 
in our province. But he understands what to do with the control 
that his government has, Premier McKenna, who by the way 
has even been asked by the Premier of Saskatchewan, how do I 
do the kinds of things you're doing? Which I guess is somewhat 
of a recognition that McKenna is viewed as a success by some 
people in this Assembly. 
 
Frank McKenna recognizes that there is more to looking out for 
the working people of his province than dictating higher wages 
and better benefits. The New Brunswick Premier recognizes 
that jobs will grow in a climate that attracts business and 
investment. He has identified the things that create such a 
climate and he's actually led the way in Canada to make those 
things happen. 
 
In Saskatchewan, the NDP has taken the opposite approach and 
produced the opposite results. While New Brunswick becomes 
more competitive and more attractive to investors, with more 
than a hundred million dollars in their budget yesterday for 
income tax revenues, we've become less so. While New 
Brunswick attracts companies and jobs, we end up on the list of 
also-rans as companies pass us by due to the high cost of doing 
business in Saskatchewan. 



February 22, 1995 

 
364 

Despite difficult challenges New Brunswick has faced — and 
they have — they're ahead of Saskatchewan in job recovery and 
they have balanced their budget without the huge windfalls that 
Saskatchewan has experienced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is not a budget for the future of 
Saskatchewan. It is a budget for the future of the NDP 
government. It's not a budget that sees government do without 
so people can grow and prosper. It is a budget that clings to 
bloated bureaucracy and big, big government. And this is 
certainly not a budget that has resulted from a thoughtful plan. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me return to my initial 
discussion about process and outcome. The government's claim 
that it has been operating according to some plan is not 
supported by their very budget. After almost four years of NDP 
government, Saskatchewan is still relying on good fortune to 
carry us into the future. Even if good fortune holds — and I say 
if — Saskatchewan will continue to be, as a result of NDP 
policies, less able to compete with her neighbours in Canada 
and below the 49th parallel. 
 
If the people of Saskatchewan must continue losing $400 per 
family to VLTs, if we must continue paying for raises to 
political aides, if we are forced to pay for increasing health care 
bureaucracy and birthday parties for the province and bogus 
Crown corporations and labour policies just to keep this NDP in 
power, then we will be unable to create a sound and sustainable 
economy. 
 
We will still be at the mercy of the weather and the world 
markets, the same as we have always been. If any of those 
elements does not hold up, if we lose people or jobs or if the 
interest rate rises, we will not have the tools — the economic 
tools — to repair the damage. 
 
The NDP plan will never work because people will not choose 
to come to Saskatchewan as we become more and more of an 
expensive place to live and to do business, while provinces 
around us focus on reducing taxes and increasing competitive 
advantage in the market-place. 
 
Saskatchewan as a province has been lucky. We have been 
lucky, as a matter of fact, to survive 20 years of governments 
that have been moving in the wrong direction. But our luck is 
running out, and time is running out. This budget may buy us 
one year of fiscal stability, but this government cannot buy a 
future for the people of Saskatchewan with gambling money 
and good luck. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I regret that the false assumptions upon 
which this budget is based, the lack of a plan to produce the 
critical elements of economic growth this budget depends upon, 
leave me no choice but to reject the future projections of this 
budget. And I must therefore reject the proposals to balance the 
budget on these unsustainable assumptions. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm so happy 
to see you in your place. 
 
I'm pleased to enter into this budget debate. It is a privilege. 
Seriously, it is a privilege to be a member of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. I believe very strongly in the 
democratic parliamentary system that we represent. I'm proud to 
represent my constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and I'm 
proud to sit in this Legislative Assembly with my government 
colleagues — each one of us representing our area to the best of 
our abilities but always conscious that we represent the 
province as a whole. 
 
I love Saskatchewan, and Canada, and I'm so pleased that we 
have been able balance the budget two years ahead of our 
deficit reduction plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — All of the people of Saskatchewan — we have 
created partnerships  have been responsible for this success, 
the partnerships that we have created. Working together in 
cooperation has always been the success of this province, and 
this effort continued in the last three years. 
 
Balancing the budget has always been a means to an end rather 
than an end in itself. A balanced budget is the first step in 
achieving the financial flexibility essential to providing 
programs and services with predictability and stability long into 
the future. This has always been a philosophy of the CCF (Co-
operative Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP: providing 
stable financial government, providing good government. 
 
This budget does that. It is just not two balanced budgets, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Three more are included, through to 1998-99. 
 
What can it do for Lloydminster, Hafford, Kinistino, and 
Preeceville? The balanced budget provides stable, fiscally 
responsible government. This is good for small business, for 
farmers, for educators, health care workers, and for the youth of 
our province. 
 
Some of the activity that has contributed to the balanced budget 
is the activity in the oil patch. And I want to pay tribute to the 
oil workers and the oil workers in my constituency. This is hard 
work. It's competitive and it means long hours of dedication and 
commitment to the industry. We can recite all the facts of the 
oil patch: 2,399 wells drilled in Saskatchewan in 1994, up from 
2,200 in 1993; over 500 jobs created; royalties revamped to 
encourage development. But behind all of these statistics, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are people. 
 
The young people in this province deserve a chance to carve out 
their own destiny. I'm going to share a personal note with 
people in the House. As a young person I came from a family 
that could not afford to send me to teachers' college or to 
university. But because of the public policy that we had under 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP 
governments, I was able to borrow money to go to school and  



February 22, 1995 

 
365 

repay this. So that today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a standard 
of living that is higher than my parents and grandparents have. 
 
I've always been of the view that Saskatchewan was one of the 
few places where a person could reach their potential. 
Saskatchewan has been a province where ordinary people can 
create their dreams because we had the public policy which 
encouraged us to do this. I want to continue this for my children 
and my grandchildren. And so I'm going to do some 
comparisons because this is what we've been hearing from the 
members opposite is some comparisons, and I'm going to do 
some Alberta comparisons again as I did in the throne speech 
debate. 
 
Last night we heard that Ralph Klein will have a $500 million 
deficit in the current year, yet the Leader of the Opposition and 
the Leader of the Liberal Party encouraged us to do things the 
Liberal way, the Alberta way, the Tory way. No way, as my 
granddaughter would say, and she lives in Alberta. My little 
granddaughter would say, no way, grandma. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Smarter than the opposition. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — You're right, she is. Klein is a Premier that has 
created deep divisions, a two-tiered health system, and a two-
tiered education system. What a contrast to our Premier who 
has been building partnerships with people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — The Liberals and Tories say that they haven't 
increased taxes, but what do you call what Mr. Klein has done? 
And who is going to pay for these services that he has cut? 
 
Let me give you some examples. Social Services cut by 18 per 
cent. He's going to privatize child care services. Who is going to 
pay for this? Municipal governments have been cut by 30 per 
cent. No increased taxes, but who is going to pay for these 
services? Health care budget cut overall by 17.6 per cent. Who 
is going to pay for these services? 
 
Funding for kindergarten cut by 50 per cent. Who is going to 
pay for these services? Funding for home-based education has 
been cut by 50 per cent. The people that want to and cannot 
send their children to school, who is going to pay this 50 per 
cent? Native education cut by 7.5 per cent. Who is going to pay 
for this? 
 
Funding for adult upgrading has been eliminated totally. Who is 
going to pay for this? We have the most literate people in the 
province of Saskatchewan because we have always continued 
education all through people's lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — School boards have been eliminated — in fact, 
practically eliminated; there's 60, used to be 140. And all of the 
school boards . . . all of the major decisions to do with money 
and the mill rate is going to be made from Edmonton, not from  

local communities. 
 
When Klein stripped local boards of all power and control over 
their schools, he also paved the way for the establishment of 
private schools. We saw what happened in the U.S. (United 
States) when under the Reagan administration . . . practically 
have a whole generation of illiterate people because public 
school funding was cut so deeply. Poor people cannot send 
their children to private schools. 
 
Under the banner of charter schools in Alberta, an individual or 
group may now set up a private school and receive full public 
funding, based on the number of students. Klein and his cabinet 
have claimed that charter schools will give parents more control 
and choice, but it will force schools to compete with each other 
for both students and public money. This means a two-tiered 
education system. 
 
So they say no tax increases, but these are the things that are 
happening. And you don't have to take my word for it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; I'll read you a piece from the Vancouver Sun. 
This is out of our province. This columnist can take a view of 
what's happening. This is what she says, and I quote: 
 
 That real people, real taxpayers, Albertans who have as 

much right to the privileges of living in this provinces as 
anyone else, are getting short shrift on their share of the 
Alberta Advantage. 

 
 Premier Ralph Klein calls them special-interest groups 

and dismisses them as victims-of-the-week. His critics 
see people with few resources and no voice, unable to 
be heard over the real special-interest groups, the 
powerful business lobbies. 

 
 Klein talks about privatizing social services, about 

community involvement in the schools and regional 
control of the health-care system. His critics see the 
government shedding itself of any responsibility for the 
standards, delivery or equality of services across the 
province. 

 
 When the premier (in Alberta) talks about not taxing 

Albertans further, he means . . . There won't be (any) 
new taxes. There will be user fees. 

 
And that is a form of taxation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
Let's turn to agriculture for a minute. We have a new safety net 
program because we had the political courage to get out of 
GRIP, and now we have the finances to provide a new safety 
net program for farmers. What about Alberta and Manitoba, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Their GRIP programs are now in deficit. They 
can't afford a new safety net program. 
 
We are returning 100 per cent of the producers' surplus to them, 
to the farmers, and 7 per cent of the taxpayers' portion of GRIP  



February 22, 1995 

 
366 

surplus is going back to farmers. Compare that with the broke-
and-in-debt Alberta and Manitoba. And what about the federal 
Liberals? They're only returning 52 per cent of their portion to 
Saskatchewan farmers. I guess the rest is going to Ontario and 
Quebec, as per usual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the budget because it is a budget that 
sets us on a road to renewal. At last there is confidence and 
hope in this province. There's no doubt in my mind that we live 
in the greatest province in Canada. I suppose all people feel this 
way about their home, but I believe we have built a society that 
portrays cooperation, compassion, and resourcefulness. 
 
This is the Saskatchewan way, a balanced approach, if I may 
say, to life, besides the budget, with the helping hand extended 
to our neighbours. Let's continue this tradition and remember 
that social democrats have made a difference in this part of 
North America. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker — I see you're back — I want to return to 
some of the things that the Leader of the Liberal Party 
commented on. I found that she, in her address, used very 
selected use of information. I don't find this completely . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Honest. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Honest. Thank you for the word. As the 
newspaper article from the Vancouver Sun said, no new taxes in 
these other provinces, but user fees. So when you look at how 
much it costs you to live in any province, let's be fair. Let's be 
fair. You can't only use income tax. That isn't the only expense 
a family has. 
 
Let's take a family of 25,000 and compare them in Vancouver, 
Calgary, Saskatoon, and Winnipeg. Okay. We're going to take 
not only provincial tax; we're also going to take health 
premiums into consideration, which we have none. We're going 
to take retail sales tax, which we have but some don't. Some are 
higher. Gasoline tax. We're going to take rent, electricity, 
telephone, auto insurance. That's the whole package and basket 
of expenses to any family. 
 
A person with an income of 25,000 — guess which city is the 
cheapest to live in? Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. Vancouver is . . . 
it cost a family for all of those services 11,980 in Vancouver; 
9,680 in Calgary; 8,563 in Saskatoon; 9,040 in Winnipeg. 
Saskatoon is the cheapest. 
 
Let's take those baskets of services . . . because some might say 
to us, well we know you NDPers; you favour people at the 
lower end of the scale. Let's take people at the 50,000 end of 
the scale. Same basket of services, same four western 
provinces, because I don't want to go into the East. It would 
take too long, and besides they're all higher than us anyway. 
 
Okay. We're going to compare the western provinces. We are by 
far the cheapest province to live in. And let's look at . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Least expensive. 

Ms. Stanger: — Yes, thank you. Let's look at the income of 
75,000. Again the same story, Mr. Speaker. If you take all the 
basket of services that a person in this income has to pay for, 
we are the cheapest province to live in, the least expensive as 
my colleague from Saskatoon Wildwood says. 
 
So I mean, let's be fair when we use information. We may 
disagree philosophically, but I try to be fair when I use facts and 
information. 
 
Secondly, again the Leader of the Liberal Party said that the 
reason we could balance our budget is because we got so much 
from Ottawa. She used the two statistics where we got a bit 
more. The Canada Assistance Plan — we got 11.5 million more 
from the federal government. And some of the other established 
programs — we got 15 million more. 
 
What she didn't tell us is that in our equalization payments we 
got 31.5 million less, and other programs, 6 million less. So as a 
total, we have a minus from the federal government of $10.5 
million. It's nothing like giving half the facts, is it? At least 
when you're entering into a budget debate, you're a leader of a 
party, you should be fair enough to give all the statistics. 
 
Let's move on. Now the Leader of the Liberal Party says all 
these great increases in salaries. What she's talking about is 
increments. There was not a percentage increase. There was 
increment increase. Now as a former teacher, I got increments. 
Nurses in our hospitals get increments. Psychologists get 
increments too, by the way. 
 
Now what is the Liberal leader saying? Is she saying that she's 
against these group of people getting increments? Because that's 
exactly what the increase was, was increments. You get 
increments . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about her staff? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Well her staff didn't get any increments 
because they never stay long enough to get an increment. How 
can you get an increment if you leave in a few months? You've 
got to stay a year before you can get an increment. 
 
But what I want the Liberal leader to be absolutely fair on is to 
explain what these increases have been, and that is increments. 
Now are we going to ask . . . Is she saying to the teachers she 
doesn't believe they should get their increments? Is she saying 
to the nurses they shouldn't get their increments? Heavens, after 
years of experience you expect to get an increment . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it's a warning to people exactly 
where the Liberal leader stands. 
 
Now that was another use of selective information. Here's 
another use. She said that it would cost a great deal of money to 
put the Premier's address on on Sunday. Well let me tell you, he 
did not use the taxpayers' money to put his address on. The 
NDP members from Kamsack, Yorkton, Maidstone, Regina, 
Saskatoon, paid for that to be put on. The people of our party 
paid, not the taxpayers. We didn't ask them to do that. 



February 22, 1995 

 
367 

So again selective use of information. Lets it hang out there as 
if the taxpayers paid for his . . . Let me ask her. When Premier 
Klein was on, I can tell you who paid for that. That was not the 
PC (Progressive Conservative) Party of Alberta. 
 
Okay, so that's four instances. Let's go on to the fifth one. She 
said if she had a surplus she would slap it on the deficit . . . on 
the debt. Well we slapped $500 million on the debt this year — 
half a billion dollars. Now let me ask you what other 
government in this country paid $500 million down on their 
debt. What other government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Actually some of my colleagues have been 
passing me information — the member from Saltcoats and 
others. I could go on. These were just five inaccuracies in the 
Liberal leader's speech. 
 
Okay. I basically like to make a philosophical speech. I like 
people to know exactly where I stand. I don't like to run down 
other people. I'd rather have a philosophical debate of how I do 
something versus how she does something. But I'm not going to 
stand here in my place and put up with selected misinformation. 
So I have laid out the five areas where she has been inaccurate 
and I hope the people that are watching this broadcast compare 
the two different approaches to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — I want to say thank you to the great people of 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster and to the people of the rest of the 
province for your support in the last three and a half years. We 
couldn't have done it without you. 
 
I also want to say that our jobs as MLAs, as cabinet ministers, 
as opposition members, are all honourable jobs. Representing 
people in a parliamentary democracy is the highest form of 
service that can be given in our society. And I am proud to be a 
politician and I've learned a great deal, and you have given me 
that ability to do that in the last three and a half years. And I 
want to say thank you. 
 
I'm proud to be here, I believe in good government, and I will 
be supporting the Minister of Finance in her budget. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
follow my colleague, the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, who 
always brings common sense, intelligence, experience, and a 
loving heart to the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Seeing as none of us can predict when 
the election call might strike, I want to spend a minute to talk 
about how I feel about the time that I've spent so far in the  

legislature. 
 
I think it's been a great honour to serve under the Premier of 
this province. To be able to have your first experience as an 
elected person with a person of that length of service and 
stature is a rare privilege, and I think we've all learned a great 
deal from that experience. 
 
I want to thank the cabinet, who in the early days I'm sure spent 
many long and difficult hours struggling with decisions that 
later they'd have to bring to the caucus for our thoughtful 
comments and approval. And I want to recognize their 
leadership in doing that. 
 
The Minister of Finance and her ability to bring a practical, 
feminine point of view to the portfolio, and to be . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . some of my fellow parliamentarians here are 
not sure about that. But it's been very good to see the approach 
that she's taken and the caring and compassion that she brings 
to the role of Finance. 
 
And as a member of caucus, our very democratic caucus . . . 
had many meetings both in committee and as caucus of the 
whole, in which we discussed the government's program. So 
there was a lot of unity and a lot of consideration of all the 
decisions that were made and I appreciate very much the work 
that everybody did in this process. 
 
We know that we're elected to be responsible but the fact is, is 
that even though people want responsibility it doesn't make it 
any easier for governments to be responsible. Responsibility 
means making decisions that people may not always like and 
responsibility means looking at the benefit of the whole 
province and not necessarily at one particular area. And I think 
that when people ask their governments to be responsible, it's 
important that they then support those responsible actions when 
they're taken. 
 
One of the things I wanted to give is a little bit of an overview 
of the way our government works, because I think in days gone 
by there used to be tendency for departments to operate fairly 
independently and there would be some money spent here or a 
big project there. But now government is working more 
horizontally, so there's a range of interdepartmental working 
committees. 
 
And the best way I can describe it is raising the water-table. 
Instead of there being one program that shoots up here, another 
one that shoots up there, there's a broad base of actions taking 
place and the whole water-table is rising across government. So 
there's an improved quality of program and an improved quality 
of life that results from that. 
 
One of the best examples of that is the Saskatchewan Indian 
and Metis Affairs Secretariat and the Women's Secretariat, 
because both of these have to deal with issues that are involved 
in every department of government. And rather than just doing 
one initiative, they're working with all the departments to 
improve the way that things work in those areas for everyone. 



February 22, 1995 

 
368 

In the Women's Secretariat it's my belief that our government 
has done more in the area of improving quality of life for 
women than probably any other government in the history of 
. . . possibly in the world. It has been a remarkable agenda that's 
been accomplished. 
 
(1545) 
 
There's been The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, which 
protects women from abusers and allows them to stay in their 
homes rather than running in the night with garbage bags full of 
clothing and toys. Having been on the receiving end of these 
kinds of problems in various jobs I had, I was very pleased to 
see the protection move to the victim of violence. 
 
There's a fund that compensates women who are the victims of 
crime. Under the new Labour Standards Act, women have 
better protections. There's improved maternity leave for 
adoption or birth. A woman who suffers a miscarriage is 
entitled to leave. There's parental leave which replaces paternity 
leave that can be taken by either parent, allowing them to decide 
what works best for them. There's a new Act that protects 
women from harassment in the workplace. We have a 
prevention unit to educate people on gender harassment issues. 
 
Child care services have been improved — not as much as we'd 
like to because we realize how important good child care is to 
childhood development, but there has been additional resources 
there. 
 
Employment equity programs have been expanded, and there's a 
considerable improvement in the representation of women in all 
decision-making levels of government. Breast cancer screening 
has been improved throughout the province, mental health 
programs expanded, a facts-of-life line established, a women's 
health centre opened at the Regina General Hospital, a 
Midwifery Advisory Council established. 
 
In the New Careers Corporation there's training available, some 
of it focused on single parents. There's new Future Skills 
training for women, a gender equity policy developed for all 
Saskatchewan schools, and additional support for Indian and 
Metis women who have had difficulty getting the resources that 
they need to deal with the problems in their communities. 
There's an improved system for collection of child support 
payments, increased responsibility for parents. 
 
And I would just like to say I think there's been a terrific job 
done right across government on improving quality of life for 
women in this province. 
 
In the area of the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat , we've 
been able to provide some resources to the Aboriginal Women's 
Council . We've created a framework for a partnership with 
Indian and Metis people across the province so that we can, in 
an equal way, decide how to solve the problems and take 
advantage of the opportunities that exist in those communities. 
 
We have agreements in the area of resources, land management,  

health, social services, education, recently on the gaming 
agreement. We have a full range of agreements that have been 
made that recognize their desire to be involved in management, 
in operations, and as well, in accountability for the programs 
being run. And I think it's a terrific step in the history of the 
province to undertake these developments. 
 
We are dealing with issues in urban centres. There's been the 
establishment of some urban bodies to coordinate services in 
Regina. We have the Aboriginal Human Service Co-op , the 
Regina Metis Management Authority , and there's also an urban 
treaty organization that's been established by the Touchwood 
File Hills Band to assist people, regardless of their band origin, 
who are in urban areas. 
 
There's been assistance to the Indian Federated College ; they've 
set up a new MBA (master of business administration) program 
reflecting their desire to get more involved in economic 
development and banking. And that is a program that everybody 
has very high expectations for. The Bank of Montreal is 
involved partially in the funding of that program. And that's just 
a little bit of the good news. 
 
We had a good news story yesterday. There was a health 
training agreement signed with the Sherbrooke health centre in 
Saskatoon, where aboriginal people will be training for new 
jobs in level 3 , 4 and 5 care. I think that this is a very positive 
step. The Sherbrooke community health centre has recognized 
that a substantial number of the people who receive health 
services in the province are Indian and Metis and that therefore 
they should be part of the people who are doing the care-giving. 
 
So this is a very good agreement, and it was exciting to be there 
and be part of that signing. We have an MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) signed with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council to 
allow participating in health care reform. And again this is a 
matter of getting the right kinds of services to the right place. 
 
Sask Property Management Corporation is another area that I 
have some responsibility for. I was down there this morning and 
met with staff and employees over a pancake breakfast. And I 
was very pleased of the good atmosphere that existed in the 
corporation. They've been making a lot of changes over the last 
few years in terms of tendering, procurement, making many 
steps to save taxpayers millions of dollars and to improve 
government credibility. 
 
One project I was involved in from the back benches involved 
using the skills of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) to help third-party organizations like universities, 
municipalities, school boards, health boards, to use the 
expertise of SPMC to improve their procurement practices and 
to enable them to take advantage of lower prices on a whole 
range of commodities that they have to have, and that includes 
vehicles and computers, whatever it is that they're involved in 
where they can help people save money. 
 
They are doing a lot of things to create jobs and stimulate the 
economy. They break up large orders into smaller orders so that  



February 22, 1995 

 
369 

Saskatchewan businesses can access them, and to help small 
business grow in Saskatchewan. 
 
We've speeded up being able to get money into the hands of 
suppliers so that they're not suffering cash flow problems from 
waiting for payment. We've taken some of the money-losing 
boondoggles of the previous government and turned them into 
viable operations. 
 
The Echo Valley Conference Centre reopened with a 
partnership between the Department of National Defence , New 
Careers Corporation , community and native groups, that 
brought the western Canada Sea Cadet training program to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This has done a lot for the community of Fort Qu'Appelle and 
has injected a lot of new activity. So it's gone from being a 
money loser to being a viable and contributing portion of the 
economy in that town. 
 
In the past two years SPMC has cut expenditures by 20 per cent 
or 33 million. And they've cut positions where they were not 
essential to the new style of operation there and saved again 
some money in doing that. 
 
They've encouraged departments to return surplus space and 
have saved five hundred thousand million in accommodation 
costs. And they've also branched out into working more with 
non-profit community organizations to help people who have 
difficulty getting space but have important services that they're 
delivering. 
 
As well, SPMC and myself were involved with other people in 
the Regina community in freeing up some land that had been 
sitting idle for some 40 years. It was heritage land and so it 
could only be used for particular, designated purposes, but 
there's now a garden — a community garden — on that land. 
And it was really good to go to the opening of that garden and 
see the retired farmers teaching the young school children how 
to garden, and just the whole community out in the garden 
together, rather than in their houses and isolated from each 
other. So it was a good . . . it's not only a good food project but 
it was a good community project. 
 
In terms of the commercial services of SPMC, their records 
management saves departments more than 1 million annually by 
removing inactive files from high-cost office space. And that's 
actually a service that we provide broader than within the 
government. And we also save another 2 million annually by 
coordinating voice and data services for the government. 
 
We're streamlining this corporation and changing its culture. 
And one of the things they've done, they're working quite 
aggressively on employment equity and they have improved 
both the ability of people to promote up through their system — 
people who may have started, for example, in the cleaning area 
and are now training to run the autoCAD system or some other 
aspects within it  and they've also improved greatly the 
opportunities for disabled and visible minorities. And I think  

SPMC has a better record actually than most other departments 
and Crowns in government at doing this, but I don't think have 
been recognized for it yet. So I'd like to recognize them for their 
efforts there. 
 
And I'm going to slide just briefly into maybe some not-so-good 
news. I found it passing strange, as the new minister of Liquor 
and Gaming, that the Leader of the Liberal Party, who had been 
so concerned about gaming that she had been out touring 
communities, had not taken advantage of even one question 
period to get on her feet and ask me a question about this 
pressing issue that had caused the need for a tour. And I just 
want to review a little bit of Liberal policy on gaming before I 
move into ours. 
 
On July 3 of 1992, the Liberal leader said that she was worried 
that first nations casinos would threaten provincial revenues, as 
well as racetracks , bingos, exhibition casinos, and video poker. 
So it was okay for all of the non-aboriginal community to make 
money off of this, but it was not okay for the first nations and 
aboriginal community to make money off of this. 
 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) Vice-chief 
Roy Bird responded by asking her to wake up and smell the 
coffee, and support Indian people instead of working against 
them. 
 
Then she told us to hurry up and start the VLT program. In the 
estimates debate on June 1, 1993, this is direct quote: 
 
 Mr. Minister, video lottery terminals have been the 

subject of much discussion even here and for some time 
now in the province. In fact, the province has probably 
foregone 50 to $60 million in revenue while the 
discussions have been going on. 

 
So her policy in June of 1993 was hurry up and get the VLTs in. 
 
In a letter to hotel owners, dated March 7, 1994, the Liberal 
leader endorsed the Saskatchewan video lottery program and 
accepted the government's policy reasons that there is a role for 
video lottery terminals. Direct quote again: 
 
 There is a role for video lottery terminals to play in 

recirculating income through hotels and lounges which 
have been hard hit during the past few years of 
recession. 

 
Again a pretty clear statement in support of the very reason why 
we put them in, is that they were having difficulties and wanted 
to participate in a video lottery terminal program. 
 
In May 1994 she changed her mind, flip-flopped, and attacked 
VLTs for sucking money out of the public's pockets. On 
November 9, 1994 she called on the government to cease casino 
expansion in Saskatchewan and said, we don't need a 
referendum on this issue. 
 



February 22, 1995 

 
370 

The Liberal leader has proven time and time again that she 
either has no policy, or she is duplicitous , or has a darn short 
memory, is my thought after hearing a lot of the debate this 
year. This is what Darryl Mills , her communication assistant, 
said on January 8, 1995, quote: we're not committed firmly to 
any position. 
 
In the recent discussion on VLT revenues, I am astounded by 
someone who feels that they have some ability to improve the 
economy and create jobs when they don't even understand that 
obviously what you are going to make at any particular terminal 
depends on the local market. You can't have a machine in a 
small town, in a small market, making the same as a machine in 
Edmonton. It's just not sensible to think that. And that she 
would even compare our revenues to those other places shows 
an astounding lack of knowledge about market as it relates to 
business. 
 
We have estimated our figure, our $508 average figure, by 
taking total sales minus commissions minus operating expenses 
and coming out with an average of 508. We have above-average 
sites that make up to a thousand dollars, and in a very few 
places, a little bit more. And below-average sites, about a 
hundred and fifty, that make 2 to 400, and some that make very 
little at all. The figures that were being used for Manitoba and 
Alberta were before commissions and expenses and reflected 
machines in much larger markets. 
 
The VLT program was not merely for budget reasons. We didn't 
go to the community and say, would you like VLTs? The 
community came to us and said, we need these in order to 
remain competitive with people on our other three borders. So 
this was a response to rural communities and rural hoteliers. 
And if the Leader of the Liberal Party wants to debate that, 
that's probably where she should take that debate, is where the 
source was of the decision to do it. 
 
I find that her research facts and statistics are not her strong 
point and I could have a lot more respect for the arguments if 
there was some rigour that went into the developing of these 
positions, not merely jumping on any available isolated number 
on any given day. 
 
I want to review our gaming policy because people have said 
that in this House that we don't have one, and I can assure them 
that we do because I was involved in its development over a 
very lengthy period. The policy is, Mr. Speaker, to limit as 
much as is possible. That's why we've placed a cap on VLTs 
and that's why we've signed an agreement on casinos that limits 
the amount of expansion that can take place and requires market 
study. 
 
We have age-restricted sites so that children are not being 
encouraged to take part in this activity until they've reached an 
age of consent, where we all agree that they have the judgement 
to decide whether to drink and whether to do a number of other 
things. 
 
We have tried to improve control in regulation and I think that's  

improved a great deal with this recent agreement. I'll go into it a 
little more because I want to go through the points 
systematically. We made a commitment to protect charitable 
revenues, to ensure the public use of funds versus just an 
individually-based community or private use of funds, based on 
a principle of revenue sharing, which is always the principle 
that has driven the Consolidated Fund and the use of its 
revenues. 
 
We made a commitment to deal with the problems and have the 
best addiction program in Canada to deal with these issues, 
which complements programing in other health areas such as 
alcohol and drug, and other problems that exist. And we 
committed ourselves to involving all people in the benefit, not 
just some people. 
 
(1600) 
 
That's the broad outline of the policy, but I want to go into a 
little more detail here because I think it's important to 
understand how we've arrived where we are. Most of the 
pressure for gaming in Canada and Saskatchewan historically 
came from religious and charitable groups who have received 
the majority of the benefits. 
 
In 1969 the federal Liberal government indicated in the 
Criminal Code that governments must be responsible for 
controlling and regulating gaming in Canada and the provinces. 
And the reason they did this was a good one — they did it to 
prevent criminal activity that built up around gaming in the 
United States. 
 
In the U.S. the money went into private pockets and was largely 
unregulated. The Canadian government also based their 
decision on the experience with Prohibition. In 1969 
Saskatchewan began with horse-racing . In the 1970s lotteries 
and casinos got going, bingo commercialization occurred in the 
1980s, and VLTs, and so far one new casino, in the '90s. 
 
In no instance was the government the proponent. The VLTs 
were requested by hoteliers in small towns to stem the flow of 
dollars over the border, and based on a pilot project in the 
south-west it was found that their concerns were true, and once 
the border hotels had this provision the other hotels in the 
province wanted it also. And we've had to turn down requests 
so far from Legions, Elks, Anavets and other service clubs who 
are also interested. But because we've capped the number of 
machines, we now will be spending some time considering how 
to fairly distribute within the framework of that cap. 
 
The one new casino in Regina was based on the FSIN coming 
forward and indicating their interest as a proponent in these 
developments. Enforcement was a big issue. When White Bear 
opened, they opened without band approval, without FSIN 
approval, or provincial approval. 
 
They also opened with illegal machines. Now an illegal 
machine in the gaming field is a machine that does not 
necessarily deliver the odds that it promises, so that a person  



February 22, 1995 

 
371 

could be putting a lot of money in there without any hope of 
actually winning as the machine is obligated to deliver. 
 
Due to the provincial responsibilities to enforce the Criminal 
Code, the RCMP made the decision that they must enforce the 
Criminal Code to be fair to all citizens. And this was a very 
potentially explosive situation here. 
 
In the new agreement, the FSIN has been delegated authority 
from the province to set up an Indian licensing authority to 
control and regulate charitable gaming on reserves, thereby 
improving control and regulation. And in return they've agreed 
to recognize our authority for enforcement of the Criminal 
Code. And we think it's important to create this jurisdictional 
unity in the enforcement of laws in the province. 
 
We've agreed to continue to take up the discussion of 
jurisdiction with the federal government in Ottawa. But 
although jurisdiction and inherent right was part of the red book 
during the election, they seem reluctant to act on the promises 
that were made under that election platform. 
 
As far as use of revenues go , the province and community 
charities currently benefit by about 150 million in gaming 
revenues from lotteries, bingos, break-opens, VLTs, and already 
existing casinos. 
 
The main change that's taken place lately in our policy is for the 
first time in history first nations people have access to the same 
money that other people in Saskatchewan have always had 
access to for the past 29 years. And without these new 
revenues, the groups who have already participated in gaming 
revenues would have to give up some of their revenues. But the 
aboriginal people have said that they will create their own 
opportunities there, much on the scale of the exhibition 
association developments that we've already had. 
 
The other developments that have happened, as far as the first 
nations people go, is that the chiefs voted 100 per cent in favour 
of this agreement. And it's a recognition that they also want to 
have more licensing and regulatory control over even the 
charitable gaming that now exists on reserves. 
 
As minister responsible for Indian and Metis Affairs, I'm also 
working with first nations on implementing inherent rights, 
self-government , and treaty land entitlements. As I mentioned 
earlier, in the section on SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and 
Metis Affairs Secretariat), we're negotiating agreements on 
justice, child care, social services, health, education, resource 
co-management, fishing, hunting, trapping, economic 
development, and finance. 
 
So for people who say that the FSIN is hung up on gaming, it is 
a very small part of their priorities, and it's only one particular 
area that needed to be dealt with. And they've dealt with it. I 
consider my pressing responsibilities to be with many of the 
other parts of their agenda. 
 
I'm pleased to speak in unity with the people of Saskatchewan  

on their priorities. I think people want financial responsibility. I 
think they want a caring and compassionate government. I think 
they want fairness and I think they want balance. They want a 
holistic and a planned approach. And I'm very pleased to speak 
in support of this budget today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's nice today to 
have the opportunity to enter into the budget reply. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, here the half-truth budget from the half-
story government. And I'm not talking about the storeys in the 
building. The story they tell is the story of grand and wonderful 
things until, as one article put it in one of the papers, you read 
the fine print. And in Saskatchewan we have the fine print 
contract in our budget. 
 
Fine print tells you that this government has balanced its budget 
on the backs of the people, downloading to the RMs (rural 
municipality), school units, and property taxpayers throughout 
this province. Downloading in the budget that came in last year, 
the one that people have forgotten about, but was written in 
such a fashion that it takes its effect now. That's where the 
people in the school units are finding that they're now going to 
have to try to balance their budget with higher taxes at the local 
level. 
 
Even with the freeze that we have this year, there's absolutely 
no doubt that if something doesn't change we will have to see a 
dramatic increase in local taxation. Because a freeze, meaning 
no cut-backs or no less money, does not take into account the 
escalating costs of utility bills, the escalating costs of teachers' 
salaries, and the escalating costs of all of those benefits that go 
to the employees that grow older and have seniority benefits 
coming to them throughout the system. 
 
And so any time that you have something breaking even, you 
lose. You have to have built into it an escalating factor that 
takes into account the ongoing increase of costs of operation. 
 
I would like to reiterate some of the points that were made by 
our leader, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, in my 
discussion about this year's budget. 
 
I think it is appropriate that we do congratulate the government 
for balancing the budget. That is a good thing to do, and it's 
nice to see that we have done that part of it. Unfortunately in 
government there are choices that have not been taken. There 
are always choices in government of doing it one way or doing 
it another way. 
 
I think some of the folks used to say there's more ways to kill a 
cat than to choke it with butter. I probably have said that here 
myself. And the reality of life is that you can run over it with a 
truck or shoot it with a gun, or a whole lot of other things. 
 
Well budgets are like that too. You can balance them one way 
or you can balance them the other way. And we've got some  



February 22, 1995 

 
372 

tremendous opportunities in this day of our society to compare 
the different approaches. 
 
We have Alberta to the west of us doing things in a totally 
opposite way that the province of Saskatchewan is doing. We've 
got eastern provinces starting to balance their budgets. I'm not 
sure if it's the trendy thing to do or if the financial community 
has finally just said, we're drawing the line in the sand and 
you're either going to balance your budgets or we're going to 
cause you big time trouble, trouble you can't afford to have. I'm 
not sure exactly where the motivation is coming from, but it is a 
trend for everybody to try to balance their budgets. 
 
So the question then is, how do we balance our budget. What 
techniques, what methods, will we use? 
 
Well in Saskatchewan it's unfortunate but here we have a 
government that balances the budget basically on the backs of 
the farmers of Saskatchewan; $188 million worth of GRIP 
money they take out of the farmers that was promised to them. 
Then they've got $119 million surplus. That to me is a $69 
million difference, Mr. Speaker, a $69 million difference which 
says they should have even had a bigger surplus if they'd have 
done their mathematics and run this province properly. 
 
They took it out of the backs of agriculture and out of the backs 
of rural communities; broke their spirit and destroyed any 
potential prosperity in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And what happens, Mr. Speaker, now, if the court challenges 
that are before the courts right now, happen to be successful? 
What happens if those people who are challenging the breaking 
of the GRIP contracts find themselves in a position of winning 
and this government is forced to cough up their $188 million 
and pay all the farmers. Where will the money come from then? 
Where will the budget have gone to then? 
 
What kind of calamity and disaster will we have on our hands if 
a government is forced to pay up the money that they have 
taken out of agriculture. It will break the bank of Saskatchewan. 
Not only that, we then have lost several hundreds of millions of 
dollars that the federal government would have put up as a 
balance against the GRIP contracts. 
 
How then, if that challenge is successful, will the province go to 
the federal government and ask for that money back. Do you 
think the feds are going to bother listening? Or will somebody 
have to take them to court? Then I suspect it will be the 
Government of Saskatchewan having to take the federal 
government to court to get the money back that they threw 
away. It's an absolute recipe for disaster, to allow the breaking 
of contracts to balance your budget. 
 
We've done this on the backs of taxpayers and on the backs of 
people who should have had increases in their wages. I can 
think of the judges' contracts, I can think of all kinds of people 
who have been duped into thinking that they've had to have 
their way of life frozen in order to benefit the needs of this 
government. 

Well we have the examples of people in Alberta, people in New 
Brunswick, finding other ways to solve their problems by 
building job bases and expanding their tax bases and getting 
money from development and organization. 
 
This budget has come at a tremendous cost, Mr. Speaker, to 
many families, small businesses, and communities. One of the 
most devastating areas where the burden has been borne by 
rural Saskatchewan is of course in the area of health care — 
almost a cut, slash, and burn approach to rural health care. The 
only thing they haven't done yet is burn down our rural 
hospitals that stand partly used, three-quarters empty, and not 
benefiting society as they should be and could be. I almost hate 
to say it for fear I'll give them the idea. 
 
To just give a few examples of how people in communities 
from my area have been hit, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you 
about the Prairie Health Care Centre in Cabri, where the need 
for two acute care beds has become so absolutely imperative 
that the people in that community have started a letter 
campaign. They have started sending letters to their MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and their MP (Member 
of Parliament). 
 
My colleague from Morse and I have both been receiving many, 
many, many of these documents from people requesting our 
assistance to try to help them to once again get a rating of acute 
care beds for their hospital. It's absolutely essential for that 
community, Mr. Speaker, because they lie in a geographic 
position such as many communities never ever understand: 35 
miles from Swift Current, 35 miles from Leader, 35 miles from 
Gull Lake, and 35 miles from everywhere. And there you are 
with a nice new hospital that was an integrated facility, 
everything set up, everything built, everything paid for, 
administration in place, doctor in place, a lot of work gone into 
a pharmaceutical structure so that they could get drugs 
administered in that town to their patients. 
 
Everything in place and then a government comes along and 
shuts the whole thing down, destroys the whole concept of 
organization there. They end up with the care home part of it 
operating, the beds for health care gone, and the doctor in total 
disarray, the prescription drug program totally up in the air, and 
no funding for emergencies or for people to come home from 
— say — hospitals like Swift Current where they may have had 
a major operation. People who are being sent home, as you've 
heard earlier today from some of my colleagues, with major 
operations, needing a place to rest for three or four days, being 
sent home to take a chance on infections setting in. And death 
is the only true companion that they can count on. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a despicable act, to be doing this kind of 
thing to rural Saskatchewan. And a town like Cabri does not 
deserve to be treated this way. They need their special care 
beds. And I think if the Minister of Health were the 
compassionate man that he tries to portray himself as being, 
then he would get out there and take a look firsthand and talk to  



February 22, 1995 

 
373 

those people and reinstate at least one or two special beds so 
that they could take care of their people and not give them a 
death sentence. 
 
I want to talk, Mr. Speaker, for a minute about what used to be 
the Gull Lake Union Hospital; now it's a wellness centre. And 
it's drastically under-utilized, Mr. Speaker. The reality is that 
some people just simply call it a bandage station because that's 
about what it really has become. Certainly it's much more to 
people who have a very immediate emergency because the 
doctor there has been a wonderful person and a wonderful 
community supporter and has given very, very magnificently of 
himself to stand with the people in that community and give 
them whatever service that he possibly can to help to make their 
lives better and to save lives. 
 
But he doesn't have much to work with, Mr. Speaker. He's got a 
building. I believe there was $700,000 spent on the upgrading 
of that building, put into just tremendous shape, all redone, 
fixed up, medically sound. Heat is good. The logistics of the 
operation are such that the nurses' station is properly located 
and that the workload could be distributed throughout the 
centre without too much trouble, as compared to some of the 
older buildings. It was just done very well. 
 
And there it is with only a couple of rooms being used, and the 
rest of the hallways stand there quiet and empty. And we have 
several people in our community and the surrounding area with 
Alzheimer's disease. We have people who are terminally ill, 
who are at home in their own homes with no place to go, not 
even for a couple of days to give their families a rest while 
someone would take care of these folks for a little while. 
 
It's an absolute disgrace that we treat our people in this way. 
And I'm thinking of specific examples that could make tears 
come to your eyes, Mr. Speaker, if you knew about their 
circumstance and how these people in these families are 
suffering. 
 
And why? Because we haven't got the intelligence to use a 
modern, new building that stands in the middle of our town, 
heated, lighted, but empty. All we need is a few nurses, and 
away we go. Everything else is there. But this government 
claims that they were going to close 52 hospitals to make some 
money for the province. And yet the cost of health care has 
gone up in Saskatchewan. It didn't go down. It's not cut the 
budget. It's not reduced the spending. It's transferred the money 
to somewhere else because now all of a sudden the city 
hospitals that were scheduled to be shut down before have to be 
open because they've got more patients than they can handle. 
 
Well what a revelation. If you shut down all the country 
hospitals and the people have no place else to go to get their 
health care, where were they going to go but to the cities? They 
were bound to stand in line and congest the system in the cities. 
It had to happen, just like we said it would. 
 
And the real cruncher comes in my area of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, when you watch people standing in line to get to  

Medicine Hat for health care because there you at least can get 
in the door and get your operation long before you can ever get 
into the line-ups in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I could give you specific, individual people's names, Mr. 
Speaker, of those folks who go to Medicine Hat as an 
alternative to anything we have in Saskatchewan — not because 
the doctors are better there, but because they're available there. 
You don't have to wait for 18 month with a cancer growth; you 
can get it taken out before it kills you. 
 
And that's the difference, Mr. Speaker, and that's the tragedy of 
the life story of rural people in the area that I come from. 
 
I'd like to talk to you, Mr. Speaker, for a minute about Maple 
Creek and the needs of a new special care home down there. Its 
current facilities are old, badly deteriorating buildings. Put very 
bluntly, that's exactly what they are. These buildings, the 
Minister of Health may want to come out and take a look at. 
Some of them are over 30 years old. Some of them are falling 
apart. Renovations would cost as much as building a new 
building, I'm told, for the one. And yet those people and their 
needs are ignored by this government. 
 
And I sometimes wonder if they don't keep this high education 
and health tax, the PST (provincial sales tax) in place with the 
hopes that all of the people from Maple Creek will go to 
Alberta and then they won't have to bother spending any money 
to fix the special care home or the hospital because there'll be 
nobody left to use it. 
 
But realistically, Mr. Speaker, those people can't all leave, and 
they won't all leave. They're tough pioneer-spirited people; 
they've done without a lot in life, and they'll hang in there. And 
they don't deserve to be treated this way. They don't deserve to 
be given the short end of the monetary balance of the budget. 
 
And if this government were truly cutting costs, those people in 
that area would be the first ones to say, we'll get on the 
bandwagon with you, and we'll share the burden. These are the 
salt of the earth kind of people. Not one of them would say, I 
won't pull up my end of this and do my share. They'll all go 
along with you the extra mile. 
 
But that's not what's happening. It's not cut back for everybody. 
It's take my share and give it to somebody else in the cities. And 
that's not fair, and that's not right. And they don't like that, and 
they're not going to accept that, and they're going to ask people 
like me to come here and tell you so. 
 
In so many ways, Mr. Speaker, the suffering in rural 
Saskatchewan has been totally unnecessary because it hasn't 
helped to contribute one thin dime to the economy of this 
province or to the debts or the deficits or whatever else you 
want to talk about. It's all been a misguided use of choices. 
 
While these communities have borne the hardships, the families 
of Crown corporations have been getting fatter with the money 
that's been squeezed out of the citizens of our province. The  



February 22, 1995 

 
374 

family of Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, with higher utility 
rates in power and gas and telephones and everything we use, 
bloated so that the debts and the deficits could be met under a 
guise of them using those monies to balance our budget . . . sit 
there in great reservoirs now swelling and waiting for an 
election time goody. And what do the people of the rural 
communities get? They get told, go to Alberta; get your medical 
service there. 
 
It cannot be understated that this balanced budget came about in 
a great measure by a combination of almost unbelievable good 
luck and unbelievable cruelty. The cruelty I've talked about. The 
good luck of course has to be the unprecedented boom in the 
gas and oil sector. It has happened a couple of other times in the 
cycles over the years. But a record of $202.1 million in sales of 
lease rights was recorded last year. 
 
And where did that money come from? Which part of the 
province and where in the province were those land sales taking 
place at? Not in Regina and not in Saskatoon. It happened in 
rural Saskatchewan, and to a large part it happened in south-
west Saskatchewan. Big oil companies, little oil companies, 
medium-sized oil companies, gas companies came into our 
province and bought up those leases by the millions of dollars 
worth to explore for gas and oil. Millions of dollars worth of 
money over and above anybody's wildest expectations in last 
year's budget came out of that area of the province. 
 
And does this government consider for one minute that some of 
that money should go back to those people or to those areas? 
Absolutely not. It's not recorded in their actions at least. Where 
is this money? It's gone to the general revenue again where 
choices are made of where to spend it. 
 
But those choices aren't to build the roads back in south-west 
Saskatchewan so that the trucks can get in there to do the work. 
It's not to put a hospital in Gull Lake with an acute care bed or 
one in Cabri so that the people that work on the rigs, if they 
happen to get a leg cut off in the middle of the night, have a 
place to go to get some medical attention. Ah no, we'll build 
that in Regina so that by the time you got there from Gull Lake 
or Maple Creek, you'd have been a long time dead. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that this government builds a 
budget this year based on that phenomenal one-year income 
from the oil patch and the gas sector, and that whole thing is 
about to blow up like a gas line with a leak and a match lit 
beside it because the reality is the price of gas has gone down 
and oil is not too stable. And the oil and gas companies are 
simply not buying leases any more this year. In fact the 
established oil companies and the established gas companies 
are about to start to lay people off is the rumour mill out in our 
area. And if that happens, this province is going to be in some 
dire circumstances because our budget will no longer be 
balanceable because it's been balanced on projections that are 
not reality in the real world. 
 
We have other examples of where money comes from, Mr. 
Speaker. Cameco for example with net earnings of $81.1 billion  

also posted one of its most profitable years ever. And I wish 
them luck; I hope they can do it again next year. But the reality 
is that normally when you have a boom, you also have a 
backing off period. And I don't think this government has 
prepared for that. I don't think they've done anything to 
realistically determine what they're going to have available in 
this budget for next year or for this year. 
 
The increased prices, Mr. Speaker, for the sales of canola, 
wheat, and other agricultural sector products has greatly 
improved the outlook for the agricultural sector in our province. 
And on paper it looks pretty good, and I'm happy about that. 
Coming from the farm sector, I recognize it as a very positive 
thing. 
 
But I've got to caution the government, Mr. Speaker, because 
the reality is that an awful lot of farmers are still financially 
behind — financially behind the old eight ball yet because the 
debts that they incurred through the dirty '80s which my dad, 
incidentally who's still living and lived through the dirty '30s . . 
. says the dirty '80s were worse than the dirty '30s for farmers 
and for people in the agricultural sector. I'm not going to go into 
his delivery of reasons why that is true; it's sufficient to say that 
that's his opinion. I happen to share that. 
 
But the reality is that even with the upswing in commodity 
prices we have lots of farmers who are still in serious, serious 
financial trouble. I spoke with a lawyer in our community just 
the other day, and he told me that every week three to four 
farmers come through their office asking for help, legal help, to 
take them through financial difficulty. This financial difficulty 
can end up being with negotiations with ACS (Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), Farm Credit Corporation, 
or could end up in bankruptcy. 
 
Three to four farm families out of that corner of the province, in 
one law firm, coming for financial assistance to try to get out of 
trouble, using the legal system  that tells me that the farm 
crisis is a long ways from over. And commodity prices simply 
haven't done everything that needs to be done out in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you tell those people that taking away $30,000 worth of 
GRIP money over the last two years isn't significant. They're 
just simply not going to listen to that, and they're not going to 
believe it because they live the reality of having to go broke and 
having to hire lawyers to fend off their creditors. 
 
Now these factors, Mr. Speaker, along with others, led to a 
temporary boom that led to a deficit reduction. Unfortunately 
the government did not see fit to share its good fortune with 
farmers. They played a shell game with the GRIP money. They 
cut programs, and they increased taxes on inputs. And the farm 
sector, in reality, might find itself worse off than ever if the 
commodity price markets happen to slump. 
 
(1630) 
 
The other terrible thing about this is the letting off of the feds  



February 22, 1995 

 
375 

with the money that they owe to Saskatchewan farmers through 
that program. How often do you get 3 or $400 million from the 
federal government offered to the farmers of Saskatchewan 
when you had them tied in with a contract? You let them off the 
hook, and you let the money get away. And that disastrous 
result will spin through our economy for a long, long time. 
 
The cost of inputs in agriculture continue to escalate because of 
the increased prices of gas and oil and power. The tax 
downloading to property tax that I talked about a few minutes 
ago hits farmers directly square between the eyes. There's just 
no getting away from it. The cost of producing a bushel of 
anything or any kind of an agricultural unit of production . . . 
the cost of producing it has gone up, dramatically up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the increased commodity prices that we are 
getting simply is not enough to cover all of that. And so rural 
Saskatchewan finds itself in the same dilemma that it was in in 
the late 1980s: cash poor and debt high. Indeed if the world 
agricultural markets, again surely by luck, hadn't been 
favourable to farmers in Saskatchewan's agricultural sector, 
then we would've been in serious, serious trouble. And many 
farmers, I believe, would have been wiped out by this 
government's total mismanagement of the agricultural sector 
and the agricultural GRIP program. 
 
Instead of patting themselves on the back, Mr. Speaker, for 
these windfalls and acts of cruelty, the NDP should have been 
addressing the structural problems in government that lead to 
debts and deficit. They speak with scorn for the spending habits 
of the 1980s when you have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that in 
good times government should spend more wisely and put some 
aside. That's what we should be doing now. 
 
But in bad times governments must spend money to offset the 
economic shock to people. And that's what happened in every 
jurisdiction in North America and in fact, I believe, in the 
industrialized world through the 1980s. The reality of life was 
that every jurisdiction ran deficits to try to ease the shock to 
their own people of an economy in the world that was going 
basically down the tubes. We didn't do too bad considering 
what happened to some other jurisdictions, but we could have 
done better. There's always choices that could have been made 
that could have been better. But the reality is that we were in no 
different shape than anybody else. 
 
Yet this government, since they took office, 18 of the 23 
government departments have increased their spending. They 
talked about the wrong attitude towards spending of the past 
administration in the 1980s. And yet when they came to power, 
they said they were going to cure all of these problems. So what 
did they do? Instead of cutting government, instead of reducing 
spending, they increased the cost of 18 out of the 20 
departments. Unbelievable. 
 
With such a great example sitting right to the west of us of how 
you can do things differently, they choose to plough on steadily 
by increasing spending and increasing taxes to pay for it. And 
they wonder why our job base shrivels up and dies. 

How are they any different than those governments that they so 
glibly criticize, Mr. Speaker? They're not really. They've only 
managed to live in a time when commodity prices have gone 
up, and they've lucked into it. Well they've done little to reduce 
spending levels from that of the 1970s and '80s. There is one 
major difference between that era and this. The NDP have 
institutionalized almost unbelievably high levels of taxation. 
 
And let's talk a little bit about the facts of the taxation that the 
people of this province are having to bear. Fact — 10 per cent 
rise in income tax. Fact — 20 per cent rise in telephone rates. 
Fact — 17 per cent rise in the price of gasoline. Fact — 27 per 
cent increase in natural gas rates with a .06 decrease just a little 
while ago, applauded by the government as a great thing at a 
time when the natural gas price itself, at the commodity level, 
had dropped 40 per cent. And they give us relief of .06. 
Absolutely unbelievable. Fact — most astonishingly, a 29 per 
cent rise in the provincial sales tax from the man who 
campaigned on doing away with the PST. 
 
I remember it well, on the radio and the TV — no more PST. 
Well what a hollow ring that has to it today, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP are so fixated on their appetite for big government that 
they would rather crush thousands of families across this 
province than reduce a single government department or 
privatize a single Crown. They do this even in the presence of 
more positive examples, either from the east or the west of us in 
our own country. And lots of other examples if you want to go 
further abroad. 
 
The government has heard about the advantageous position of 
the Alberta model, the numerous times already this session, Mr. 
Speaker, and the public is demanding to hear more and more 
about what's going on in Alberta and what could be done here 
to emulate their very positive approach. 
 
The government's legions of expensive political assistants have 
done their best to paint Ralph Klein as some sort of a Canadian 
Darth Vader. They tried to convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that this is a bad guy. In reality, Mr. Speaker, this 
man is a legend in his own time. He's a hero at home and he's a 
hero abroad. He's a hero in Ottawa and he's a politician's 
politician. And he's just a great example for the province of 
Saskatchewan to follow. 
 
While the Premier and the Finance minister may want to try to 
hide behind ideology and rhetoric, they can't hide from the hard, 
cold facts — the Alberta growth and success story. Alberta 
produces more jobs in a year than we could ever dream of, and 
we lose a thousand jobs over the past three and a half years — 
30,000 jobs in Alberta in one year . . . and we get? We get to 
watch them fly by. With the new reduced fuel tax on airplanes, 
we helped to contribute so that they can load up more plane 
loads of our young people and fly them to Calgary. That's what 
we get in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've heard time and time again from the economists that the 
government's high tax policy costs jobs. We all know it does 
because quite frankly nobody's going to stop in this province  



February 22, 1995 

 
376 

when they see that they can go to Alberta and operate with so 
much less cost in taxation. 
 
The government doesn't deny this, and even their best figures 
show that the province did lose a thousand jobs since 1991. 
They try to paint a good picture on it by coming up with all 
kinds of facts and figures, but the reality is that Klein's 
Conservative government in Alberta has created 80,000 new 
jobs over that time span. New business, incorporations in 
Alberta jumped 21 per cent in 1994. With a consequent rise in 
revenue from corporate income tax, the province finds itself 
making more money now without reducing taxes. It's an 
economy with a tax base, and it works, Mr. Speaker. Go to 
Alberta and find out. Alberta's GPP (gross provincial product) 
has been over 3 per cent for the last two years. That's a sign of 
success. 
 
Here the government talks about dramatic turnaround. But 
unless you are a bureaucrat, you're not likely to have noticed 
any difference, Mr. Speaker, because only the bureaucrats have 
gotten higher wages and better positions. The rest of our society 
has been told they're on freeze. 
 
One place where the difference between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan is noticed is in my home riding and throughout 
the south-west. Ironically this area has been the centre of much 
of the government's windfall in the oil and gas revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we feel that we have helped by good fortune of 
living in the south-west where the oil and gas industry has done 
well, and by good fortune that agriculture is picking up. But we 
feel that we have been slighted, abused, used, and ignored by 
this government. So much of the wealth of this province has 
come from our area and none of it is finding its way back home. 
Yet where the fruits of prosperity have come from, this 
government continues to tax in such a way to drive businesses 
out of the area. 
 
Just the other night there was a TV clip about the town of 
Maple Creek. The mayor, Doug McAlister, was on the 
television and he told the story about how people are leaving 
the town of Maple Creek and about how the businesses are 
closing, up and down the streets in that town. 
 
One major factor is identified by the mayor — taxation, and the 
difference in taxation between our province and Alberta, most 
specifically the 9 per cent sales tax in this case. 
 
The hon. member from Morse has already spoken as to the 
damage that the high PST has done to the economy of the 
western part of the province, Mr. Speaker. That member quoted 
from the February 13 edition of the Leader-Post where Dale 
Eisler explained the plight of the people from the Swift Current 
area. And certainly those of us in our constituency fall right into 
that explanation and the things that were said by the member 
from Morse. 
 
What was most amazing about the article was that the response 
of the member from Swift Current was that he said that the PST  

problem was just a convenient excuse for not being good 
business people. 
 
I dare say, Mr. Speaker, that this gentleman must not plan on 
running for politics ever again in his life, especially in Swift 
Current. Because the business people in Swift Current are 
excellent businessmen and businesswomen. They've done a 
phenomenal job of managing to keep any kind of business 
going in light of the unfair competition that they face in terms 
of having these higher taxes placed on them. 
 
Not just the 9 per cent that is directly competitive that allows 
people a 9 per cent advantage to go to Alberta, but the higher 
utility costs, the higher taxes all across the board. The income 
tax, the whole thing — it's all built into the circle. Every dollar 
that a businessman earns is taxed to death in Swift Current, far 
beyond that which happens in Alberta. 
 
So his costs of production, his cost of keeping his business 
open, the downloading of the business taxes from the provincial 
government, the downloading on education that costs local 
taxpayers to have to pay more, all of that has to build into an 
escalated part of the sales price of any item that any 
businessman sells. 
 
Anybody that retails will tell you all of his costs have to be built 
into it before there's any profit. And when there's no more 
profit, you go broke. Those people cannot compete on a fair 
level playing field with Alberta, and yet they still stay there and 
survive. It's a miracle. It's not that they're bad business people; it 
is a miracle that they survive at all. 
 
And the member from Swift Current ought to shake his head. 
But it is typical of this government's insensitive attitude, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The member from Swift Current also responded to the latest 
round of complaints from the area's business people by coming 
out with some incredible figures that proved that the PST 
problem in south-west Saskatchewan didn't exist at all. 
 
Meanwhile, another Swift Current business man, Marvin 
Shatosky, stays afloat by renting U-hauls to people going to 
Alberta on shopping trips. The MLA from Swift Current can 
produce all kinds of studies and he can do that all he likes. The 
people of south-west Saskatchewan can see the truth before 
their eyes in the form of empty U-hauls heading west and full 
ones heading home from Medicine Hat and other towns in 
Alberta. 
 
The unfavourable comparisons between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan government policies don't end with taxation, Mr. 
Speaker. Labour policies also differ between the two provinces. 
Just as we warned, this province's new labour legislation is 
having a serious effect on the hiring practices in our oil patch. 
A lot of work going to Alberta contractors who do not pay taxes 
in our area or in our province provide jobs for Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 



February 22, 1995 

 
377 

It is not uncommon to hear of Saskatchewan boys applying in 
Medicine Hat so that they can be shipped back home to work in 
the oil fields. Mr. Speaker, think about it. You have to go to 
Medicine Hat to get a job so that you can get in a truck to drive 
back to Saskatchewan to work all day, and then at night you 
may go back to Medicine Hat or some other place. 
 
It is bad enough that the government is killing jobs with high 
taxation. It is intolerable that they are also doing it with ill-
timed labour legislation, Mr. Speaker. The south-west may have 
particular problems with the government's short-sighted 
taxation and labour policies, but all of Saskatchewan people are 
groaning under this tremendous burden. Many of our 
detrimental effects remain in spite of hard-earned concessions 
recently gained by the small-business community. And of 
course there are some small concessions. There's a little bit of 
tax relief if you're in the manufacturing industry. But reality 
here, Mr. Speaker, is compared to this: the government has 
taken away the loaf and they're throwing back the crumbs. 
 
The legislation still makes it more difficult, expensive, and 
complex for employers to deal with part-time employees. That's 
discouraging employers from hiring. That's the reality of the 
labour Bills that we passed and The Labour Standards Act. 
 
The government's arbitrary benchmarks on the size of business 
covered by The Labour Standards Act have created confusion 
and unfairness in the market-place. An example, whether or not 
franchises are covered. For example, a lot of people simply 
don't know how these Bills and how these laws are going to 
affect people. If you have three people sharing one job, are 
those people counted as three people in that job place, or is it 
counted by the job? People aren't taking any chances because 
they are confused and they don't know, so they're not expanding 
and they simply aren't employing more people for fear that they 
will get past these benchmarks that have been set. 
 
Benchmarks also encourage employers to stay under that 
benchmark, Mr. Speaker. This again discourages people from 
hiring. Simply, they won't take the chance on getting caught in a 
more expensive area of the legislation. 
 
But where The Labour Standards Act is simply ill-timed and 
poorly written, The Trade Union Act amendments are 
destructive to the labour market in this province. 
Communications between employers and employees is 
inhibited. New areas of cost and resentment from employers 
who are expected to pay for all of the benefits to striking 
employers is a serious problem. Taking away management 
negotiation rights, such as the ability to call for a final offer 
vote, bothers people. New, Draconian penalties that can be 
imposed on the basis of little more than hearsay, Mr. Speaker, is 
totally unacceptable and will drive people out of our province if 
they have the choice to take their business elsewhere. 
 
Throwing up time constraints to technological development, 
again unacceptable when you have alternatives like Alberta or 
Manitoba or somewhere else to go. Inhibit the competitiveness 
of Saskatchewan business by severely restricting their ability to  

tender out services. 
 
And the reality here, Mr. Speaker, is that we have union-
preference tendering going on in our province. And it's got all 
of our rural municipalities and urban municipalities absolutely 
upset and worried about the extra costs that they will have to 
pass on to their taxpayers. 
 
We have certification and decertification made even more 
undemocratically than ever before. These are simply 
unacceptable to people who might spend their money 
developing businesses in our province. And they simply won't 
stop here if they've got the choice to go to Alberta or 
somewhere else. 
 
That's why Alberta is growing and we are stagnant — a stagnant 
budget in an isolated state. That's what we are in Saskatchewan. 
We are a province isolated from the world, with Draconian 
legislation that makes us unusual and unacceptable to the 
outside business world. 
 
In the February 20 edition of the Leader-Post, Randy Burton 
outlines how Saskatchewan is lagging behind other provinces in 
the competition to attract jobs. Mr. Speaker, Burton notes that 
in the race with New Brunswick and Manitoba to attract new 
call centres, Saskatchewan is getting shellacked. I've got a copy 
of the article with me here, but Burton says: 
 
 Over the . . . (last) several years, Manitoba has seen 

seven or eight major new companies established, 
creating more than 2,500 new jobs in call centres, 
service centres and marketing companies that depend on 
telephone service. 

 
 By comparison, Saskatchewan has attracted one 

company, a Sears Canada call centre, which produced 
600 jobs . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, and the public will remember that very major 
concessions had to be made to that company in order to get 
them here in the first place. 
 
A lot of folks in business don't believe that there should be 
special considerations for one group and none for the other. 
They believe we ought to have fair and reasonable legislation 
that covers everybody and gives everybody an equal 
opportunity. 
 
The leader in the race for this telephone-based service, the 
company, is in New Brunswick, Mr. Speaker, which has so far 
attracted 19 such companies. Now New Brunswick, who would 
expect would end up being the leader in attracting all of those 
companies and all of those jobs? But there it is. They've got 
them and we haven't. What's the difference between our 
province and those provinces down east? One very significant 
one is attitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One Toronto entrepreneur moving to New Brunswick says of 
the province and I'll quote: 
  



February 22, 1995 

 
378 

 . . . everybody's working hand in glove. We had the 
federal people . . . the provincial people, the municipal 
people, . . . every level of government and other 
entrepreneurs, other people who have also located in 
this area . . . Everybody was very helpful . . . 

 
On the other hand Burton notes in his article that Saskatchewan 
has several disadvantages such as its labour laws. 
 
 Saskatchewan's new labor law dictates benefits be paid 

to part time workers, which most call centres employ. 
 
Another major disadvantage the article notes, Mr. Speaker, is of 
course taxes. The article quotes Dale Botting, and I quote: 
 
 We have surtaxes on surtaxes on flat taxes on taxes, and 

you start to compound them . . . 
 
And that's the reality, Mr. Speaker. When will the government 
get through its head, Mr. Speaker, that it cannot attract new 
business, cannot create new jobs, and cannot turn this province 
around with high taxes and restrictive labour laws. 
 
The opposition has presented the people of this province with a 
clear alternative. On the labour side, we will be calling for the 
repeal of The Labour Standards Act. If the government itself 
thinks this Act is so bad that it needs to make changes and 
major concessions and to delay certain aspects of the Bill, then 
why have the Bill at all, Mr. Speaker? The reality is that they 
worked through regulations and continue to make changes. 
 
On the tax side, we believe that the tax burden and the 
structural problem of the government's deficits should be 
relieved by doing away with tax-and-spend budgets of any kind 
— balanced or otherwise — Mr. Speaker. 
 
Taxes should be replaced with an across-the-board 5 per cent 
cut on all government departments. This would immediately 
lighten the tax load by $200 million. And after that it must 
become illegal to present tax-and-spend budgets ever again by 
bringing in The Taxpayers' Protection Act. 
 
This Bill presented by our caucus would go far beyond the mere 
window-dressing of the government's proposed legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. It would call for — and I'll list a few things for you — 
an accounting for all revenue and expenditures including 
Crowns, tabling of quarterly financial statements to maintain 
tighter public scrutiny of the government's fiscal targets. In 
stark contrast to this budget, all surpluses would be applied to 
reduce the debt and therefore to reducing taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We maintain further that balanced budget legislation without 
teeth is a paper tiger. Our Act would therefore call for province-
wide referenda to ratify either tax increases or deficit budgets. 
 
Finally, if a government failed to balance its budget, the 
government members themselves would feel the sting of having 
their salaries reduced by 25 per cent. Build in some penalties  

for the people that don't do their job right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our "Mr. Premier, I want to know . . ." cards, at 
rallies and in coffee shops across the province, we are hearing 
that these are the kinds of measures that the people of 
Saskatchewan really want to have put into effect. 
 
The Premier may think that his army of hacks has convinced the 
public that taxes are good for them, but they have not. You can't 
sell higher taxes to the people. They just won't buy that 
argument any more. 
 
I cannot urge the government too strongly to start listening to 
the public, Mr. Speaker. Open up your ears; listen to the people. 
Their first opportunity will come soon when we introduce our 
Taxpayers' Protection Act and our motion to repeal The Labour 
Standards Act. 
 
There is a chance, an opportunity, for the government to show 
the people of Saskatchewan that they're willing to listen to what 
they have said and what they are asking for. Support these 
pieces of legislation and set this province on a new and true 
course to real prosperity and sustained and long-term tax base 
development. 
 
In the meantime I can only condemn this half-truth government 
for their continued dedication to tax-and-spend policies as has 
been exemplified by this disaster of a budget which simply has 
gone on to say we're going to have more of the same and no real 
and true building for the future in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
know, as I've sat in this legislature for nearly eight years, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm astounded. This budget speech is the first one that 
all through question period the opposition parties, both of them, 
have been virtually silent about the budget. 
 
Why have they been silent about the budget? Because this is the 
best budget Saskatchewan has seen for well over a decade. This 
is the first balanced budget in over 10 years. And it's the first of 
four more — five — in our longer-term plan leading right up to 
the year 2000. Five in a row, sustained, balanced, surplus 
budgets and they have nothing to say about it in question 
period, and I say that's a shame. The people of Saskatchewan 
are the losers because they've got nothing to talk about other 
than some other generally more frivolous things. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there's two people have made some 
quotes and I want to see if anyone can recognize. One of them 
said: there's so much more we can be. Now who said that? The 
member from Estevan in 1982. There's so much more we can 
be. 
 
Who said this now? — personally, I think we should have  



February 22, 1995 

 
379 

higher targets. In other words, there's so much more we can be. 
Who would say: personally, I think we should have higher 
targets? The member from Saskatoon Greystone, the Leader of 
the Liberal Party, in 1995 in this legislature — so much the 
same it's just scary. 
 
We have two people who have said that not once has the 
government hit its own target since it took office. Now I'm 
going to help people here. One person that said that is the 
Associate Minister of Finance; the other is the Leader of the 
Liberal Party. The Associate Minister of Finance said, when 
you're setting up a budget, you take your 10-year average crop, 
take that, that's what you budget for. You know you're going to 
be wrong. Some years you'll be higher; some years you'll be 
lower, but you know that that's on average . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It now being 5 o'clock, this 
House stands adjourned until 2 . . . Order, order. It now being 5 
o'clock, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow . . . Does 
the Government House Leader have another agenda? Order. 
Maybe the members are in such a jubilant mood that they would 
like to come to the video tonight at 7:30 in 218. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — They may just learn how this House should 
really run. With that, this House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


