






















































May 10, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 10, 1995 

 

 
2115 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
present the names of over a thousand Saskatchewan people 
today on a petition. This prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, specifically firearms owners, in order to 
halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from across the province. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition, 
and the prayer says: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearm owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
have petitions I would like to lay on the Table this afternoon, 
and I also will read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearm owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have literally hundreds of names here as well. 
And looking over them, I find that they come from literally all 
parts of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
pile of petitions that have been sent to me, coming from mostly 
the Saskatoon area, and I'd like to read the prayer. It says: 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to examine the decision to 
close St. Paul's labour and delivery and post-partum 
wards; and further, to reverse this decision as soon as 
possible. 

 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 

Deputy Clerk: — Mr. D'Autremont, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts, presents the committee's 
seventh report which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
move the motion, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld: 
 
 That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts now be concurred in. 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd just like to make 
some brief remarks about the report. 
 
I want to say, first of all, that over the last few years we've had 
the opportunity to work with the member from Morse, who 
served as Chair of the committee. And I want to say that the 
committee members certainly enjoyed our relationship with the 
member from Morse, and he did a good job and we thank him 
for his work as Chair. 
 
I also want to thank the Clerk, Mr. Putz, who worked with us; 
the Provincial Auditor and his staff; and the Provincial 
Comptroller and his staff; as well as the staff of Hansard; and 
the various government officials that appeared in front of us. 
 
I want to say that there were several major accomplishments by 
the committee in the last year or so. One was the resolution of 
the task force report on roles, responsibilities, and duties of 
auditors, and in particular the relationship between the 
Provincial Auditor and the private auditors which was a matter 
of ongoing concern. And I'm pleased to say that we were able to 
concur in the development of a good working relationship 
between the Provincial Auditor and the private auditors which 
was a significant accomplishment because the problem had  



May 10, 1995 

 
2116 

existed for some time. 
 
Another major piece of work that we managed to accomplish 
was the ongoing work we're doing in terms of monitoring the 
government's implementation of the committee's 
recommendations. And the members will see in the seventh 
report, an appendix of recommendations we've made and the 
actions that have been taken by the government. I'm pleased to 
report to the Assembly that by and large the government is 
following the recommendations of the committee which is a 
very positive development from our point of view. 
 
We have also managed to have The Provincial Auditor's Act 
amended last year by the House. The Act that we proposed, or 
the amendments, were moved by the member from Morse as 
Chair of the committee, and they enable the Provincial Auditor 
to issue more than one report per year, so that he can issue a 
spring report and a fall report, also to table and distribute his 
report when the House is not in session. And we think these are 
significant advances in terms of public accountability of 
government funds. 
 
For the first time, pension costs and liabilities were recorded in 
the summary financial statements issued for the year ending 
March 31, 1994, which was another important milestone. 
 
Generally, Mr. Speaker, we've found that the government and 
its departments are complying with the recommendations of the 
Provincial Auditor in his reports. We believe that the 
developments that are occurring improve public accountability 
in our province, and I'm very pleased to second the motion. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Ms. Lorje, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations, presents its fifth report 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
move that the fifth report of the Standing committee be now 
concurred. 
 
In doing so I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that your 
committee has been extremely diligent, and members on all 
sides of the House have been extremely cooperative in meeting 
regularly. Indeed we met 21 times over the last year to review 
the various items of business that are properly before the 
purview of the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this House will recall that one year 
ago, on May 5, 1994, the legislature adopted new guidelines for 
the terms of reference for the Crown Corporations Committee. 
These new guidelines expanded our mandate and enabled us to 
look at the goals and objectives of the various Crown 
corporations and to do a prospective, as well as a retrospective, 
review of their annual reports. 

Mr. Speaker, that change in the guidelines has significantly 
opened up the considerations of the committee and the debate 
has been extremely interesting and, I believe, in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We also changed our procedures so that members of the 
electronic media could more easily record the proceedings. I 
believe that has also increased the accountability of the Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we expanded our terms of reference 
so that we now review a couple of major entities that receive 
the majority of their revenue from some place other than the 
General Revenue Fund. I refer specifically to the Workers' 
Compensation Board and to the Liquor and Gaming 
Authorities. 
 
We have concluded our review of the Workers' Compensation 
Board. Our review of Liquor and Gaming is still ongoing. We 
have also concluded our review of several of the Crown 
corporations and related agencies. We do continue to review the 
Crown Investments Corporation, the overall holding company 
for the Crowns in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to, as has the speaker from Saskatoon Idylwyld has 
done, I would like to thank various people for their help with 
the committee. We met with the task force on the roles and 
responsibility of auditors and I am very appreciative of their 
input and their comments to us. 
 
Mr. Putz was the Clerk to our committee. He then changed 
responsibilities and Ms. Woods became the Clerk. Both these 
people have been extremely competent and very helpful. 
Hansard as well has been very helpful. And the Provincial 
Auditor attended faithfully and gave us extremely good 
feedback about the various items we were considering. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there were several private auditing firms 
who are responsible for various Crowns, and they attended the 
committees faithfully and also gave us extremely important 
input in our reviews. So I do wish to thank them. 
 
I also wish to thank all the members of the Crown Corporations 
Committee for enabling this experiment in the change of 
reference for the Crown Corporations Committee to become the 
success that it has, and I look forward to working with them in 
future years. 
 
Having said that, I do now move, seconded by the member from 
Moosomin: 
 
 That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd just like to add a few 
comments to my colleague from Saskatoon Wildwood 
regarding the concurrence into the Crown Corporations 
Committee report and acknowledge that, while we did proceed 
and were able to review a number of Crown corporations and  



May 10, 1995 

 
2117 

while the mandate of the Crown Corporations Committee was 
certainly expanded, there were times when ministers were more 
than willing to debate current issues; there were other times 
when they still referred back to the current committee . . . or the 
year under review. 
 
So I just wanted to bring that to the attention of the Assembly, 
that yes we did expand the purview, and I think that in the 
future will probably work well. But ministers also chose at 
times to just acknowledge that they preferred to stay into the 
year under review. 
 
One area that we felt we weren't getting a lot of responses in 
and we'll look forward to debate in the future is the Gaming 
Commission. I think that's an area that's going to need a lot of 
review. 
 
I guess at the end of the day though, Mr. Speaker, I would have 
to suggest that while our committee worked well, there were 
times when we just had to acknowledge . . . bring the Chair to a 
point of acknowledgement that maybe she was trying to stymie 
the work of the committee. And we just had to bring her to the 
. . . to bring to her remembrance the fact that she was Chair, and 
if she wanted to debate, that she could certainly relinquish the 
position of Chair and take part in debate. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, in general it was . . . we've had a 
fruitful discussion in committee and I thank all members for 
their involvement. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, a group of 46 
grade 8 students from my constituency in Saskatoon from 
Dundonald School. And they're accompanied today by teachers 
Derek Barss and Verdynne Schmidt, and also by Audrey 
Sabiston who is the secretary at Dundonald School. 
 
And they're going to be observing the proceedings here, having 
a tour of this building, and I'll be visiting them at 2:30 after 
which we'll even get our picture taken. And I hope the students 
have a pleasant day in the city of Regina and see lots of 
interesting things. And I'd ask all members of the Assembly to 
join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
also like to introduce to you and through you to members of this 
Legislative Assembly, a group of guests, Mr. Speaker. I guess I 
am twice lucky. Last week I had the privilege of introducing 
around 50 grade 5 students from Martensville School and it's 
my privilege and honour, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to the 
Legislative Assembly some 73 grade 7 and 8  

students from Venture Heights School, also in Martensville. 
 
And they, Mr. Speaker, are accompanied by teachers Debbie 
Rodger, Terry Stanviloff, Diane Beaule, and Patrick Kazuzka. 
And if I have my information right, a chaperon, Mrs. 
Geisbrecht, as well. 
 
And I would ask all members to help me welcome these 
students to the legislature this afternoon. And I'm also looking 
forward to a visit with them at 2:15. Subsequently to that, 
pictures. So, members, please help me welcome these grade 7 
and 8 students from Martensville. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if I draw 
your attention to your gallery, there are three gentlemen that I'd 
like to introduce this afternoon to you and to the members of 
the Assembly. 
 
And I'd ask them to stand — the first one is Mr. Kent Latimer, 
the second one is Jordan Cooper, and the third one is Tim 
McGillivray. These three gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, will be 
representing the Progressive Conservatives, as candidates, in 
Saskatoon constituencies and we look forward to their presence 
on the floor some day. 
 
So I'd ask all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Schizophrenia Public Awareness Campaign 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we are wearing 
irises on our lapels and these are worn as symbols of hope for 
people suffering from schizophrenia. On April 24, the 
Schizophrenia Society of Canada launched its first national 
public awareness campaign to dispel misconceptions and to 
raise awareness. 
 
Schizophrenia is much more common than people think. It 
affects about 270,000 Canadians. Sadly, 40 per cent of these 
attempt suicide and one-quarter of those succeed, but this 
illness receives relatively little public attention. 
 
Schizophrenia is caused by a chemical imbalance in the brain 
and often strikes young adults. It drastically affects an 
individual's quality of life and causes great strain on the family. 
Because mental illness is feared and misunderstood, sufferers 
are often ostracized. Fortunately, research is resulting in more 
effective treatment programs. 
 
The Schizophrenia Society of Canada is a charitable 
organization. Through chapters and provincial associations, 
including the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan, the 
society provides educational information, emotional support, 
advocacy work, and supports research. 



May 10, 1995 

 
2118 

And I'd like members to join with me in congratulating those 
involved in the society for their continued commitment and 
hard work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
is Nursing Week in Saskatchewan and I would like to take this 
opportunity to pay tribute to the 9,600 registered nurses in our 
province. 
 
As members will know, the role of registered nurses has greatly 
expanded in the last few years, particularly in towns and 
villages across the province where the nurse is more than the 
front-line health provider. She may only be — and he may only 
be — the only health care provider. 
 
Last week the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association 
had their annual meeting in Saskatoon, and one of the decisions 
made at that meeting was to open the discipline hearings of the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association) to the 
public. They will be making a more detailed announcement 
about this resolution at a news conference this Friday. 
 
The other major result of their convention was some movement 
by the Minister of Health toward accepting the SRNA's desire 
to have all registered nurses hold a baccalaureate degree as 
entry to practice by the year 2000. 
 
Today also marks Registered Psychiatric Nurses Day in the 
province; the RPNs (registered psychiatric nurse) are holding 
their annual meeting, both yesterday and today, in Saskatoon. 
And last night at their awards night, Barbara Wilson was 
honoured as the RPN of the year, having been selected by her 
1,200 colleagues in the province for that honour. Barbara is the 
adult day care coordinator at Regina Pioneer Village, and her 
area of specialization is Alzheimer's patients. 
 
So to all Saskatchewan nurses, the RNs (registered nurse), the 
RPNs, the LPNs (licensed practical nurse), and the CNAs 
(certified nursing assistant), we wish to extend thanks and 
appreciation on behalf of the people of our province for the 
important role that they play in our health care system. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Schizophrenia Public Awareness Campaign 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
join with colleagues in the Assembly today in saying a few 
words in support of those who are affected with schizophrenia 
and those who support individuals affected. 
 
My colleagues and I are pleased to join with organizations 
across the country and the world who work on behalf of the 
mentally ill and have designated the iris as the worldwide  

symbol of faith for those who suffer with mental illness. 
Individuals suffering with such an affliction deserve the respect, 
support, and recognition of all members of our society, and we 
join with those who support them. 
 
It's my sincere pleasure to wear this iris and to share in the faith 
for people with mental illness, and as well, Mr. Speaker, to 
extend our appreciation for the work that nurses do in our 
society and in our province in supporting people who suffer 
with mental illness, plus supporting and offering support and 
encouragement to individuals who suffer with any other form of 
illness. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Week 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nursing Week is 
that week in which we give recognition to that group of 
dedicated professionals who it can be said without exaggeration 
are the heart and soul of our health care field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it can also be said that members of this nursing 
profession will probably not take time themselves this week to 
observe any special ceremonies because, as always, they will be 
too busy providing expert care. 
 
As well, today is Registered Psychiatric Nurses Day. Psychiatric 
nurses are the mainstay of our mental health system. They give 
it continuity. Psychiatric nurses provide in-patient care in 
special care homes, in acute care psychiatric facilities, and our 
prisons. And in the community they provide care in out-patient 
settings such as clinics and the home. 
 
Nurses all too often don't get the recognition they deserve. In a 
very small way I hope that this week can help to change that. 
And I ask all members to join me in expressing our thanks and 
paying our respect to all Saskatchewan nurses who care for 
Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Schizophrenia Public Awareness Campaign 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with my colleagues in recognizing the launching of the 
national awareness campaign by the Schizophrenia Society of 
Canada. Schizophrenia is a biochemical brain disease which 
results in disordered thinking, delusions, hallucinations, and a 
lack of energy and motivation, striking, as my colleague from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld said, over a quarter of a million Canadians. 
 
This devastating disease takes a terrible toll on young people 
because it usually strikes its victims in their late teens or 20's, 
though I must comment that I have in my work worked with 
children as young as six who suffered from the disease. And it 
usually continues throughout their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, schizophrenia has a devastating affect on the  



May 10, 1995 

 
2119 

families and the friends of victims. The national awareness 
campaign about schizophrenia has as its slogan: If you think 
spelling it is hard, imagine living with it. 
 
The goal of this campaign is to educate the public, because they 
know very little about this disease. Ultimately the goal is to 
encourage more research into this brain disease to find a cause 
and possibly a cure. 
 
The Schizophrenia Society has presented some of us with irises. 
Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to acquire a better 
understanding of this disease and to pledge their support to the 
work and goals of the Schizophrenia Society of Saskatchewan; 
and their support, especially, to the victims and their families. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Regina Aquifer 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
constituents of mine have asked me to investigate the concerns 
for the Regina aquifer. I'm happy to do so, and because their 
interest in this portion of Regina's water supply is shared by us 
all, I would like to take the opportunity to respond publicly. 
 
As is the case with any water supply, our considerations are 
twofold: one, is it safe to drink; and two, is it sustainable over 
the long term? 
 
Since 1992, Mr. Speaker, when four new wells on the aquifer 
were added, the water quality has been tested by four separate 
agencies: Sask Water, the city of Regina, Sask Environment, 
and Saskatchewan Health. All studies found the water quality 
acceptable. As well, an independent water quality consultant 
agreed there was no problem with the supply. This is the kind 
of thorough monitoring I believe we should all expect for such 
an important resource. 
 
In recent months, the issue has been raised again. In order to 
assure the public that the water from the north-west portion of 
the Regina aquifer is both safe and sustainable, an independent 
consultant has been hired to review all relevant data. The 
consultant and his team of experts met Monday with city and 
provincial officials to begin the consultation process which will 
lead to a full report on the state of the Regina aquifer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina and the Government of 
Saskatchewan are taking every step possible to ensure the 
proper management and safety of our water. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Great Canadian Geography Challenge 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
the privilege to meet an outstanding young geographer in 
Weyburn just a few days ago. Justin Craigen, a student at 
Weyburn Junior High School, is one of the three provincial  

finalists in the Great Canadian Geography Challenge. In fact he 
scored the highest marks in the provincial competition. 
 
This contest is sponsored by the Canadian Council of 
Geographic Educators and the Royal Canadian Geographical 
Society. The top three finalists travel to Ottawa on May 20 to 
compete in the national geography contest, from which the 
winner goes to the international geography challenge to be held 
in Disney World. I am sure Justin and the other contestants will 
be able to find their way to the proper locations. 
 
The Canadian contest, with 36 students from all the provinces 
and territories, will be hosted by Alex Trebek, the Canadian 
host of the TV show, Jeopardy. We may all do relatively well at 
home answering the questions on this show, but Justin and the 
others will have to do so under pressure in front of a large 
audience. 
 
I wish Justin and the other two Saskatchewan representatives 
well. It takes a lot of preparation, hard work, dedication, and 
love of geography to accomplish such an achievement. I admire 
their knowledge of the world we live in, and I know they will 
put it to good use at the contest and throughout their lives. 
 
Congratulations and good luck in Ottawa. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — If the member has a statement by members, 
he'll have to wait for another day or ask for leave. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, the all-party 
committee has made its presentation to the Justice Committee 
in Ottawa. And, Mr. Minister, you got the limelight and you've 
had the photo opportunity that you were looking for there, but 
you didn't bring anything back for the law-abiding citizens of 
Saskatchewan. You came, you saw, but you were rejected. 
 
And I hesitate to say it, but I told you so, Mr. Minister — I told 
you so. Your plan of talk, talk, talk, has failed. And now, Mr. 
Minister, it's time for a plan of action. Mr. Minister, the ball is 
in your court. What are you planning to do now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm terribly 
disappointed in that question. We went to Ottawa — that is to 
say, three members from the government side of the House, two 
members from the opposition Conservatives, and the Leader of 
the Third Party — and I thought we put on a pretty good show. 
 
I thought we were able to very clearly articulate to the standing 
committee and to the eastern media exactly what were the views 
of the people of Saskatchewan and this Assembly. And I  



May 10, 1995 

 
2120 

thought that was far more effective than anything, than anything 
that the members opposite have suggested during the past few 
weeks might be done by some kind of futile gesture from this 
House. 
 
I thought our presentation was very powerful and very effective, 
and I'm disappointed that apparently the member doesn't share 
that view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, it was 
indeed a very good show, and the Liberals rejected it out of 
hand. 
 
Mr. Minister, lawyers tend to drag things out with endless and 
endless streams of rhetoric, somewhat like politicians. And 
that's exactly what you're doing — being a lawyer, Mr. Minister, 
instead of representing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We need a made-in-Saskatchewan plan, Mr. Minister. We need 
to protect ourselves from the Liberals. We've introduced 
legislation that would entrench property rights and invoke the 
notwithstanding clause — something that firearms owners in 
Saskatchewan want. 
 
What are you going to do today, Mr. Minister? Would you 
please do something — do anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I stood in this House last 
week when they were making similar noises and I said, if that's 
how you feel about it, don't come. We'll go without you. We'll 
go without you and make a presentation. 
 
We presented to the federal government yesterday a united 
front, and I thought that was a very, very effective way to 
approach the problem. We should be proud of that and we 
should maintain our unity. We don't need to come back here at 
home, having these fights across the floor of this House, and 
thereby weakening the presentation that we made to Ottawa. 
 
We heard again and again, Mr. Speaker, comments from all 
sorts of people that ours had been the most effective 
presentation made to the House of Commons committee, and 
we should all be proud of that. And we should continue to 
follow that up with all of the contacts that we have to try and 
impress upon the standing committee our point of view. 
 
I did not hear anybody in that standing committee reject our 
option yesterday. I did not hear Minister Rock, in any of his 
interviews, deal with our point about the necessity of doing a 
very careful appraisal of the effectiveness of existing gun 
control legislation, which was the major part of our approach. 
 
So I wouldn't be nearly as pessimistic as the members opposite. 
I would just continue the enormously important work that we 
have begun. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
we agreed to go, but we wanted to go with some action out of 
this legislature, something real that we could take down to 
Ottawa, and you rejected that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can spare us the interpretations that you 
continually give us about the Act  that we can't do anything 
about this issue  because you can get a lawyer to say almost 
anything about anything . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Will the members please 
settle down. There's just too much interruption on both sides 
when the person is asking the question and when the minister is 
answering. So please settle down and let them have their turn. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
will you please save us the time of listening to your long 
speeches with no action in them. Take that team of bureaucrats 
that you took with you to Ottawa, and put them to work, and 
come up with a real solution to deal with the problems in 
Saskatchewan related to firearm registration. Or, Mr. Minister, 
are you admitting defeat, that you can't do anything. And if so, 
will you step aside and let somebody else carry on the fight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I just can't really credit 
that the member is sincere in some of the things that he's saying. 
I for one was very happy yesterday not to have the 
embarrassment of trying to explain to the standing committee 
what effect a change to our Human Rights Code might have on 
their gun law. Every constitutional lawyer in the country would 
have been laughing at us, including the people who are advising 
the standing committee. And that is the fact of the matter. 
 
Anybody who thinks that a change to the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code would have any impact at all on this debate and on 
the constitutionality of the federal proposal is just dreaming — 
is just simply dreaming and not being realistic. Furthermore it's 
irresponsible to continue to press that view when you must 
know better. You give some hope to people that there might be 
something here we can do by amending our provincial 
legislation when you must know and your advisers must tell you 
that it's just a bunch of nonsense. 
 
Now let's keep our shoulders together on this thing. Let's keep 
side by side in our determination to oppose these laws. And let's 
not pretend to anybody that there's anything we can do on the 
floor of this House that is going to buttress our position as far 
as the constitutionality of the federal Bill is concerned. And 
that's the fact of the matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, do 
you think it's fair that status Indians are exempted from paying  



May 10, 1995 

 
2121 

the provincial sales tax? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, what we have said consistently is this: we have 
discussions on an ongoing basis with the previous, with the 
new, leadership of the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) about the whole package of tax issues as they 
affect first nations people. We will continue those discussions 
and we will not play petty politics with this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, why 
is it so hard for your government to give a straight answer on 
this issue? I was really interested in reading what the member 
from Elphinstone, the NDP (New Democratic Party) campaign 
manager, had to say about this issue. He said, and I quote: 
 
 I think a 28-day campaign is not the place to deal with a 

complicated issue like taxation and Indians. 
 
All of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, I'm starting to feel pretty good 
about this upcoming election. Here we are just a few days away 
from an election call and the NDP campaign manager is starting 
to sound like Kim Campbell. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think this is an election campaign issue, and I 
think it's a perfect time to discuss important issues like fair 
taxation. My position is very, very clear on this. Will you tell us 
what your party's position is; do you intend to end the 
exemption for status Indians — yes or no? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the members 
opposite, I'm not sure why they're so proud of what they've done 
here. They've announced some major change. They haven't 
consulted with the people affected. They haven't looked at the 
whole package of taxes. They haven't looked at the fact that first 
nations people in this province in some cases pay less, in some 
cases pay more, than other provinces. And they haven't taken 
account of the fact that we have very important discussions 
going on with these people at this particular time. 
 
What the people of this province want is tax policies that are 
well thought out, that are long term, that promote harmony, and 
tax policies that are sustainable into the future. And that's what 
this government will deliver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
going to be an interesting election. The Liberals are taking their 
campaign strategy from Texas. The NDP are getting their 
campaign strategy from Kim Campbell and drinking Campbell 
Kool-Aid, and they don't want to talk about the important issues 
for 28 days. We are the only party that is getting its platform 
from listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me tell you, Madam Minister, Saskatchewan people want 
tax fairness — that's what they're asking for. They want  

spending cuts and an end to the tax exemptions as an overall 
part of reducing the PST (provincial sales tax). 
 
Madam Minister, what are your plans with regard to lowering 
of the provincial sales tax in Saskatchewan? Or is this one of 
the issues again that you don't want to talk about in the 28-day 
election period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. What we will say to the people of Saskatchewan is, in 
1991 we removed the E&H (education and health) tax from all 
the items that the members opposite tried to tax: children's 
clothing, books, etc. 
 
We will say we have provided targeted tax cuts to promote jobs. 
We will say that we have a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan that, as our finances improve, one-third of every 
dollar will go to tax cuts, and we delivered on that promise in 
this budget by reducing income tax. And finally, what we will 
say to them, is we've laid out our whole plan Here's how we 
going to reduce taxes; here's where the money's coming from. 
 
The members opposite will just lay out part of their plan. Here's 
how we're gong to reduce taxes, but you wait till after they're 
elected to find out where the cuts will come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Food Bank Use 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I refer 
to the 1991 NDP Party platform, which states that the NDP 
will, and I quote: eliminate the need for food banks in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm very sad to say, Mr. Speaker, like their promise to restore 
the drug plan and like their promise to get rid of the PST, this 
promise, too, has been broken. 
 
My question is to the Premier this afternoon: sir, given your 
promise, can you explain why the Regina food bank has 
experienced a 20 per cent increase in requests? The Saskatoon 
Food Bank has been hit with a 25 per cent increase in requests 
since your government came to office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there must be an 
election in the offing because this Liberal leader who had her 
picture taken the last time there was an election, at the food 
bank in Saskatoon, is all of a sudden interested in poverty. The 
limo's gone, and here we are. 
 
I will tell you that five hours of estimates in Social Services and 
they weren't around, Mr. Speaker. The questions we . . . Ask 
those questions later today. The key issue is jobs, and there's 
good news here. We have the lowest unemployment rate in  



May 10, 1995 

 
2122 

Saskatchewan; you know that very well. We also have created 
9,000 new jobs this year, 7,000 jobs new over last year, net new 
jobs. We've created over 500 jobs for students. 
 
And what do you support? You support the federal budget that 
will continue to unravel the health care system on your 
Texas-style model. That is very much related to this. You have 
voted against every initiative to help those people that you say 
you're supportive of. You have voted against every single issue 
— every one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Everyone knows the reason why we have the lowest 
unemployment rate is people leave this province. Mr. Speaker, 
these particular figures come directly from the food banks 
themselves. And perhaps the Minister of Social Services and 
the Premier of this province should be genuinely concerned 
about wishing to respond to this very, very serious issue. 
 
Last year, sir, almost 32,000 families alone in Regina turned to 
the food bank for help. That's almost 5,300 more families 
requesting assistance than when your government came to 
office. 
 
My question, sir: does the fact that almost 5,300 more families 
in Regina have turned to the food bank for help since your 
government was elected . . . do you think it has anything to do 
with people having given up, giving up looking for work 
because of lack of real opportunities, the high cost of taxation 
and utilities, the unfortunate set of circumstances that places 
them at an extraordinary disadvantage just because they happen 
to be in Saskatchewan with your government in charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
take this question on behalf of the government because the 
Leader of the Liberal Party has now shifted to the larger issue 
of how she would manage government if — which is the 
biggest word in the English language — if ever entrusted that 
responsibility. I don't think it will happen. 
 
In her campaign document, the way that she's going to handle it 
is by something called efficiency audits. Notice the approach by 
the Liberal leader in saying all of these things that we've done, 
by this document she will undo by the Texas-style efficiency 
audits. 
 
By the way, in Texas 102 auditors were hired — 102 auditors 
were hired. I would table at some later date an article by the 
Business Week newspaper. The headline tells it all: them's pretty 
fancy accounting tricks, pardner — according to the Business 
Week report about the Texas audit. 
 
And what's the Liberal document say in Saskatchewan? Quote: 
the Texas experience suggests that efficiency audits in 
Saskatchewan could identify savings, and efficiency is the sole 
test. No mention of caring, no mention of compassion, no 
mention of sharing — efficiency, Texas style. That is your  

answer, and your answer is the last time you're at a food bank is 
when you got your picture taken prior to the last election. I 
suspect it will be in 1996 as well, coming up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not at all surprised that 
this Premier has no idea how to make smaller government in 
Saskatchewan. That particular paper deals with smaller 
government. And as he knows, the budget in Texas is 12 times 
bigger than the budget in Saskatchewan. If they had 102 
auditors — and I have faith in the Provincial Auditor; I have 
faith in Saskatchewan auditors — and we would require 
one-twelfth of that number. Twelve auditors from 
Saskatchewan, I think, would be very worthy investment of 
finding 5 per cent savings in this government which is totally 
bloated compared with every other government across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's talk about choices. The cost to society is 
tremendous for poverty . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Well there's just too 
much interruption by people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's 20 degrees above outside. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Then let's go outside for those 
who . . . and for those who don't abide . . . order. I was just 
going to suggest, for those who don't abide by the rules, they 
will be. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
cost to a society for poverty is tremendous in terms of mental 
health and well-being, a loss when productive citizens lose their 
self-esteem and a tragedy for children who must face life with 
odds stacked against them. But we can measure, we can 
measure how much taxpayers are paying for increased poverty 
even though the social costs are very difficult to measure. 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying $28 million per month for 
welfare. That's $12 million more per month than four years ago. 
 
Mr. Premier, instead of laying the blame at the feet of 
absolutely everyone else, it's your government that's in charge. 
What exactly are you doing to improve the lives of these people 
who need hope? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I could spend some 
considerable time, which question period does not permit, in 
outlining programs ranging all the way from children's action 
plan to the fact that with every budget that we've introduced 
we've never reduced the Social Services budget. There is a 
problem that needs to be continued to work at. I could make 
that answer and at some appropriate time will do so in this 
legislature. 
 
But I want to come back to you and your position. I'm reading 
from your document, quote . . . listen to this, Mr. Speaker,  



May 10, 1995 

 
2123 

listen up. Every social worker, listen up. Every teacher, listen 
up. Every health care worker, every nurse, listen up. This is 
what the Liberal leader says, quote: and by testing every 
program — I repeat, Mr. Speaker — by testing every program 
against the strict demands of efficiency, services to Texans were 
actually improved over this time. 
 
Every program . . . efficiency, not caring, not compassion. That 
means children's action plan. That means first responders. That 
means every form of initiative undertaken. Listen up, health 
care workers. Listen up, teachers. You elect a Liberal, and you 
elect a Texas-style approach of accountant's efficiency. You 
have no right to come to this legislature and plead compassion 
when you don't show even one word of compassion in any of 
your statements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Battlefords Constituency Office 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a question of fairness for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, last week the member from The Battlefords 
indicated in this Assembly that he had corresponded with you 
directly over his constituency rental scheme involving 
prominent NDP supporters. He said that we could check in on 
it, and that's exactly what we would like to do with you today, 
sir. 
 
Mr. Premier, did you review the member's rental scheme, and 
did you give it your personal approval, as the member from 
Battlefords alluded to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I answered this 
question last week in the Assembly. I answer it again. 
 
I have full accountability for the practices of rental of my 
constituency office. I ask the hon. member, trying to attack 
people and smear people to cover up for your own 
inadequacies, call this before the Board of Internal Economy, 
and I'll reveal all the evidence to you. You can do your research 
work first with the Legislative Assembly Office. 
 
But for Heaven's sakes, stop the accusations and bring this 
before the Board of Internal Economy where I can deal with it 
as a member of this Assembly who should have the right to 
have all that information on the table and not have to deal with 
the accusations and the innuendo that you make as a member 
struggling for existence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, I did raise it at the Board of Internal Economy, and the 
government majority took great issue with what I had to say. 
 
But the point I bring to the Assembly today, Mr. Premier, is 
this. The member from Battlefords said that he had gone to  

great time and expense to prove to you that this was all right. 
And what I asked today, sir, in the Assembly is do you approve 
of the scheme that the member from Battlefords has used, with 
public money, to pass on his constituency office to some charity 
in the city of North Battleford? Do you approve of that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the member's question is flawed 
with inaccuracies. And if the member thinks there's some 
wrongdoing on my part as a member of the Legislative 
Assembly, then you should take the appropriate action, 
whatever that action may be. 
 
One remedy I suggest to you is through the Board of Internal 
Economy. Maybe you want to resurrect the Standing Committee 
on Privileges and Elections. Maybe you want to turn over the 
file to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). 
 
Do whatever action you want, but stop making false accusations 
against my character and the arrangements I have as a tenant 
with the landlord in the city of North Battleford. Just stop that 
and deal with this in the appropriate fashion instead of trying to 
cover up for things that happened within your own caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Paul's Obstetrics Ward Closure 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question today to the Minister of Health. Earlier on I tabled 
petitions with over 1,700 signatures on, opposing the closure of 
St. Paul's labour and deliver and post-partum wards. 
 
With the closure of so many rural hospitals, there's a much 
larger rural population having to use Saskatoon's labour 
facilities. After the closure of St. Paul's obstetrics ward, there 
will only be 15 labour and delivery rooms in Saskatoon, three 
of which aren't even equipped with showers. And these 
individuals feel that's not enough. 
 
Mr. Minister, before Saskatoon's labour facilities fall short of 
what is needed to accommodate the number of births in the 
Saskatoon area, would you examine the decision to close St. 
Paul's obstetrics ward and reserve this decision . . . or reverse, 
pardon me, this decision if necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite I 
think have got to straighten out where they stand on this issue 
of health care renewal, particularly when it comes to the 
question of district health boards. You either want local people 
inputted through elections, which is what the concept of the 
district health boards are, or you don't. Or you don't. 
 



May 10, 1995 

 
2124 

The elections are coming in the fall, and the nominees are the 
representations of this Assembly, as represented by the 
government, based on widespread consultations. Now if the 
argument of the member opposite is that the government of the 
day should simply say to the district health board, look, you 
must do it this way, come heck or high water, then we might as 
well do away with the district health boards. 
 
I don't think he's saying that. He can argue they should be 
improved, there should be immediate elections, whatever he 
would argue in that context we might debate. But the overall 
concept, I think, has a lot of merit. We didn't do it like the 
Liberals in New Brunswick where they wiped out all the 
hospital boards and virtually had the Department of Health in 
New Brunswick control everything. 
 
So this is an issue which has to be worked out by the Saskatoon 
District Health Board. I will say to the Minister of Health, who's 
not here today because of an announcement of a spa opening in 
. . . the opening of the spa in Moose Jaw, economic 
development, I'll ask the Minister of Health to have his officials 
inquire into this matter. But please understand that this is a 
cooperative arrangement between the Department of Health and 
the district health boards, and that is the nature of many of these 
kinds of concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our office 
has received numerous calls regarding the proposed closure of 
Saskatoon's St. Paul's obstetrics ward. And I believe the people 
who are calling us would feel more comfortable if they knew 
that the decision was made by a group of individuals who are 
accountable — not an appointed board but a totally elected 
board. I believe, Mr. Speaker, the issue would be addressed in a 
much different manner. 
 
Most people believe that the closure of the obstetric ward 
means that in the near future all of St. Paul's will be shut down. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, one letter states that the 
former bishop at St. Paul's feared the loss of the entire hospital 
and was threatened with that possibility if obstetrics wasn't shut 
down. Could you give these individuals your personal assurance 
that this will indeed not be the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again this is a variation 
of the same question. And unfortunately my answer will have to 
be, I guess, a variation of the answer that I gave earlier. 
 
I don't think it can be argued credibly that people like Mr. Cliff 
Wright, who has served the city of Saskatoon and the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan — I'd even argue Canada — 
honourably all of his life and all of the representatives there, 
plus the people who are advising them, are either unresponsive 
or are manipulative or determined to thwart the legitimate 
interests of the best health care services and needs for the 
people of Saskatoon and area. I don't believe that, and I don't  

think that you believe that either. 
 
What is implied here is that somehow there is a refusal to listen 
to the case. I argue that that is not the case. The Department of 
Health will raise the matter with the district health board. Of 
course we shall do that. We're aware of the concerns raised. I 
was at St. Paul's Hospital, opening up a safe haven project for 
the west side for street kids — something which, by the way if 
some political leaders were to attain office, would undergo the 
strict test of efficiency. And I don't know whether one could 
really measure it by efficiency. 
 
I was at St. Paul's and I know about the concern. What you have 
to do is raise it with the district health boards, please. And 
understand that while there have been difficulties in the reform 
of health care, we want to see these things worked out but in 
partnership with our local organizations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Good Spirit Regional Economic Development Authority 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, I want to apologize to the opposition for not having 
extra copies here today. I am pleased to report the launch of 
another regional economic development authority to foster 
regional job creation and cooperation in the provision of 
economic development services. 
 
Good Spirit is Saskatchewan's 11th regional economic 
development authority. Founding members of the Good Spirit 
Regional Economic Development Authority include the RMs 
(rural municipality) of Cote, Sliding Hills, Insinger, and 
Buchanan; the villages of Buchanan, Pelly, Semans, and 
Theodore; the towns of Canora, Esterhazy, Kamsack, Norquay, 
and Sturgis; the city of Yorkton, and the Assiniboine Plains 
Rural Development Corporation, which represents a number of 
RMs in the communities. 
 
REDAs (regional economic development authority) are an 
excellent way for rural areas to reap the benefits of the 
economic recovery that is under way in Saskatchewan. They 
will enable regions to take advantage of the climate of growth 
and job creation as the government's budget plan implements 
sustainable surpluses, tax relief for families, targeted tax cuts to 
manufacturers and processors, training and education, and a 
focus on supporting job creation as a number one priority. 
 
Good Spirit REDA has opportunities in food processing, 
specialty crops, tourism; recreation and cultural activities 
related to the history of the area that are unique. I know that all 
the members will be working together to capitalize on these 
opportunities. By creating partnerships, we are finding new and 
creative ways to work together. Everyone has the opportunity to 
make it work. 
 
As part of that partnership, I am pleased to invite the members  



May 10, 1995 

 
2125 

to join me in offering the best wishes of this Assembly to the 
Good Spirit REDA, as many communities and committed 
stakeholders continue to make progress in its important work. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
response to the minister's statement, we certainly . . . we're 
always, on this side of the House in opposition, in favour of 
economic development. 
 
But after attending the meeting in North Battleford a couple of 
weeks back, the way that the people in that area say that you 
create economic development, is by having a low tax regime, 
putting us in a competitive position with other jurisdictions 
across this country, lowering the PST — that's what they said to 
us that night, Mr. Minister. 
 
The way to have long-sustainable economic growth in this 
province is by having a tax system that is competitive with other 
jurisdictions. And that is why, Mr. Minister, we have 
formulated a policy that says by cutting government spending, 
by cutting government spending by 5 per cent, we can lower the 
rate of taxation, lower the PST from 9 to 7 per cent, providing 
equal tax treatment, fair tax treatment, to all people across this 
province. 
 
That's what I think the minister should be talking about in terms 
of economic development. That's how you create a climate for 
business that sustains economic development, creates jobs and 
more opportunities for people all across this province. 
 
It's not by some of the measures that the minister is talking 
about and has been talking about over the last number of 
months. It's by having the lowest tax regime possible in this 
province. And lowering the PST from 9 per cent to 7 per cent is 
certainly a step in that direction, Mr. Minister. If you were 
serious about economic development, those are the kinds of 
policies that you would be bringing forward to the people of 
this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
I would ask leave of the Assembly, which I think has been 
obtained by the respective House leaders, to speak to a 
condolence motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1430) 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, at the end of 
my remarks I will move, seconded by the hon. member from 
Souris-Cannington, a condolence motion respecting the passing 
of Charles David Cuming. And, Mr. Speaker, it is with sadness 
that I rise to inform this Assembly of the death of Mr. Charles 
David Cuming who was a former member of the Legislative 
Assembly. 

Mr. Cuming lived a very full and complete life. He died at the 
age of 95 years on April 27, 1995 at the Pasqua Hospital here in 
Regina. Mr. Cuming leaves to mourn his wife Elaine, children 
Blanche, Zelda, Dale, Ron, and Douglas, as well as 11 
grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. 
 
I happen to know Mr. Ron Cuming on a personal basis. Ron is 
a professor at the College of Law, and I've known him through 
school days when we both went to the College of Law together 
at the same time and also in his capacity currently at the College 
of Law. And all of the family indeed is a family of 
accomplishment. 
 
The government members of this Assembly, this side for sure, 
and, I would argue, in a non-partisan way, that the body politic 
generally owes a great deal to Mr. Cuming. Charles Cuming 
was elected in the important election of 1944 — every election 
is important, whether one agrees with the outcome or disagrees 
with the outcome; it certainly was a watershed election 
campaign result — when he was elected in the Souris-Estevan 
constituency as part of the first government and CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) members of the CCF 
team of Tommy Douglas. 
 
Mr. Cuming, like so many of the pioneers of that particular 
time, moved very strongly in cooperative circles, in segments of 
fighting for the improvement of the average position of people 
in Saskatchewan. He lived very much, on a daily basis, his 
beliefs, social democratic beliefs. He was a true believer, a firm 
believer. 
 
And he began early. He began by organizing the Estevan Credit 
Union. He continued to be active in the CCF and the co-op 
movements in a variety of forms for over 60 years. And he, I 
think, is the last — I may stand to be corrected — if not the last, 
near the last of the 1944 team that was elected to the legislature 
whose passing we are marking today. 
 
In those days politics really was a clash of ideology in the 
classic sense of politics. Economic and social, it was also 
politics of the people very much. In the absence of television 
and radio, the way that politicians had to work was the way that 
I kind of mourn the passing  although we try to maintain it; 
all of us do  they had to, in those days, meet in the town 
halls, on coffee row, coffee klatsches in the kitchens and 
basements of interested people. Television and radio and instant 
communications has partly robbed all of us of that benefit. 
 
And in that period prior to 1944, coupled with the classic 
debate about left-of-centre social democratic principles, 
right-of-centre principles, Liberal-Conservative views  if I 
may, generally. I don't mean this in any partisan sense  it 
must have been a very, very high time and a very important time 
to be involved in the shaping and the reshaping of 
Saskatchewan and Canadian life. 
 
And it is people like Charles Cuming who dedicated all their 
lives to these beliefs that I would hope all of us would recapture 
the sentiment, the kind of the fervour, all of us would recapture  



May 10, 1995 

 
2126 

that in the 1990s as we head the 21st century, as a means of 
battling back what unfortunately is a prevalent mood in many 
areas, of cynicism toward political people and the political 
process. 
 
Well in his professional life, Charles Cuming also served as 
sheriff to the Estevan judicial district very admirably and 
impeccably until his retirement in 1965. He modestly said, and 
really modestly, that he was proud to be a small part of the great 
movement which swept this province in 1944 and which has 
continued to be felt ever since. 
 
But to those of us who came after, the contribution of Mr. 
Cuming and his contemporaries was and is not a small 
contribution but immeasurable. They saw the promise of what 
could be. They worked very hard to overcome seemingly 
insurmountable odds. And when victory was theirs, they set 
about to create a government which would build programs that 
were envied around the world. 
 
Mr. Cuming lived a long life filled with service. His 
commitment was such that he continued to travel to party 
events right up to the very last few years of his life, his very 
long and productive life. And not least was his great love for 
children and young people, which reflected his hope for the 
future and which was reciprocated by the youngsters who came 
into contact with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel saddened on this occasion to witness the 
passing of an important era. I am rejuvenated to contemplate 
and to think of the life of Charles Cuming and his contribution, 
and motivated again — as I hope all members would be, 
regardless of their points of view — to the efficacy and the 
worthwhile nature of serving in this legislature, serving in the 
Commons, serving anywhere in public life. 
 
With those few, brief words, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move, by 
leave of the Assembly, seconded by the hon. member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution 
that he made to his community, his constituency, and to 
the province. 

 
 Charles David Cuming, who died in Regina on April 

27, 1995, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 
representing the constituency of Souris-Estevan from 
1944 to 1948. Mr. Cuming was born on April 7, 1900, 
at Inchkeith, Saskatchewan. He received his early 
schooling at schools in Inchkeith and Kipling. Later in 
1920 he continued his studies at business college in 
Calgary, Alberta. It was here that he first became 
interested in social change. 

 
 Mr. Cuming had a long and accomplished record of 

service in public life. In his own community of 
Inchkeith, Mr. Cuming was an active member and  

director of the United Farmers of Canada, Saskatchewan 
section, and served for several years on the school 
board. He devoted considerable energy to the formation 
of cooperative movements, a devotion that was to 
survive in excess of 60 years. His interest in the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was an extension of his 
occupation in farming and insurance. 

 
 Mr. Cuming's contribution and support played a 

valuable role in the growth of the Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation and later the New 
Democratic Party. Initially he assumed an organizational 
role, managing the provincial campaign for the 
Cannington constituency in 1938, and the Assiniboia 
constituency in the 1940 federal election. 

 
 Subsequently, in 1944 Mr. Cuming was elected to serve 

as member of the first CCF government. He ran again in 
the general election of 1948, but was unsuccessful in 
retaining his seat. 

 
 After leaving provincial politics, Mr. Cuming's 

commitment toward serving his community did not 
diminish. He was appointed sheriff in the Estevan 
judicial district and served in this capacity until his 
retirement in 1965. 

 
 In recording its own deep sense of loss and 

bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the hon. member from 
Souris-Cannington. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
second the motion moved by the Premier. 
 
Charles Cuming was a man who gave much to his community; 
he was a man who cared. Although I didn't know Charles 
Cuming personally, his history and reputation speak for itself. 
Mr. Cuming represented the constituency of Souris-Estevan 
from 1944 to 1948. I have the privilege today, Mr. Speaker, to 
represent part of Mr. Cuming's old riding. 
 
Mr. Cuming was born and raised at Inchkeith, Saskatchewan, 
where he cultivated an interest in social change. This interest, 
Mr. Speaker, came while he attended business college in 
Calgary. In his own community, Mr. Speaker, was involved in 
agriculture and became an active member and a director of the 
United Farmers of Canada. Along with that, Mr. Speaker, his 
community interest involved the credit union system and he 
spent a number of years on the school board. 
 
Mr. Cuming's strong interest in politics led him to become a 
member of the first CCF government in Saskatchewan and an 
active political worker for a great number of years. He further 
served his community as being appointed sheriff in the Estevan 
judicial district from 1948 until his retirement in 1965. He was 
a man who demonstrated through example the kind of life all of  



May 10, 1995 

 
2127 

us strive for — a life full of working and giving to others. 
 
I'm certain that he will be sorely missed by his family and 
friends scattered throughout this province and across the 
country. On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to 
express our deepest sympathies for the Cuming family. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Leader of the 
Third Party, I join other members in this House as we pay 
tribute to a former member, Mr. Charles David Cuming, who 
served four years in this Assembly as a member from 
Souris-Estevan. 
 
Mr. Cuming served in this legislature during a time in 
Saskatchewan's history when enormous challenges were faced 
by people and governments. His term covered those post-war 
years when optimism ran high for our province's future. That 
time must have been an exciting one for Mr. Cuming and his 
fellow members, but it was also a time of enormous adjustment 
as many service men and women came home from the war. 
 
I came across a debate in an early edition of Hansard that took 
place on February 28, 1947 in which Mr. Cuming participated. 
In this debate he seconded a motion that called for more 
adequate housing. In the text of his remarks, Mr. Cuming said: 
 
 . . . our returned personnel, recently released from the 

Army, is seeking housing accommodation without any 
proper provision having been made for them . . . . I 
would just point out that I think it's obvious to Members 
that in their home towns all across the province here at 
least, we see improvised housing being used by our 
returned personnel such as single rooms, one or two 
rooms in industrial or business sections, without proper 
sanitary conditions provided for, without proper garbage 
removal, lack of playgrounds for children . . . 

 
Just two days ago in this Assembly we marked the 50th 
anniversary of VE (Victory in Europe) Day, but today Mr. 
Cuming's remarks reinforce what the aftermath of war was here 
at home and the level of adjustment that was required before 
normal life could resume. 
 
On behalf of the members of our caucus and the Liberal Party 
of Saskatchewan, I extend my condolences to the family of the 
late Charles David Cuming: his wife Elaine of Regina; two 
daughters, Blanche Hopp and Zelda Nelson; three sons, Dale, 
Ron, and Douglas Cuming; and his 11 grandchildren and three 
great-grandchildren. 
 
I want to express my gratitude and appreciation for the life and 
work of this former member, Mr. Charles David Cuming; for 
his service to our province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm privileged 
to be able to add a few words to those of the other speakers in  

memory of Charles Cuming. 
 
I first met Charlie in the mid-'70s, when both he and I became 
active in a local constituency organization in the city of Regina. 
I was elected to president that year and Charles along with me 
was elected the treasurer. We were both rookies in our 
positions; the difference was that I was in my 20's and Charlie 
was in his mid-70's  but we were both rookies. 
 
That didn't deter him though. I found out that at about the same 
time, that although he had never learned to swim, Charles 
started swimming lessons also in his mid-70's. That's the kind 
of person he was. He was an enthusiastic and hard worker. 
There's a rather difficult . . . a word that is very difficult to 
pronounce in the dictionary that I saw once, I think it's 
indefatigable, which best describes Charles. He's one that never 
tires. 
 
I had lots to worry about that year as a rookie president of the 
constituency organization, but I didn't have to worry about the 
job that Charles was doing as the treasurer of the organization. 
He was competent, efficient, and thorough. I very much enjoyed 
working with him. 
 
He was a man of principle. He truly, deeply cared about his 
community, his province, the world. He spoke out against 
injustice. He spoke out for cooperation, friendship, social 
justice. And I guess I'm not surprised, and neither is anyone 
else, that a person of his deep principles and deep commitment 
would become both active in the church and in politics, because 
he deeply cared about his world. 
 
I moved out of the constituency but we stayed in touch after 
that time, Mr. Speaker. Charles always liked to stay current; he 
liked to talk about today and tomorrow, not much about the 
past. He always relished a new challenge. He liked being with 
people, but he didn't ignore his garden. He was a kind person, 
he always had a kind word for everyone. 
 
In my estimation, Charles Cuming was an outstanding person. 
He enriched the lives of many who knew him and especially his 
family, and I will miss him. And I extend, along with the other 
speakers, my very sincere sympathy to Elaine and all the 
members of the Cuming family. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the hon. member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 
 That the resolution just passed, together with the 

transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 
be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of 
this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Leave granted. 



May 10, 1995 

 
2128 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We'll be converting both those to 
motions for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 77 and 78, motions for return 
(debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2). These 
amendments respond to the unanticipated consequences of the 
new pay arrangements recommended by the McDowell 
committee. 
 
If adopted by the Assembly, the new salary structure could 
result in dramatic increases in pension allowances for members 
participating in the defined benefit plan, ranging in increases 
from 32 to 43 per cent. Such increases, Mr. Speaker, are simply 
not acceptable. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill will do the following: 
they will eliminate the Premier's allowance which was instituted 
during the Liberal administration of Ross Thatcher; they will 
cap the pension entitlement for all non-superannuated members 
of the defined benefit plan at 70 per cent of the best four-year 
average earnings. They provide that when the pension 
entitlement of a sitting member has reached the statutory 
maximum, the member is no longer required to make a 
contribution from which there would be no benefit, as is the 
case in policy for all other pension plans. 
 
They will expand restrictions on double-dipping to include 
members of the House of Commons, members of the Canadian 
Senate, judges of any court, and any employment or service 
paid for by the Government of Canada or any other province or 
territory. 
 
They will allow non-superannuated members of the defined 
benefit plan to transfer into the fully funded money purchase 
plan on a voluntary basis and allow members of the money 
purchase plan to transfer the monies credited to their account to 
a locked-in registered retirement savings plan, commonly 
known as a locked-in retirement account, when they cease to be 
members. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed with 
respect to the money purchase plan bring the plan more in line  

with other public sector money purchase pension plans. 
 
The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act 
was enacted in its most recent form in 1979 with subsequent 
amendments. The legislation provides a defined benefit plan for 
members first elected prior to April 1, 1979 and a money 
purchase plan for members elected after April 1, 1979. 
 
Under the defined benefit plan, members contribute 9 per cent 
of their earnings. The government pays each plan member a 
pension based on the member's salary and the years of service. 
 
In the money purchase plan, the government and the member 
each pay a percentage of the member's annual salary into a 
fund. The member's pension is based on the accumulated 
contributions and investment earnings, and when the member 
reaches the age of 50 and ceases to be a member, he or she can 
buy a retirement annuity which then becomes the pension 
benefit paid to the member. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will ensure that 
there are no unintended pension increases resulting from the 
recommendations of the McDowell committee. They will 
ensure that there is no opportunity for improper double-dipping 
and ensure that the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
pension allowances are fair and reasonable. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 
Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation 
Amendment Act, 1979 (No. 2). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd just 
like to make a few comments regarding the Bill before the 
Assembly, An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Superannuation Act. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, one could ask if this is a last-minute 
repentance or what have you, or the fact that the government 
has responded to the wishes and the demands of the general 
public . . . certainly has responded to the questions that have 
been raised by the opposition members, by our caucus. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's appropriate and we can certainly 
see that the government has made some serious attempts to 
address this issue. I think as well, Mr. Speaker, the government 
has also indicated that they're only willing to go so far. 
 
And maybe it would have been more appropriate to have a 
minister raise the Bill who isn't affected by the Bill directly, in 
the fact that the minister, the Provincial Secretary, is certainly 
one of the individuals whose salary would fall under this. And 
while most members of the House, or the Legislative Assembly 
here, are under another plan which won't even come close to 
what the . . . even the changes under the superannuation bring 
forward. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think it's certainly appropriate that this  



May 10, 1995 

 
2129 

legislation comes forward to the House. I believe there are two 
or three areas where we certainly would want to enter into some 
debate and some discussion. I think that discussion certainly 
can be handled quite comfortably in Committee of the Whole; 
in fact may give us more of an opportunity to raise the 
questions rather than just taking the time to debate them in the 
House without any responses from the members. 
 
We as well would like to bring forward an amendment or two to 
address areas that we feel may not have been addressed as 
accurately as the general public would like to accommodate. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm certainly not going to take a lot 
of time just to . . . holding up the Bill, but I want to indicate that 
I think it would be appropriate and much more important for us 
to take the time in committee to address the areas of concern 
that we may have with this Bill. And so therefore I thank you 
for the opportunity for just having a moment to bring up some 
points that we would be concerned with. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 65 pertains to 
just several people. It pertains to the Premier, Deputy Premier, 
the member from Elphinstone, Regina Centre, Athabasca, the 
Speaker, and myself — seven current members. 
 
I thought that maybe I should make some comments on this Bill 
because it was pertaining to myself, but I see that it doesn't 
affect the pensions of the member from Elphinstone and 
myself. So I thought, seeing that I'm neutral really, whichever 
way this Bill goes, whether it had been brought in or whether it 
was passed or not when it comes in or died on the order table if 
an election was called, doesn't affect me. 
 
Bill 65 should not have been brought, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
should not have been brought to this Assembly until after the 
next election or until the recommendations from the McDowell 
report or the commission have been studied and passed in its 
whole or part, and then we should have looked into the pension 
plans, how it affected. 
 
There's too many assumptions being made, as far as I'm 
concerned, Mr. Speaker. It's hard to sit and forecast that if 
something is going to happen, and if somebody's going to be 
re-elected, and if somebody's going to be elected so many years, 
what they're going to get. I don't think that this is nothing but 
perhaps playing a little politics on behalf of the opposition 
sides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition parties, they've made the pension 
plan, as far as I'm concerned, a political issue. And I can see 
why they would do it because none of them have been elected 
too long, especially the leaders; they've only been here three and 
a half years. And I can see that it looks like a lot of money for 
somebody being here so long as somebody from 15 to 30 years. 
 
I don't know whether . . . the Deputy Premier did explain quite 
well, but I'll just cover just a little bit more of what these 
defined benefit plans . . . and the money purchase plan. 

When I was elected in 1978, Mr. Speaker, we were called in by 
the Clerk, Mr. Gordon Barnhart, to explain the two plans. I'm 
sorry, that was after March of 1979 when the new money 
purchase plan was made law. And we were given a choice, and 
some of our members chose the money purchase plan and some 
chose — most of them chose — to stay in the defined benefit 
plan. 
 
But we were told if we were young and thought we could be 
lucky enough and fortunate enough to serve Saskatchewan 
people for a long term, that you'd be better to go to the money 
purchase plan, and which I think some of the members of the 
opposition don't understand yet. And they'd have to be elected 
like myself for 17 years. If the now Premier serves for 29 years 
until 19 . . . another four years, what it might do for them, that 
maybe under the new money purchase plan . . . And I don't 
think they understand just exactly how that works and I want 
add a little bit to what the Deputy Premier didn't say, or least I 
didn't hear him say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the old plan, they took . . . When I came in here 
in '78, 9 per cent went off my cheques exactly the same as 
anybody on the new plan. But in the old benefit plan it was 
matched by a different figure up as high as 24.5 per cent 
depending when you're in cabinet, Legislative Secretary, or 
what your positions were. It was matched by . . . and it stopped 
there, and that's what you were paid on. 
 
But they're not understanding in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, on 
the money purchase plan, money purchase plan, you paid in 9 
per cent matched by the government for 9 per cent. But what 
they're not talking about is that money was invested and that 
money was invested in Saskatchewan in the markets. And 
through the early part of the '80s, when investment money was 
in the two-digit figures, there was a lot of money accumulated 
for the people in the money pension plan. 
 
So who's to say if the members of the opposition here — and 
I'm one too of course, but I'll say the Conservative Party and the 
third party — if they happen to stay here for the next 15, 20 
years, like many people have been, and longer, elected people, 
that maybe we might have two-digit investment money again 
and their plan could be more money than we're talking about in 
the old benefit plan. I don't think a lot of people understand 
that, and the media definitely never put that in the papers to get 
the people to understand. 
 
(1500) 
 
There's one thing that bothers me just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, 
especially from the member from Kindersley, the Leader of the 
PC (Progressive Conservative) Opposition. He wasn’t always in 
favour, along with myself when I was in the PC caucus, of 
retroactive legislation. They had a fit along with myself when 
the government of the day changed the retroactive GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) plan, and they didn't like the 
judges' salary being changed and several other issues they felt 
that were retroactive. 
 



May 10, 1995 

 
2130 

But now that it's a political issue they seem to think it's fine to 
have retroactive legislation to affect four or five to eight 
members of this Assembly. And I think if that isn't absolutely 
nothing but . . . it's being hypocritical to go out at election time 
and say, here we are, we're going to want to change . . . just for 
political points, we want to have the four or five people's 
pension plans being affected when this is no way their fault that 
these pension plans got to be so high. 
 
It was the McDowell commission that came in recommending 
something that hasn't happened yet. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, we all know in this Assembly that after that 
recommendation is either passed in part or whole, then they 
would deal with it. 
 
And I not very often stick up for what the government's said in 
this last 17 years, but in this case the Deputy Premier stood to 
his feet and says he realized something was wrong here and said 
he was going to deal with it. Why do we have to make an 
election issue of it and go this far? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to — I'm only going to be a few moments 
— and I'd just like to make a few comments about MLAs and 
their salaries and wages and pensions. It all works together. We 
are making mistakes out there, and the Leader of the Opposition 
is trying to say that they'll have no pensions after the next 
election and maybe we should be working for less; we should 
be cutting government down to eight cabinet ministers and all 
this. They're only trying to fool themselves because it will not 
work. 
 
What we're going to do in this province, Mr. Speaker, we're 
going to have a hard time to get a candidate to ever run for 
these offices if we don't pay them for their time. And that's 
what's happening out there. 
 
All three parties at this very moment getting ready for this 
upcoming election are having a difficult time in finding 
candidates. And I can see why the Progressive Conservatives 
cannot . . . which I've always been a part of and always will be a 
part of, even . . . maybe not momentarily but I always will be. 
They can take my position away from me in the party, but they 
can't take my vote away from me. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these people are not able to get candidates 
because, as I said, we're not going to have pensions. We're 
going to have to have less cabinet ministers. Less cabinet 
ministers and pensions — how ridiculous can we be? It means 
bringing in more people to help the cabinet ministers and just 
the same amount of money. They're only trying to fool the 
public. 
 
I agree a little bit what the Reform member in Ottawa came out 
the last few days and said about pensions, that maybe we should 
drop the pensions. But then let's pay the MLA and MP 
(Member of Parliament) as if you were paying an executive type 
position, $150,000 a year, which maybe he comes out with the 
same amount of money. 
 

If you want to drop pensions in Saskatchewan, then for 
goodness' sake pay an MLA so you'll get the executive type, the 
executive type from the farm, the educated farmer, the educated 
businessman. He'll come in here in competition and fight to be 
a candidate. Don't have to have parties running around trying to 
dig them out: will you run for us? Will you run for us? 
 
It's not right, and it's going to ruin Saskatchewan's politicians 
that the type of people who are going to be sitting in this 
Assembly . . . Because as far as I'm concerned, what we've had 
for many, many years is a few people that are absolutely 
dedicated  dedicated  that they want to go do something for 
their country, something for their province. They weren't 
worried about pensions. It didn't mean nothing to them. 
 
I only know of two real dedicated people in my lifetime, and 
that's John Diefenbaker and Tommy Douglas. They believed — 
whether I believed in Tommy Douglas's philosophy or not — 
but they believed in what they believed in. They believed in 
their philosophy, and they were politicians. 
 
And you got quite a few people that are well-to-do and they 
don't care about the salary: well I'll get a little glory out of 
running for an MLA or an MP regardless what I get for a 
pension. Then after that comes the people that can't even get a 
job: I'll go out and fast talk and get myself elected and see if I 
can grab a few easy dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think our whole philosophy on trying to fool the 
people out there — that we have to get MLAs salaries so low 
we can't get them to run and we got to talk about no pensions . . 
. Because if everybody elected in this next upcoming election 
come in and said: we'll work for nothing for four years, zero, 
and take their deputy ministers and all their secretaries in this 
building, we'll work for zero — wouldn't put a dint in the 
deficit we got in this province what was created by the NDP 
and the PCs, all together. 
 
No sense blaming it all on the Progressive Conservative 
because we're all to blame. We're all to blame. Everybody in 
this province to blame, but not on purpose, Mr. Speaker. They 
all thought they were doing the right thing. 
 
I will feel very badly if a pension is taken away from my past 
premier, the member from Estevan. He was a premier for nine 
years. He worked hard; it will affect him for the rest of his life 
what he's had to go through for nine years. I watched Mr. 
Blakeney, I watched Tommy Douglas, I watched the now 
Premier now. It takes something out of their life. If 
Saskatchewan people can't pay them when we're through, well 
then Saskatchewan better start examining themselves. 
 
And I ask the Progressive Conservative caucus to examine their 
hearts and say, why are we doing this? Don't play politics. And 
the member from Moosomin just made a statement that the 
change wouldn't even come close to being the same as the new 
plan, when these changes come in. How does he know? There's 
no way that he knows because he doesn't know the future of the 
investment money in this province of Saskatchewan. So they're  



May 10, 1995 

 
2131 

only guessing. 
 
And I ask this man, which is a very honourable, decent man, to 
examine his heart and look out to what the people of 
Saskatchewan really need, and that is politicians that you're 
going to pay, and pay well. 
 
And I'm going to close, Mr. Speaker, in one comment. And 
that's when we did . . . 1988 when we brought in the changes to 
salaries and pensions, and directive 4 was changed and we had 
increases; it hit the papers on a Friday and everybody was 
talking about these MLA pensions and salaries going high. 
 
I walked the next morning into my local café and I heard one 
person say: there's Mr. Muirhead, he surely didn't vote for that. 
He surely wasn't in favour of this. And they said to me, Gerry, 
are you in favour of what you done yesterday? And I said, 
absolutely not. And they said, well we didn't think you would 
be. No, I said, I wish they had have made them double, double 
my salary. And if any of you people want my job, come and get 
it. And nobody came. Now the person that takes my place, I 
hope they come in here, and I hope somebody over the future 
pays them well for their service. 
 
And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your time. And I believe 
what I'm saying. And in this case, if I happen not to be here 
when the vote comes — I expect to be — but I'll be voting with 
the government on this Bill, Bill 65, but I'm very open to look at 
any amendments that anybody brings in. And I thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act respecting the University of 
Saskatchewan 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
Minister of Education to please introduce the officials who 
have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. To my immediate right is 
Dan Perrins, the deputy minister of Education, Training and 
Employment; behind Mr. Perrins is Lily Stonehouse, assistant 
deputy minister on the post-secondary side; immediately behind 
me is Jim Tomkins who is a senior policy analyst on the 
post-secondary side of the department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and 
welcome, Madam Minister, and officials. It seems I get to see 
your officials almost as much as you do with these Bills. 
 
Madam Minister, I was wondering if you could tell us, please,  

who you consulted with in dealing with this Bill. It's my 
understanding that the university had a great deal of input into 
this and in all likelihood made the suggestions for coming 
forward to this Bill. 
 
So I'm just wondering, just who did you consult with in that 
context? Was it both universities? Was it all the various 
governing bodies? And who else might you have consulted 
with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We consulted with the board of 
governors of the University of Saskatchewan, the senate of the 
University of Saskatchewan, the administrative management 
council, which would be the administrators at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan), the faculty association, the 
students' union. As well, we had discussions with the University 
of Regina senior administration. Because in the past the U of S 
and the U of R (University of Regina) Acts have basically 
reflected each other, and this is a departure from that. The 
University of Saskatchewan has a different piece of legislation 
now. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With your 
consultations, what kind of a response did you get back from 
the various bodies you talked with? Were they in agreement 
with this particular piece of legislation? Were they 
recommending some changes, or were they opposed to it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We had a strong endorsation of the 
notion of a representative council. The only concern that we 
heard came from the faculty association and it emanated around 
two issues: the issue of the impact that a representative council 
would have on their collective agreement when it came to the 
interpretation of that collective agreement; and the second issue 
was on the powers of the board of governors in that the board 
of governors would be able, due to financial exigency reasons, 
disestablish a college, a department, a chair, a program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'll get into 
both of those particular issues after a bit. 
 
This whole governance system within the university seems to be 
a fairly complex system with four different bodies being 
involved. Why is it necessary to have those four bodies? And 
couldn't the governance of the university be somewhat more 
streamlined? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, let me say that this piece of 
legislation essentially emanated from the University of 
Saskatchewan. It had gone through all of the internal processes 
of the university, been endorsed by the board of governors, 
endorsed by the faculty council, by the administrative structure; 
the students' union is supportive of this legislation, as is the 
senate. 
 
Basically there will be . . . there are two governing bodies. The 
board of governors will have jurisdiction over financial  



May 10, 1995 

 
2132 

exigency matters, financial matters, and the representative 
council will have decision making over academic matters. 
 
The senate and the general council will be sober second thought 
when it comes to some of the recommendations of the board of 
governors and the representative council. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. This sober 
second thought, what kind of an impact, what kind of powers, 
will they have to be able to influence the financial questions or 
the academic questions? Do they have any real levers or 
hammers in which to either slow down or speed up some of the 
processes? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The general academic assembly, which 
consists of all of the faculty and some student representation, 
would be able to, on the basis of some decisions of the 
representative council, could suspend the decision-making 
process for awhile. And they also, on the basis of some actions 
of the representative council, they could recall the 
representative council members. 
 
In terms of the senate, the senate would also be able to delay the 
implementation of some recommendations of the representative 
council. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It sounds 
like the Senate in Ottawa. They can slow things down but can't 
really do anything about it. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you could give me some idea of 
the dollars that would go into, not into the programing that 
would be administered by the various bodies, but rather into the 
administrative costs of each of those bodies. 
 
I'm curious to find out just how much money would be spent on 
some of these sounding boards — the two sounding board 
governance bodies as compared to the administrative and the 
academic — to get a feel of just how much money we're 
spending on this. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You're asking me a question that the 
University of Saskatchewan will have some knowledge of. As 
you may know, the province of Saskatchewan has given the 
universities unconditional grants, and through their own 
internal decision making they make the appropriate decisions. 
So we do not have that information here. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, that disappoints 
me because if we're going to provide legislation to provide 
these governance bodies, I think we should also have a little 
more information on what they do and what it costs us to gain 
that action. 
 
If they're simply there as sounding boards and we're spending a 
significant amount of money on them, perhaps there's some 
other way that that could be done. If all they can do is slow 
down the process, maybe some brakes need to be put into place 
in the other two bodies — the academic side and the finance  

side — to provide some opportunities there to slow the process 
down to allow some input from either the faculty or the 
students. 
 
I'm not sure that we need two other bodies that are going to 
spend a significant amount of money. And I don't know if it's a 
significant amount of money because you can't give me the 
information on that. I think it's important that we should have 
some idea what these two particular bodies are going to cost us, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We will get that information for you as 
to the cost of the senate. I'm advised that it costs about $30,000 
for the senate. The representative council, I presume . . . as 
committee making is now done on campus, people participate 
in those committees as part of their academic functions. So I 
don't anticipate that there'll be any incremental costs 
whatsoever. But the representative council's purpose is to have 
a more consistent involvement of faculty members, through 
their representatives to the council, on various academic 
decision making. It does not mean that the faculty is going to be 
paid additional dollars. They're not. This is all part of their 
normal function on the University of Saskatchewan campus. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Madam Minister, if they're 
doing this after hours I have no complaint. If they're doing it 
during work hours, then perhaps we need to look at how the 
money is being spent on this. 
 
When we look at the previous Bill, the previous constitution for 
the Saskatchewan university, what was failing in that particular 
legislation or that governance structure that needed to be 
rectified and changed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The faculty council, as it presently 
exists before the introduction and proclamation of this Bill, 
amounts to over 1,000 people being members of the faculty 
council. The faculty council presently only meets twice a year. 
There have been occasions when the faculty council could not 
proceed with its work because they did not have a quorum. 
 
The whole purpose behind a representative council is to have 
elected people meet on a more regular basis. And I'm being 
advised by the university that it's their intention to meet at least 
10 times a year so that more work can be done on campus to 
deal with academic decision making. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well let's 
say that the board wants to shut down a group of studies or a 
chair or a college or whatever it might be. How would they go 
about doing that? How would the decision-making process 
work through this governance structure that you're proposing 
today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It would depend on the reason, so you'd 
have to give me the reason before I could respond to how it 
would work. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well I believe that there was some  



May 10, 1995 

 
2133 

discussion, Madam Minister, at one time — and I'm not sure it 
happened — about the closure of the school of dentistry. So 
let's use that as an example because it's a high-cost college and 
graduates a very few students, and perhaps we could better deal 
with those monies by having those students go out of province 
to a larger college. So let's have that as the example. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We'll use your example. If, because of 
financial reasons, the University of Saskatchewan board of 
governors was put in a position where it had to disestablish a 
department or a college, they could disestablish that college, but 
they would have to consult with council before the final 
decision was made. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well, 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you could explain to me, not just 
in terms of the powers of the boards — what the different 
segments do — but what kind of a role they play within the 
university when it comes to a political and a social role. I'm 
talking small “p” political. Within the university structure, what 
kind of a role the four different bodies would play. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. I'll give you an example of the 
senate. The senate will focus on, in this new legislation, on 
external matters. It will approve honorary degrees. It will have 
suspensive veto and dissolution of departments, colleges, or 
federation affiliation agreements, and changes to admission 
requirements or admission quotas. It will receive proposals and 
provide advice  for example, addition or closure of academic 
units, federation or affiliation agreements. And it's responsible 
for the student discipline related to non-academic matters. 
 
The council, the council will have the power to authorize all 
degrees from the University if Saskatchewan; grant scholarships 
and prizes; authorize the establishment or disestablishment of 
academic units, chairs, institutes or affiliation federation 
agreements; determine student appeals on academic matters; 
review physical and budgetary plans; and give advice to the 
president. And it will set the academic timetable for each year. 
It will prescribe admission standards, set admission quotas, and 
discipline students for academic reasons. 
 
The board of governors will be able to manage, administer, and 
control university property, revenues, business affairs. And 
there is no significant change to the powers of the board of 
governors in relationship to this new Act, other than the new 
Act explicitly empowers the board of governors to dissolve 
academic units and federation and affiliation agreements under 
some circumstances, and those circumstances are for financial 
exigency reasons. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'd like to 
go back to the example we used earlier. I went off on this 
question because my colleague was talking to me and I wanted 
to carry on on the previous example. What would happen in the 
circumstance where the board, because of financial reasons, 
decided to shut down a college? And let's say the senate was to 
veto that. What would happen in that process then? Can you  

end with a circumstance where the college still exists but the 
board will not fund it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer to your specific question is 
yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you; that was an unexpected 
answer. I had not expected that you could have a college still 
operating at the university but receiving no funds. So I have to 
ask you, why is that permitted? Why do you have that within 
the Bill; that if you're going to have a college there surely it 
must provide some service, or why is it retained on the roll of 
course of studies that would be available at that university? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, the creation of an academic unit 
or department or college or a program takes some time to go 
through all of the proper processes to have that particular 
program, department, college, developed. And so one does not 
want to disestablish a college, a department, a program, a chair, 
without considering some of the implications. 
 
As you know, the federal government is in the process of 
downloading onto the provinces a considerable amount of 
money and programing through the federal transfers and 
changes to EPF (established programs financing), 
post-secondary EPF, health, and CAP (Canada Assistance 
Plan). And that has some terrific implications for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
We do not yet know what the federal Liberals are going to send 
us for the fiscal year 1996-97. And this prospect that's 
emanating from the federal Liberals has some tremendous 
potential impacts on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we want to ensure that the board of governors of the 
University of Saskatchewan has, for the financial exigency or 
financial emergency reasons, the power and authority to deal 
with what could be coming down the pike. And that is why 
there the board of governors has been given the very limited 
power of being able to disestablish a program, a college, a 
chair, a department  because we don't know what's coming, 
and they would only be able to do that for emergency reasons or 
if the general . . . or if the representative council recommended 
to them that a college, a department, a chair, be disestablished 
for academic reasons. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
let's say that three of the bodies have approved the disbandment 
or discontinuance of a particular course or chair or whatever, 
but one of the groups — the assembly or the senate — vetoes it. 
So you end up with a situation where the board may not fund it, 
so you have no capacity then to maintain staff. 
 
Your educators are gone, your staff is gone, your equipment is 
gone because somebody else is now using it. Your space within 
the university is gone because I'm sure that building space is 
never left empty at the universities. Somebody is in there using  



May 10, 1995 

 
2134 

it for something within one of the other colleges. So while you 
have the name of that college or that chair still in place, it has 
nothing else happening. So you've lost all that corporate 
memory. 
 
You talked about that it takes a long time to get a program up 
and running. Well if everything is gone but the name, it's going 
to take just as long to get that up and running the next time, 
because you have to go through the whole process of staff and 
equipment and space, as it would if there was no name there. 
The only change would be the College of Dentistry or no 
College of Dentistry, and we'll start a new College of Dentistry 
tomorrow. 
 
So I don't understand why they would be allowed to discontinue 
the function of the college and the funding while carrying on 
the name simply because you stated that it takes awhile to get it 
up and going. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Under the old Act, at the 
University of Saskatchewan there's a program called far eastern 
studies. It is there in name only. It doesn't have staff attached to 
it. It doesn't have a program attached to it. My understanding is 
that far eastern studies, for financial reasons and other reasons, 
was disestablished. 
 
Under the new Act, the board of governors at the University of 
Saskatchewan will be able to disestablish a program for 
financial reasons. So we shouldn't have to go through this, I 
guess, bit of a shadow boxing to have a department there in 
name only because you didn't have the authority to disestablish 
it for financial exigency reasons. Under the new Act we 
shouldn't have this problem. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well can either the senate or the 
assembly prevent the discontinuance of a college though? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The general assembly, the faculty 
council, and the senate cannot prevent the disestablishment of a 
program when the board of governors makes that decision for 
financial exigency reasons, meaning a financial emergency. 
 
So they do not have suspensive powers when it comes to a 
financial emergency. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When I 
asked you, with the consultation and who had problems with 
this particular Bill, you talked about the faculty and the 
collective agreement that's in place. I'm sure you received a 
copy of this fax today also, Madam Minister — your name is on 
the list — from the faculty association. I'm wondering how 
you're going to respond to this. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me say this about the concerns of 
the faculty association. The Government of Saskatchewan has 
had a couple, maybe even three  I can't quite recall the exact 
numbers — legal opinions, legal advice indicating that under 
the collective agreement, even though the definition of council 
has changed to representative council, that for the purposes of  

the collective agreement that the procedural rights of that 
collective agreement are intact, that if the purpose of this 
legislation was to override the provisions of the collective 
agreement, the legislation would have to be very clear and 
specifically state that this Act takes precedence over the 
collective agreement. 
 
That is not the legal advice we have gotten from the Department 
of Justice. We have been told very clearly that the faculty 
association's collective agreement's procedural rights are still 
intact, and that The University of Saskatchewan Act cannot be 
used to override the procedural rights as contained in the 
faculty's collective agreement. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
think I have expressed to you before my concern over the legal 
opinions that are provided to your government on other matters, 
and I can understand why the faculty association has some 
concerns about those legal opinions. 
 
I'm wondering then, if nothing is being changed by this Act in 
regards to the collective agreement, what are the real concerns 
then of the faculty association? They state in the letter that all 
that is required is a clarification that the new general assembly 
inherit the negotiated powers of the old council in the collective 
agreement. What is the problem there, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'd just like to state that, because of the 
concerns of the faculty association, that I have had discussions 
with the president of the University of Saskatchewan, Dr. Ivany. 
And he has put in writing to me that he is prepared to negotiate 
the concerns that the faculty association have. 
 
I just want to reiterate that it is true that the faculty association 
has expressed concern that the amendments would legislatively 
change their collective agreement. I have sought legal opinions. 
I have sought advice from outside of government. And I can say 
with some certainty that I have been advised that this new Act 
does not override the collective agreement, that the new Act 
would not affect in any way the substantive and procedural 
rights of the individual faculty. 
 
So in other words, I've been told that the University of 
Saskatchewan administration and the faculty association must 
abide by the terms of the collective agreement, and any changes 
to that collective agreement would have to be negotiated. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I only 
have a few more questions for you. 
 
I have some questions concerning the elections to the senate. 
Under the Bill, you're going to have 14 elected from the alumni 
— I believe it is — from different regions or zones around the 
province. You're also having another 14 that are going to be 
elected at large. Will these elections all be held at the same 
time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that that's the intention. 
 



May 10, 1995 

 
2135 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Why was 
this change necessary? Why are you now bringing in the 
at-large group? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that this is what the senate 
wanted. They wanted to have more representatives from across 
the province and that they wanted them to participate regardless 
of where they lived. As you know, graduates don't necessarily 
live in Saskatoon or Regina, and it was their hope that they 
could have people on senate who came from outside of those 
two large areas. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. With 
those comments I'm not sure if you're referring to the 14 elected 
in the electoral districts or the 14 at large. I would hope that the 
14 electoral districts would not somehow all funnel into the two 
main cities so that someone in the two main cities could 
represent all of the 14 electoral areas. Now perhaps you can 
clarify that, Madam Minister. 
 
Who will be . . . okay, they'll be elected at large, but what kind 
of requirements will there be on those particular 14 at large? 
And do the electoral districts in some manner or function 
incorporate the two main cities into a number of those electoral 
districts? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, I'm advised that there are 14 
districts right now. And the Act will give them the authority to 
change those districts, but it's not anticipated that they will. And 
when we talk about people at large, we're talking about alumni 
being able to run for senate whether they live in Saskatchewan 
or not. It would be any graduate of the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
When these elections are held, who pays for them? Does the 
university sponsor it, or does some other body pay for those 
elections? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The University of Saskatchewan does. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well with 
the explanation as to the powers of the senate and the assembly, 
I really question whether the taxpayer should perhaps be paying 
for these elections. I'm not sure that the taxpayer is getting a 
significant benefit from those bodies to warrant all the 
expenses. And perhaps they are; I'm just not sure if they are. 
 
Madam Minister, another issue that I want to bring up is the 
expropriation powers under section 83. To what does that 
expropriation power apply? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that this has always been in 
the Act, and it's just a continuation of the power under the old 
legislation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It seems 
like a fairly broad power, and I was concerned as to whether or 
not they were going to be expropriating lands or other  

properties. So if it has been there before, they seem to be using 
it responsibly. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, I'm pleased today to hear some of the reassurances 
you've given relative to the faculty agreement because I've 
received some strong expressions of concern from faculty at the 
university in this regard. And so I just want to confirm that you 
have opinions from the Department of Justice, and you have 
additional legal opinions outside of the Department of Justice, 
and you have other advice, you said, from outside government 
that says that there's nothing in this University of Saskatchewan 
Act that can override the collective agreement. I just want to be 
very, very clear on that point. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well if that's the case, then I think I'd like to 
request that you spend some time and emotional energy with 
your department sharing this information with people in the 
faculty association such that they can disseminate this because 
it's obviously a big concern. And if there's misunderstanding on 
this score, the communication needs to restore understanding of 
exactly what is allowed and what is disallowed. 
 
So with that assurance, I will leave this issue if I can be assured 
that there could be communication on this point. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can assure you that I have spent a 
great deal of time on this issue because I wanted to be very sure 
that the legislation was not going to override the faculty 
association's collective agreement. As you know, our 
government supports the free-collective bargaining process, and 
we do not support the notion of legislatively amending 
collective agreements. 
 
So we spent a great deal of time and effort discussing this issue 
with people from Justice and others. As well, we have spent 
some time consulting with the faculty association. We met with 
their lawyer as well. They have a bit of a different opinion, but I 
am satisfied that this Act does not override the collective 
agreement. And I am satisfied that the substantive and 
procedural rights contained in that collective agreement are still 
intact. And I am satisfied that the University of Saskatchewan 
president, in writing, has indicated that it is his intentions to 
negotiate any changes. So changes could only come about if 
they were negotiated through the collective bargaining process. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well I very much appreciate, as I've said, 
those expressions of your satisfaction with the process. 
 
And the only point I would make again though is that that be 
communicated with people on the University of Saskatchewan 
campus. If it has been communicated in the past, the 
communication seems to have broken down, and maybe some 
of the transcripts of this procedure today need to be shared with 
those people. 



May 10, 1995 

 
2136 

I just want to move on very briefly, Madam Minister, to 
basically one other concern, and that is representation on the 
board of governors. I have received correspondence on this 
matter from the graduate students' association at the U of S who 
basically express their concern that it's simply not adequate any 
more in this day and age that the president of the students' 
union be the student representative, especially when the 
graduate students in 1992 voted to disassociate themselves from 
the USSU (University of Saskatchewan Students' Union) at the 
U of S. 
 
So they make the case that they have some 2,000 graduate 
students who have a very distinct relationship to the academic 
process in the university community, distinct as apart from that 
of undergraduate students, and they had requested that they 
would have representation through this Act on the board of 
governors. And I'm wondering why they don't have 
representation. If you could comment on that. Maybe . . . I'll 
just leave you with that part; that's part 1 of my question. 
 
And a related issue pertains to representation from CUPE on 
the University of Saskatchewan campus. It's long been a 
concern of CUPE members, Canadian Union of Public 
Employees, that they might have representation on the board of 
governors. 
 
And I think this also makes some reasonable sense in my 
estimation in as much as the powers or responsibilities of the 
board as indicated in clause 48 have to do with the 
management, administrative, fiscal, property, revenue kinds of 
concerns on campus. And I personally have heard a number of 
stories of governance at the university, where it seems to me if 
CUPE representation might have been on the board of 
governors, they might have been able to interject some very 
valuable fiscal material perspectives into the mix of governance 
of the university. 
 
And I think the university is the lesser for not having CUPE 
representation on the board, and I'm wondering if you could 
comment then. And that is the second part of my concern in 
terms of full representation from the university community — 
both graduate students and CUPE representation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I want to thank you for the 
question because it's certainly a question that I've been asked on 
many occasions. As you know, when our government was 
elected in 1991, we moved very quickly to do a couple of 
things. 
 
We now have working people represented on our various 
boards of Crown corporations, and we also have people who 
work at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), both faculty and support staff, represented on the 
board of governors of SIAST. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina 
are somewhat different in that historically government has been 
at arm's length from those two institutions, and this is not unlike 
what happens across the rest of Canada where universities tend 
to be autonomous institutions. Governments  

give them the appropriate funding, and then they self-administer 
themselves with very little input from the province. 
 
I certainly would welcome any suggestion for an amendment 
from the board of governors of the University of Saskatchewan 
or from the administration or through the new representative 
council to a change to the structure of the board of governors. 
But I think that that change would have to come forward from 
the University of Saskatchewan because we've tended to have 
this arm's length institution, and this legislation has been 
generated internally. So I would certainly suggest to the grad 
students and the CUPE members of both the support staff and 
the sessional lecturers that the government would welcome an 
amendment if the board of governors wanted to have the 
legislation amended or if the administration or faculty did. So I 
would welcome that amendment at some later date. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that 
explanation. That's helpful information to have. I just think I . . . 
I'd like to conclude by saying on balance I think I simply don't 
agree with the argument that the government maintain an arm's 
length distance from the university in this instance. I think when 
it comes to the very governance of the university, I think that in 
this day and age I would feel comfortable as a legislator 
proposing that representation should be there for example, from 
CUPE membership. I'm not going to open that whole can of 
worms today. 
 
I respect that the University of Saskatchewan, through its own 
processes, has brought this legislation to government and 
consulted with you on it. I would just want to state for the 
record that I don't agree with the legislation on this point, both 
in terms of the graduate students and the CUPE membership. 
And having said that, I am prepared to defer to other members 
in the House. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just to respond to the member's 
comments, I would say this, that in this day and age it's not 
unusual for very large corporations the size of the University of 
Saskatchewan to have representatives of working people from 
inside the institution. That's not unusual. We're doing it in our 
Crown corporations, and we're doing it at SIAST. And I think in 
terms of quality of working-life issues and the new mode of 
management style that it is appropriate to have working people 
on boards of governors of universities. 
 
I would strongly encourage that the working people on campus 
at the U of S and the sessional lecturers and the grad students 
work with their university administration and faculty and board 
of governors. And if they can develop a consensus, we'd 
certainly welcome an amendment to the University of 
Saskatchewan Act which would change the composition of the 
board of governors. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Given that my 
colleagues have ably asked the questions that I was prepared to 
ask on behalf of the faculty association, the graduate students' 
association  and I believe quite adequate answers have been  



May 10, 1995 

 
2137 

given  I would like to thank the officials for their assistance 
in this. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 108 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1600) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act respecting the University of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to the first item, I would like 
to ask the minister to please reintroduce the officials who have 
joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. To 
my right, Conrad Hnatiuk, deputy minister. Behind Con, Neil 
Yeates, the associate deputy minister. Just to the right of Neil, 
Phil Walsh, the director of income support. And behind me, 
Bob Wihlidal, the director of the budget branch. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the last 
time we spoke in this Assembly, I raised the question . . . you 
had indicated that my colleague before . . . that comes from a 
Dalmeny resident, had asked the questions, and all of them had 
been answered. 
 
We've done some research, and obviously either all the 
questions weren't asked, or all of the questions weren't 
answered. But I know one or two of the questions were. So I 
want to bring these questions to your attention to make sure 
we've got this file completed and closed before we move away 
from it. 
 
The questions are, does a welfare recipient have to sign any 
kind of form when they request a move? And how do they get a 
move authorized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — As clients, like anyone else, can move on 
their own if they decide to. If they — and some do — if they 
decide that they need some additional assistance to do so, they  

request a form that they have to fill out stating the reasons and 
cost and so on. And that would need to be approved usually, 
depending on the amount, by a supervisor. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess, Mr. Minister, the fact that no one . . . Or 
the recipient really isn't accountable and doesn't have to answer 
to Social Services. The question that arises is, who then is left 
with the responsibility of paying the bill? 
 
Normally, a tenant would give a 30-day notice that they're 
leaving. But in many cases — and that's where this question is 
coming from — a tenant just moves out, and what happens to 
the landlord? Who does the landlord go after for the payment of 
rent, especially if there's not only rent that is owing but the fact 
that there's that 30-day notice for rent recovery as well? Who's 
responsible for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well clients are responsible. Whether 
they are high-income earners or low-income earners or people 
on assistance, clients are always responsible for their own lease, 
if they're renting, and their own requirements around their 
shelter. So it wouldn't be correct to say that clients aren't 
accountable. That just wouldn't be a fair statement. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what does a landlord do then if a 
client of Social Services does leave a residence and moves to 
another residence? Does Social Services then cover the cost of 
that rent that was still owing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well again it's really the client's 
responsibility to look after their own shelter needs. They get an 
allowance to do that. People make their own arrangements; we 
don't make arrangements for people. Just because they're poor, 
they don't need the government making their plans and 
arrangements for them. 
 
If they move without giving due notice, then landlords can do 
what landlords have the opportunity to do, and that is to go to 
the Rentalsman's office. And so those are the opportunities 
available to them. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, how many times must a 
social assistance recipient misspend funds before being put on a 
trusteeship? And I wonder if you could give us the regulations 
regarding that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Basically again the starting point is that 
just because you're poor doesn't mean you can't manage your 
money. So basically people are given their money to manage it, 
and the vast, vast, vast majority do. 
 
It is an option available. If someone demonstrates that they can't 
manage, for whatever reason, then trusteeship services are 
possible and available. And there are some clients on 
trusteeship services. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what is the format that would be 
followed for a client to be put on trusteeship services? 
 



May 10, 1995 

 
2138 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well there's no specific criteria. It's based 
on the ability or inability of the client to manage their money. 
And the caseworker would know that, based on the experience 
of that particular individual on social assistance. And as well 
there's always the right to appeal any decisions that we make. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the reason I'm asking that and the reason 
we're bringing these questions of Ms. Attwater forward . . . and 
it's certainly another question that came up . . . is the fact of a 
person moving without notice. And if there's bills left regarding 
utilities from the town, who's responsible? And I would take it 
from your previous answer that the tenant would probably be 
responsible for that as well. Ms. Attwater actually requested 
that a previous tenant be put on trusteeship. The department 
disagreed. And as a result, he has moved without notice and 
owes money for bills. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not agree that a trusteeship would have 
been the answer in this particular situation? I don't have all the 
details, but it appears to me it's been something that was 
ongoing. And there had been problems arose before, and that's 
why Ms. Attwater had called for this. Is this a way of maybe 
protecting landowners from tenants who would move, 
especially tenants that may be under the auspices of social 
assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well we'd really have to review the case 
to answer that question. I really am probably missing some 
information. But I think I've answered as fully as I can. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I'll take the time to send you over 
the name of the individual and ask if your department would at 
least follow up and follow up with Ms. Attwater regarding this, 
if you don't mind, please. 
 
While this is coming across . . . also can an individual's GST 
(goods and services tax) be garnished for money that is owing 
in rent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well we don't do any garnishees. We just 
don't have that authority. But the landlord can apply to the 
courts on that instance, just like with anybody else. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Finally  and this is the last of the questions that 
were brought to our attention by Ms. Attwater  do social 
assistance recipients receive extra funds to get their driver's 
licence renewed, or does this money have to come out of their 
daily living allowances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — It comes out of their daily living 
allowance. We do not pay for the renewals. 
 
Mr. Toth: — A question regarding foster parents. Could you 
briefly outline how the department chooses foster parents, more 
specifically — and I'm going to give you five instead of just 
getting up and down — what is the recruitment process; how 
are potential candidates screened; what kind of training do they 
take; how intensive is the training; and what happens when a  

complaint is made against a foster parent? Are the children 
removed from the home? And has this process changed at all 
over the last three years? Maybe I should pass you the list of 
questions over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We made note of your questions. If it's 
okay with you, we will . . . We have a manual that outlines all 
of those; it's not very lengthy. We'd be very happy to . . . That's 
all in writing; it's part of our package. We'd be very happy to 
send that over to you, if that's okay? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Sure, I'd appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and thank 
you. 
 
A couple questions regarding the North Battleford Youth 
Centre. How many incidents have been reported at the North 
Battleford Youth Centre in the last fiscal year? And I wonder if 
you could provide me with the incident and the date on which 
the incident occurred. I'm referring to escapes, assaults, and 
drug or alcohol abuse, and any other complaints about staff 
members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we have all of that information. We 
don't have it just at our fingertips here. We'd be very happy to 
send that over to you, if that's okay. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. And would you 
also include the incidents for the '93-94 fiscal year and '92-93 
fiscal year at the same time, if you don't mind, please? And I'll 
just go on to another question. What changes have been made 
to prevent these incidents from happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — On your first question, the '93-94 
information, we'll provide you with that as well. 
 
You recall that we had the Jackson Review, the major review of 
the North Battleford Youth Centre, a couple of years ago, and 
we have recently completed a progress report on that. We've 
implemented virtually all of the Jackson recommendations to 
strengthen the centre. And we also have just received some 
feedback from the Ombudsman's office, who has done their 
own review, and the feedback is very positive about the steps 
we've taken. 
 
And we can send that all over to you if you like, because it's 
fairly detailed. And I actually did send some of that to the 
official critic, but we can supplement that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I have about four questions here, Mr. Minister, 
that maybe could be handled in the same manner. Rather than 
taking the time to respond to each individual separately, you 
might be able to send us the information following this in 
written form. 
 
Can you provide us with the staff listing at the centre that notes 
the positions and education? 
 



May 10, 1995 

 
2139 

Do staff positions require mandatory levels of training and 
education? 
 
Have you received any complaints about staff promotions or 
lack of qualifications? 
 
How many other youth facilities are in Saskatchewan? And 
please provide us with a list of closed and open custody 
facilities and information on escapes or any other incidents that 
have occurred. And I would like this information to compare it 
with other years. 
 
And at the same time, we'd like to use this information in 
comparing how the North Battleford Youth Centre is holding 
up compared to other facilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we'll . . . If you'll provide us with 
those, to make sure we have all your questions, we'll send that 
information over. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Yes, I will. There's about three more. And maybe 
if I just read them into the record and then I'll send them across 
to you and you'll have them. 
 
Do all of these facilities have the same programing available to 
the young offenders? 
 
What sort of programing is available at the various centres? For 
example, are they required to take classes or participate in 
counselling or drug and alcohol abuse sessions, anything of that 
nature? 
 
Could you tell us what an average day is like at a closed facility 
in Saskatchewan. What time do the incarcerated arise? What 
duties they perform. Do they work? Do they take classes? 
 
And I'd also like the information on the population at the open 
and closed facilities. I would appreciate this broken down by 
age. 
 
Now if you could agree to provide this, we'll just send it across 
and await your response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we keep regular reports on all the 
questions you raise. The answer is yes to all those questions. 
But we'll send over the details so that you can study it and ask 
for clarification or share your ideas if you so wish. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Regarding young 
offenders in the school system, when young offenders are 
released from custody or are in open custody and attending 
schools, are the teachers and principals, or at the very least, 
school boards, informed that the individual's an offender, or 
would this violate the law? 
 
And also, how are teachers and students protected from violent, 
repeat offenders? Representatives from the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation have mentioned that this is an area of 
concern. What does the government plan on doing to protect  

our school system and those within the system from violent 
offenders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, right now it really is the court's 
decision if it's an open custody situation where the court 
decides it is safe for that young person to be in the school. That 
decision is made by the courts. 
 
With regard to the question of sharing of information, we share 
the concern that you raise. And as you know, the Young 
Offenders Act amendments are before the House of Commons 
right now. We share the notion of, on a case-planning basis, 
there needs to be more opportunity to share that information 
with the schools. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess one question I 
would ask before I leave that area is, were you or any of your 
officials asked for some input regarding the legislation that is 
before the federal House, in view of your experiences here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we've had input and contact. In fact 
the Minister of Justice and myself wrote a joint letter to the 
minister federally and to the joint committee that's pursuing the 
. . . yes, the joint senate committee, sorry, that is reviewing the 
Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, a couple of questions arriving out 
of the globals. I notice under government department agency 
report, personnel report, last year you had two contracts for a 
total $8,505. This year I notice there's three contracts for 
$95,938. I wonder if you could explain what these contracts 
were for, who they were for, and why we have an increase of 
more than 10 times the last year's expenditure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Could I just clarify, you're talking about 
employees on contract, are you? 
 
Mr. Toth: — It's under the personnel report, general 
department agency report, personnel report no. 1, I guess it's 
marked. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Those are for employees, I understand, 
short-term contracts. We don't have the detail of those but we 
could provide you with the names and the detailed description 
of those duties, if that's acceptable to you? 
 
Mr. Toth: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. Under the 
personnel report no. 3, I notice that compared to last year  
there were 28 reclassifications  and conversions were up to 
114 this year. 
 
Could you give us some details on the difference that took place 
from last year to this year, from 28 to 114? What would that 
involve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — These were new positions that had to be 
classified and the three areas that we required new positions in 
related to, first of all, federal offloading on the social assistance  



May 10, 1995 

 
2140 

program, to administer that, those increased case-loads due to 
that; the increased youth and young offenders program 
requirements; and the audit verification program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Last year, Mr. Minister, you gave us a very 
extensive list of manuals that your department had put out. I'm 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just give or send over or 
inform us of any additions or deletions of manuals that you 
published as compared to last year. 
 
In the case of additions, what was the purpose, the audience, 
and the cost of the publication and whether it has been 
registered with the Legislative Library. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — There were no new manuals over the last 
year. There were some adjustments and updating and so on and 
we can provide you with those adjustments if that's okay. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Okay. I noticed in your advertising, under 
advertising and communications, Westcan media monitoring of 
sixty-two twenty-seven. What is the purpose of Westcan media 
monitoring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We don't have that information with us. 
We'll have to check and get back to you on that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the real question we have is what do you 
really mean? Who are you monitoring, or why are you 
monitoring the media? And that's what I'm trying to figure out, 
why we've got this expenditure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Okay. It's actually the media clipping 
services from the daily newspapers across the province that we 
get, and on social service issues. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I had a feeling that's what it may be, but just the 
way it's worded it's almost: are you trying to figure out what the 
media are going to say next? It's an interesting challenge. 
 
Another issue under advertising — and I find it very interesting, 
Mr. Minister. Phoenix Advertising Group, last year received 
$36,727. This year we see they have increased to $64,692. I 
wonder if you could explain the reasons for the increase. And 
would it be . . . one of the reasons be that it's just a matter of 
trying to get the message out before another provincial election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — That is all staff, and related to those 
positions I talked about in your earlier questions. It's all related 
to the staffing advertising. 
 
Mr. Toth: — One final question before I allow other members 
to speak out on this or ask questions that they may have. Last 
year you had a total of 25.19 on ministerial greeting cards and 
thank you cards in your budget. This year I noticed it's up to 
$530.83 on ministerial Christmas cards. I wonder why we've 
had such a dramatic increase and why you . . . $25 seemed 
appropriate one year, now we're up to 530. Could you explain 
that please? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I would think this is because the first 
year I was minister I just became appointed, and I think I sent 
out a lot of Christmas cards over this past Christmas, and it 
relates to that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, it's cards that were directly 
sent from the minister's office. Who would the cards go to? And 
are they just generally to workers or people involved in Social 
Services? Or who would you send those types of cards to — 
constituents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — No these would be — there'd be no 
constituents from the ministerial office — these would be 
provincial associations, agencies, NGOs (non-governmental 
organizations), those who in a sense are sort of partners around 
the province in terms of providing Social Service's programs 
and services. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Toth: — One further question regarding polling. As I 
understood it, you undertook a poll this year on public opinion 
on the child action plan. I wonder if you could summarize for 
us the results of that poll. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We really don't do any polling except 
that we did the one question there where it related to testing the 
level of public awareness of the child action plan. At the time 
we did that, which was some time ago now, we found out that 
about 12 per cent of the public was aware of the plan. So that's 
what that is. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Minister, 
to your officials. And I wonder, before I start, if we might have 
assurance that all the information that you will be sending over 
to the opposition would also be sent to us. 
 
Could you outline the department's responsibility in relation to 
the youth detention centres and in the disposition of young 
offender sentences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — With regard to the information requested, 
we will send that to you. 
 
As you know, the Young Offenders Act is really a federal 
legislation and we administer that Act. We basically . . . the 
sentences are determined, as you know, by the courts — closed 
custody, open custody, service, or probation — or through the 
police prior to that process. There may be alternative measures 
worked out, is another disposition. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me somewhat of 
the process of the determination and cooperation with the 
Department of Justice, or whoever you cooperate with, in how 
these decisions are made on closed, open, or alternative 
measures, and what sort of alternative measures are available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, as you know, I'm sure that the court 
makes the decision as to one of these dispositions based on the  



May 10, 1995 

 
2141 

information presented to them by the police. And of course, we 
are sometimes asked for a pre-sentence report in terms of our 
judgement here. But based really on the arguments of the 
Crown and the defence, the court then makes a decision. 
 
There are many, many alternative measures. We'd be happy to 
send you over a list of those. But the recent victims' program in 
Regina here, administered through the Friendship Inn, with the 
police and Social Services and a number of other partners . . . 
The shoplift program for young people who might be involved 
in shoplifting . . . And there are a number of community service 
order type things where you try and bring the young person in 
touch with the person that's been victimized, and many 
variations of that. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. In terms of the 
pre-sentencing report, what information do you work from? 
How is that pre-sentencing report put together and presented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the worker . . . Basically it involves 
developing an assessment of the situation the young person is in 
— a profile, if you will — based on interviews with the young 
person, the family, the school, the police, collateral agencies if 
there's some involvement there, to try and get the best . . . to try 
and sort of capture what the real needs are in a situation and 
what, I guess, the problems are and sort of what . . . (inaudible) 
. . . recommendation as well in terms of disposition. Yes. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — So as you say, you make a recommendation 
for the disposition. Now is this the disposition whether it be 
closed, open, or alternative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Right, you're right there, but I forget to 
mention that we just give them, you know, an informed, an 
educated opinion from this collection and this assessment, that 
at the end of the process, as you know, the court still makes the 
decision. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Can you please tell me, what is 
the current provincial population of young offenders in custody, 
whether open or closed or in remand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Three hundred and fifty-five in total. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — How many would be open, and how many 
would be closed, and how many would be in remand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, 140 in open custody, 167 in secure 
custody, and 48 on remand. Now those are the December 
figures. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. In terms of the institutions, 
could you tell me how many spaces each of these institutions 
was designed to meet the needs of . . . or to serve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — The total number of spaces they were 
designed to accommodate were 310. 
 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. And that is a problem I'd like to 
address. I've been told by staff members that the most urgent 
priority in the institutions, given the excess numbers according 
to what they were designed to provide program to and to 
provide facility for, is, to quote them directly . . . the quote is: 
the point is to reduce the case-load. 
 
At least that's the feeling of many staff members I've talked to. 
I've visited two of the institutions. Does this accurately reflect 
the situation at these institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We are trying to reduce the case-load. 
But we're sorry; could you just give a clearer picture of the 
question? We're not sure we understood. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Certainly. I've visited at least two of the 
institutions, and I've also talked to staff outside their work time. 
And they said that the most urgent priority, it seems to them, is 
to reduce the case-load in whatever way possible, given the 
overload of these institutions. And that's a fairly strong feeling. 
Does that accurately reflect the situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, I would agree with you and the staff 
that this is a challenge that we're trying to address. And on that 
note, the staff have done an incredible job in a very challenging 
situation. 
 
As you would know, I'm sure there's a similar . . . the numbers 
are similar across Canada as we struggle to not only come to 
grips with some potential changes in the Act but also, maybe 
more fundamentally, to deal with the issues like family poverty, 
unemployment, and other longer term solutions which we're 
attempting to do through the child action plan which, I might 
add, has significant interest across Canada as a joint 
government-community holistic approach to dealing with 
community challenges. 
 
But I would agree with you that we need to continue to work to 
reduce the numbers. And we believe that some of the 
preventive measures that we're putting in place, some of these 
are investments, and it doesn't turn the situation around 
overnight. We're on the right track in terms of that strategy. 
 
Now it's going to make it very difficult to maintain some of 
these programs with the . . . unless we can get back on track 
with the federal government in terms of some of the joint 
initiatives that we believe that together would be very helpful in 
terms of our long-term family poverty strategy. And so any 
support you can give us in that regard would be very helpful. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. And you will know 
that I've worked in the preventative area for many years, and I 
know that's where the solution lies. And I encourage the efforts 
of 20 years worth of work coming to the child action plan; it's 
extraordinarily important. 
 
But I am concerned about what is happening in the institutions. 
When I related this quote about reducing the case-load, it seems 
to me that in addition to this, what staff had to say is that they  



May 10, 1995 

 
2142 

cannot deliver the very fine programs that they are designed and 
trained to deliver, partly for lack of sufficient staff, partly 
because of overcrowding, because of the pressure on the 
institution. So that's a big concern, and I wonder if you might 
address that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I think you raise a good point. We 
agree that the overcrowding has contributed to the inability to 
deliver the programs, very fine programs. We know we're on 
the right track there in relation to the challenges. 
 
And as a result of that though, we believe that we've been 
responsive, and we have opened up a new Echo Valley camp. 
We've re-opened the camp there. And also we've just 
announced and are working on additional spaces at 
Whitespruce, 14 additional spaces at Whitespruce. And we 
believe that will take some of the pressure off the institutions. 
And the staff should see a reduction because those are the two 
new units that are available within the next month or so. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Just to go back to another figure we talked 
about, you said there were — the institutions were built for 310 
— that were 355 young offenders in them right now  140 
open, 167 closed. And I wondered in the closed institutions 
what those figures might be, what the institutions were built for, 
and what they actually are handling at the moment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Basically . . . I mean we're agreeing with 
you here. Echo Valley and Whitespruce will halve that problem 
for us. We're about 40 to 50 spaces short. Echo Valley and 
Whitespruce will have that for us, and we're working on two 
other contingency options as well. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Are the Echo Valley and Whitespruce 
closed custody facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — As you've said, it's a very important and 
difficult problem to deal with, and I understand the difficulties. 
But in a time not only when there's a demand for more 
accountability of youth and institutions, when the institutions 
we have cannot deliver the services that would a difference, it 
becomes an even bigger concern. 
 
What about the remand facilities? How often are they filled at 
or beyond capacity? I understand that there's a lot of pressure on 
them. And there was the recent case I believe at the Dojack 
Centre where there was a suggestion that a young offender was 
too violent and disruptive for that facility. 
 
The first question is about the remand centres themselves, the 
remand themselves, and then into this particular case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — . . . separate remand facilities as such. 
Older youth for example, if necessary, could be on a temporary 
basis remanded at the adult system, so we do not have as such  

the separate remand facilities. But the point you raise is part of 
the overcrowding that we discussed. If and when we're 
successful, as we believe we will be with reducing the 
overcrowding, that will also . . . We're satisfied that we will 
have enough remand spaces in the system. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. When will these two 
facilities be on-line, and when will this overcrowding begin to 
lessen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Echo Valley is already in operation, and 
Whitespruce will be receiving the first young person this 
Friday. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. That's encouraging, Minister. 
 
One more question in this area. How are these young offender 
facilities structured administratively? What role do communities 
play in the running or supervision or cooperation with the 
department in these facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes. Well many communities are 
involved in different ways. For example, say North Battleford, a 
lot of the people who live in North Battleford are employed at 
the centre. We utilize . . . we work very closely with the 
aboriginal community, so elders go into the centres, for 
example. We also have again different arrangements in different 
centres but a number of volunteers go in for different reasons. 
 
In addition to the community partnershipping that goes on, sort 
of the working relationships on behalf of families from more of 
a holistic perspective, that goes on again in each community. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. The community aspect of these 
is very important. And given another time and more time, I'd 
like to explore that with you. 
 
I have a question about a program called the Queen's University 
national executive MBA (Master of Business Administration). 
It's a program designed for managers and professionals at 
Queen's University. And according to the document I have, 
participating organizations include the Department of Social 
Services. Can you tell me what the involvement of the 
department is with this MBA program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, one or two of our staff are involved 
in this program through extension as they're pursuing their 
MBAs, but there's no departmental money involved here. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — How does the department come to be then 
involved as a participating organization? Is it just because the 
staff is from the department, or what reason would they be 
listed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — That must be the case, because they must 
have identified themselves as having worked in the department, 
because we have no involvement with them nor has there been 
any money spent in any of these courses on behalf of staff. 
 



May 10, 1995 

 
2143 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. As I understand your 
government's JobStart program, there are two client groups 
eligible to participate in the program, and one group includes 
social assistant recipients in the 17- to 24-year age range. Can 
you explain your department's role in the JobStart program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Do you know the program is run by the 
Department of Education? We make referrals to New Careers 
who run that with the Department of Education. That's basically 
what our role is in this. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — How many of your clients are participating 
in the JobStart? How many referrals have you made; how many 
are participating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, as you know, it's a new program 
and the numbers will increase, but as of yesterday — and we 
don't have this written but we're recalling it from a report we 
saw yesterday from Education — there are 59 of our clients in 
that program. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. Before we close off, I 
just have one more question. You've recently begun sending out 
a newsletter called Next Step, and I guess there have been two 
issues now, and I just wondered who it goes to — what is its 
circulation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Actually this letter's been ongoing for 
two years now, so there have been 8 or 10 volumes of it. It goes 
to all employees, to a number of organizations, and to 
government departments. And it also goes to other provinces 
where we get theirs. Other provinces have similar letters to 
communicate in terms of what they're doing, and so we send 
ours to them as well. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I would imagine it's also available in centres 
for clients to read as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, it is. It's in all the offices, and as a 
matter of fact, they sent it to the MLAs as well, as you would 
know. So yes. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Can you tell me the cost of this newsletter 
on an annual basis, what it cost this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — It's very minimal. It's done by staff and 
. . . but I can get that information to you, if that's okay. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I'd appreciate that, and also perhaps the 
number that are distributed. 
 
Before I sit down, I'd like confirmation that we'll be receiving 
the information you sent over to the opposition as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we will do that. Thank you. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you very much, Minister, and thank 
you to your officials. You've been very enlightening this 
afternoon. 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I just want to thank my officials as well, 
and to thank all the department and all the staff in the 
department for a very challenging, and, I think, year where 
we've done a lot of creative partnershipping with our 
communities, and it's a real credit to them. So I thank you for 
your important questions. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 
Vote 36 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to extend my 
appreciation and thanks to the minister and to his officials for 
their indulgence over the past number of meetings we've had 
and for your response to our answers. And we look forward to a 
response to the answers that you've committed to us. Thank 
you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 
 


