






















































March 17, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 17, 1995 

 

 
929 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would be happy 
today to present petitions on behalf of the people from the Gull 
Lake and Webb area of the province; also a considerable 
amount of names here from Shaunavon. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these on behalf of the people from the 
south-west part of the province today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Lancer, Abbey, Sceptre, Hazlet 
areas of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also have a 
petition. The prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are constituents of mine from Shaunavon  

and Frontier area. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Petitions opposing changes to federal legislation 

regarding fire ownership. 
 
 And petitions to allocate adequate funding dedicated 

toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 
 
 And petitions seeking the approval of Pool membership 

by a vote before the proposed changes to the Wheat 
Pool Act are enacted by the Assembly. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Britton, as Vice-Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills, presents the eighth report 
of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 
 Your committee has considered the following Bills and has 

agreed to report the same without amendment: 
 
 Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 
 Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act respecting Our 

Lady of the Prairies Foundation 
 Bill No. 03 — An Act to provide for the incorporation of 

The Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the Seventh-day 
Adventist Church 

 
 The committee has also considered Bill No. 04, An Act to 

amend An Act respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being 
an Act to amend and consolidate "An Act respecting 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to amend and 
consolidate An Act to incorporate Saskatchewan Co-
operative Wheat Producers Limited" and to enact certain 
provisions respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 
 Pursuant to rule 68, the committee held 32 hours of public 

meetings to hear witnesses for and against the Bill. The 
committee heard from 70 witnesses and also received 10 
written submissions. The committee wishes to thank all 
those who participated in the process. 

 
 Your committee has agreed to report Bill No. 04 without 

amendment. 
 
 Your committee recommends under the provisions of rule 

61 that fees be remitted less the cost of printing with respect 
to Bill No. 01, 02, and 03. 



March 17, 1995 

 
930 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member for Prince Albert Carlton: 
 
 That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills now be concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act 
respecting the expropriations amendment Act, lands and 
chattels, 1995. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and the other members of the 
legislature, students and teachers from two schools, Radisson 
School in my constituency, and Shell Lake School just outside. 
 
There's 76 in all, 7 to grade 12, sitting in the east gallery. They 
are accompanied by Walter Kyliuk, who is the principal of 
Radisson School. And the other teachers are Janice Kozun, 
Reiner Boensch, Rob Dalparte, Loretta Harpham, Joyce 
Scarpinsky. And I would like to have you join with me in 
welcoming them here and wishing them happy St. Patrick's Day 
in the morning as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the Legislative Assembly, two visitors from 
Russia: Mr. Nikolai Khudykh and Dr. Lydmila Lykova. They 
are accompanied by their interpreter, Mr. Oleg Richkoff. Dr. 
Lykova is the chief expert at the Centre for Social and 
Economic Issues of Federalism with the Russian Academy of 
Sciences. Mr. Khudykh is the First Deputy of the Department of 
the Economy for the region of Krasnoyarsk. 
 
They are in Saskatchewan as part of the Russian-Canada 
collaborative federalism project. This project has been 
established to share information on the Canadian system of 
fiscal federalism. After their visit, our guests will return to 
Russia to help redesign Russia's federal system based on its new 
constitution. 
 
Dr. Lykova and Mr. Khudykh have spent this past week with 
officials in the Department of Finance to study the principles, 
goals, and legislative basis for fiscal federalism, the distribution 
of taxation and spending responsibilities, and the budgetary 
planning process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's participation in the Russia-Canada 
collaborative federalism project is another recognition of our 
national leadership in these crucial areas. It also represents once 
again a much-deserved acknowledgement of  

the competence and professionalism of our provincial public 
service. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to warmly welcome our 
special guests from Russia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
join with the Minister of Finance and welcome these people 
from Russia. It's been a privilege for me to be in not only the 
area of Moscow at least three times in the last three years, but 
I've been in St. Petersburg and in Kiev — of course that isn't in 
your country any more — but I've been in Kazakhstan, Alma 
Ata, and travelled there and met with a lot of government 
officials. 
 
In fact — I'm not sure whether this is politically correct — but 
the day that Mr. Yeltsin turned the lights off in parliament I was 
across the river in the Ukrainian Hotel and I saw the lights turn 
off, and I have pictures of that in my file. At 5 after 10 the 
lights were turned off and I have those pictures; and that's 
where CNN (Cable News Network) was taking the pictures 
from, the next week that Mr. Yeltsin took the tanks and shot the 
parliament. 
 
I have visited in the parliament with members of your 
parliament. I have visited in the Kremlin with various agents of 
Mr. Yeltsin, and so it's a special privilege for me to welcome 
you here as a part of transferring some of the information on a 
democratic society and relating this to how you transform your 
country into a democratic country. 
 
Thank you very much for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me today to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 
a group of grade 7 and 8 students from Lakeridge and 
Sutherland schools in Saskatoon. They're accompanied by their 
teacher, David Ehmann, and chaperons Mrs. Haugen, Mrs. 
Jenzen, Mrs. Steenvoorden. 
 
And I'd like to ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
them and wish them a safe trip home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with my 
colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland in welcoming the students 
from Sutherland schools, and most particularly, Lakeridge 
School in my riding. And I would ask members of the 
legislature to note that this is a group of probably the best 
dressed, best behaved, and probably most thoughtful students 
that we've seen here for some time. So welcome to the 
legislature and I hope you enjoy your tour. I'll meet with you 
later for drinks and discussion. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 17, 1995 

 
931 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 
today, to you and through you to the members of the legislature, 
a constituent of mine and a friend of mine from Radville, Rod 
MacDonald. Rod and I have had very many conversations and 
discussions about many issues that affect my area of the 
province, and all of Saskatchewan, and I really appreciate his 
commitment to the quality of rural life in Saskatchewan. And I 
ask members to help join me in welcoming Rod here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to join 
my colleagues in welcoming Rod MacDonald to the legislature, 
a long-time friend and co-worker. Perhaps some of the 
members opposite remember our days on the Rafferty project. 
But I'd like to ask members in joining me to welcome Rod here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
St. Patrick's Day 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and a top of the 
morning to you. As you know, today is St. Patrick's Day and I 
would like to make a few comments in tribute of our Irish 
heritage. 
 
It was in 1832, Mr. Speaker, that thousands of Irish along with 
Scots and the English in the first great wave of Canadian 
immigration chose to make Canada their home — my father's 
family among them. Because of this, Canada's status quickly 
changed from colony to country. That is why, one of the 
reasons why, St. Patrick's Day is important here in Canada and 
North America, as it is in Ireland. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, there are only two types of people: the 
Irish and those that wish they were. 
 
During all the rather bizarre commercialization associated with 
St. Patrick's Day, we should take a moment to remind ourselves 
the traditional view of the stage Irish person is somewhat 
distorted. As we look ahead to the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination next Tuesday, we should 
note that the Irish too have been subject to racial intolerance 
and have yet managed to retain a proud and rich heritage. 
 
Rather than stereotypes, Mr. Speaker, we should pay tribute 
today to the Canadians of Irish descent who have contributed 
much to the mosaic of our society with their wit, their music, 
their love and brilliant use of the language, their humour. 
 
The story of St. Patrick is centuries old but we keep his memory 
fresh by honouring his people today. Erin go bragh, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Draper: — Mr. Speaker, sir, as mentioned, today is St. 
Patrick's Day. Last year I claimed him on behalf of his own 
people, the Welsh, and this was not to denigrate either the Irish 
nor St. Patrick, but simply to put him into a better perspective. 
In St. Patrick's time, the population of present-day England and 
Wales was Brythonic Celts. The country was properly called 
Britain. 
 
Erin was the home of Goidelic Celts, more closely related to the 
Scots than to the Welsh. Raiding, fighting, looting, rapine was 
the order of the day between the branches long before the 
common enemy, the English, arrived. 
 
I paid homage to St. David on behalf of the Welsh side of my 
family on March 1. Today I honour Margaret McManus, my 
great-grandmother, born and raised in Baile Atha Cliath, more 
commonly known by its Viking name, Dublin, by paying 
homage to Padraig. 
 
The example, the experience, and the teachings of all good men 
and women, be they saints or not, are available and appropriate 
to all of us, whatever our race, our nationality, or our religion. It 
is my fervent hope that now some semblance of peace has been 
restored to Ireland, that all Irish men and women can live 
together in harmony, whether they revere St. Patrick, St. David, 
St. George, or even St. Andrew, for many Scots have migrated 
to Ireland. 
 
So I say slainte and I give you the salutation used at the rising 
of the moon: Erin go bragh, long live Ireland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
New Dialysis Equipment for Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to rise 
today and inform this Assembly of some good news for all of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, over half a million dollars has been 
allocated for new equipment for Saskatchewan patients with 
kidney disease. These funds will go to cover the cost of 20 new 
and replacement dialysis machines for the health facilities in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 
 
The expansion of these programs will ensure that patients from 
all across the province have a better access to this life-saving 
technology. There are currently around 350 people in our 
province with kidney disease, Mr. Speaker, and on average 29 
or 28 patients are added to the list every year. 
 
The good news, Mr. Speaker, comes during National Kidney 
Month, which focuses on raising funds for research and patient 
services and education, as well as organ donor awareness. 
 
While our new health system is providing a wider range of 
community service, there is a role for high-tech services by our 
base hospitals. And until a cure is found, Mr. Speaker, for 
kidney failure, dialysis is the most realistic option for many 
patients. 
 



March 17, 1995 

 
932 

The good news I bring to the Assembly today will continue to 
ensure that all residents in our province have access to health 
services that they require. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Head Start Program in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an unfortunate fact 
that some low income families cannot afford to send their 
children to a much-needed preschool program. Some of these 
children may go on to fail in kindergarten because they just 
aren't learning the basics. Fortunately, some concerned citizens 
from my constituency are doing something about this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Education Week, I'm pleased to inform the 
members of the Assembly that a new program called Head Start 
is being established in Moose Jaw to help these preschoolers. 
This new and exciting program is being organized by the people 
of Hunger in Moose Jaw. 
 
This preschool program will be available for children aged 3 to 
6, and would be partially funded by the federal government. In 
addition, the program will also rely on the support of the people 
of Moose Jaw. 
 
The Head Start program will be a cooperative, community-
based effort. It will involve several local agencies and groups, 
including the Moose Jaw Family Life Education Centre, the 
YM-YWCA, and the south-central early childhood intervention 
program. 
 
The preschoolers' parents will also play an active role in the 
program, for they will be encouraged to volunteer and help out 
at the school. They will also be asked for input on how they 
think the preschool should be set up and run. Town hall 
meetings have already been scheduled for the Hunger in Moose 
Jaw centre at the Orange Hall, as well as at the YM-YWCA and 
Moose Jaw Family Life Education Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the establishment of the Head Start program will 
give preschoolers a head start in education, and I wish them 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Seniors' Health Care 
 

Mr. Toth: — And top o' the morning to you, sir. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. My questions are to the Minister of Health. The 
official opposition have brought forward dozens of cases which 
show that your health care attack is simply not serving the 
seniors of this province, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Each day, Mr. Minister, we receive telephone calls, we receive 
letters from concerned parents, concerned sons and daughters, 
husbands and wives, who tell us that a hospital is evicting their  

loved one with absolutely no place to go. 
 
Yesterday in fact, Mr. Minister, we received an urgent call from 
Gerald Schultz of Rosthern whose father needs 24-hour care. A 
hospital in Saskatoon has informed Mr. Schultz that his father 
will be evicted shortly, but there are no available beds for Mr. 
Schultz to place him in near the community. There are no 
current nursing beds available in the immediate vicinity, and 
Mr. Schultz cannot do it himself. 
 
The story, Mr. Minister, is far too common and home care isn't 
the answer for everyone. Mr. Minister, have you any idea of the 
level of concern for seniors in rural Saskatchewan, or are you 
relying on bureaucrats in Regina to tell you what is going on in 
the real world? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it's been my privilege in 
even the last few days to be travelling in communities beyond 
the capital of this city. And I'm regularly talking to both seniors 
and other people who have concern and care about our health 
care system. I'm not able to comment on the specific case which 
the member brings to the House this morning, and we can 
follow up on that. 
 
But let me say, as the member well knows, in this very budget 
that is yet under debate in the legislature, substantial amounts of 
money are being provided to improve community-based and 
home-based care while at the same time recognizing that we 
will always need supportive care at a variety of levels, including 
up to about the most heaviest levels of care. 
 
I want to quote again to the member and to members of the 
House, reaction from seniors across our province. And this 
appeared, Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatchewan Seniors 
Association newsletter, an organization which represents 
literally thousands of seniors across Saskatchewan. In this 
newsletter, when referring to the new emphasis on home and 
community-based services, one senior says: this is something 
we've been waiting to hear for a long time. It is very good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, I'm 
afraid that there are many people across this province, including 
Mr. Schultz, who are not totally impressed with that type of a 
response or an answer. 
 
Because, Mr. Minister, while you indeed have allocated more 
funding for home care, that does not meet the need of the 
individual out there who is in a situation where they need some 
very heavy 24-hour care — care that is not easy to be offered 
under the home care program. Mr. Minister, I frankly don't see 
many seniors finding a lot of relief and a lot of comfort in the 
comments and the answers you have given to these questions. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, there are some alternatives, and we've  



March 17, 1995 

 
933 

raised it before. I've asked you before why you do not allow the 
licensing of private care homes in rural Saskatchewan such as 
the one proposed in Avonlea, a private care home that would 
meet the need of a person such as Mr. Schultz. Mr. Minister, 
this will not cost the taxpayer one dime, and it will provide 
desperately needed nursing home beds for seniors and will 
relieve pressure on publicly funded seniors' facilities. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe this makes sense. Why are you 
restraining the licensing of such facilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in reference to the 
member's question, and we've talked about the question in the 
House in question period, we've talked about it in estimates, 
and I've assured him that we are very carefully working out 
some policy issues in this regard, and I expect to be making 
those policy announcements very soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to provide, across 
Saskatchewan, a wide band of options. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
today in Saskatchewan there are 10,000 people receiving heavy-
level care. Now for the member to suggest that this care isn't 
available is simply false. There are 10,000 people across our 
province receiving heavy-level care, and that at a cost of about 
$250 million. 
 
We recognize that a wider band of options are necessary, 
ranging from care in one's home to care in one's community. 
And we're looking very seriously at some of the ideas that the 
member and others have brought to public attention and to the 
attention of this House. And we're looking at options that I 
think not even the member has conceived of, and which I know 
when announced will be very positive and very popular and 
welcomed by that member and all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, unfortunately we have, yes, raised this question 
before. But unfortunately as well, Mr. Minister, you keep telling 
us that soon you'll be making an announcement. But that soon 
has probably gone back about 12 or 14 months already. And 
people are getting tired of hearing the word soon. People want 
to know exactly when you are going to come to the point of 
making a clear-cut and affirmative decision regarding level 4 
care in this province. And while you talk about the number of 
beds that are available out there, it's fortunate that there was a 
time span where some of those beds would have been made, or 
they wouldn't be available because certainly nothing was being 
done in the '70s. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are groups that are willing to offer some 
solid and basic and sound care for level 4 patients across this 
province who do not have the ability to receive it in their homes 
— adequate care. They're willing to do it. Why will you not 
stand and give us a firm commitment today or give us a specific 
time period when you will be making that announcement, rather  

than just saying soon or very soon you will be making it. Why 
will you not do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
member and members of the House that he and his government 
were in office in this province for 10 long years, 10 years. Will 
that member . . . can that member stand in this place and say 
one new, creative idea that was brought to support of care for 
seniors in this province during that length of time? Was there 
one new concept? 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, 10 years — nothing. Now he's pushing, 
pushing, pushing us. Well that's fair enough, that's his job. And 
I repeat again this morning that policy in this regard will be 
announced very soon, and I am very confident that he and all 
members of the House will greet this policy with much 
applause. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ACS Employee Conflict of Interest 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for ACS, the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, it's been brought to 
our attention that a senior employee of yours in ACS in Swift 
Current appears to be in a serious conflict of interest. Mr. Bob 
McGowan is a senior credit officer with ACS. 
 
Earlier this year, Mr. McGowan also began working for a 
private collection agency called Falcon Collection & 
Investigations. As you know, ACS has an extensive database 
and one of the most sophisticated tracking systems in the 
province. ACS has access to bank records, credit information, 
individual assets, outstanding loans, and other sources of 
income. All of this confidential information would be extremely 
valuable to a collection agency. 
 
Clearly, use of confidential information in a private business 
would be conflict of interest. Mr. Minister, would you not agree 
that it is a conflict of interest for a senior credit adviser with 
ACS to also be working for a private bill collector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first time 
that this matter has been brought to my attention. I would 
appreciate it, if there are serious concerns on individuals, that 
the member would take the more appropriate route and bring 
those to my attention without fanfare and politics with the 
individuals' names. But, Mr. Speaker, we certainly will 
investigate. We have rules regarding conflict of interest and if 
somebody is in violation of those rules we will certainly take 
the appropriate action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 17, 1995 

 
934 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, that's 
why they pay you the big bucks, so that you . . . that's so that 
you pay attention to what your job is. ACS is a big component 
of your job. 
 
Conflict of interest guidelines state, Mr. Minister, that an 
employee is in conflict of interest if he has private or personal 
interest which gains an advantage by virtue of position in public 
service. 
 
I remind you of an instance a couple of years ago where 
SaskTel employees were told that they could not sell Amway 
any more because Unitel and Amway had some type of a 
working agreement and every employee got a letter from the 
president of SaskTel saying: no more Amway sold, boys and 
girls. 
 
Now thousands of Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Minister, deal 
with ACS and they need to know that the information they give 
to your bill collectors is kept very private, is not used for 
someone else's personal gain. Will you give a commitment to 
investigate immediately and make sure that your ACS clients 
are not being used for private gain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I made that 
commitment in the last answer. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Mr. Minister, while you're busy 
thinking, I'll give you something else to think about. Are you 
contemplating privatizing the credit accounts of ACS? And if 
you are, will you give a commitment to the House today that 
people such as Falcon and Bob McGowan will not get that 
business without going to a fully open tendering process, 
contrary to what you've done in other Crown corporations with 
construction. Would you guarantee that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure what the 
member opposite is on about. We certainly, in any business 
deals we make, make them above board and obviously without 
prejudice. And if there's any thought of selling ACS, I don't 
think those two individuals are probably on top of the list. 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government closed hospitals without a plan, and now they're 
going to open casinos without a plan. The government has no 
idea how many casinos Saskatchewan can support, other than 
the study that they themselves commissioned which told them 
that the current exhibition casinos already satisfy the full market 
demand. 
 
My question is for the minister in charge of Gaming: how do 
you, Madam Minister, plan to measure and assess the impact of 
the Regina casino on the economy, on the existing exhibition 
casinos, and on the future proposed casinos? In other words, 
how are you determining how many casinos Saskatchewan can  

support? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I'll just start by saying that I was 
very pleased to find out that the Liberal opposition in Alberta is 
supporting Saskatchewan's approach and that they're giving us 
the recognition that we deserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Nick Taylor of the Liberal 
opposition there, said that the Alberta government should 
follow the example of Saskatchewan and set up revenue-sharing 
agreements. 
 
Specific to the question that the member opposite is asking, we 
did have — and she will be familiar with — the Candace Fox 
report in 1993, due to her very able research people on that 
subject. And they concluded that there was sufficient room for 
VLTs (video lottery terminals) and casinos in Saskatchewan, 
that the province can sustain two casinos with a limited number 
of machines each. 
 
And at this point, we've only approved half of that capacity with 
the Regina casino, and each subsequent casino up to a 
maximum of four requires a market study, so I think that would 
be fairly obvious. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 
take note of the minister stating that that particular report said 
that two casinos could be supported in Saskatchewan. 
Yesterday it was stated that casinos at . . . Saskatoon has not 
been ruled out as a site for yet another casino. That could mean 
two casinos in Saskatoon alone, Madam Minister, two in 
Regina and more around the province. 
 
The government has chosen to actually ignore the one 
independent study that shows that the current casino models are 
all the province can support. And people are beginning to see 
the increased addiction to VLTs (video lottery terminals) and 
the failure of charitable lotteries because of too much 
competition for gambling dollars. 
 
My question, Madam Minister: can you guarantee the people of 
Saskatchewan that the six- to eight-month waiting period that 
was promised after the opening of the Regina casino will be 
used to assess the impact on the casino market-place before any 
further casinos are opened? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you to the member. Mr. 
Speaker, I would have to assert that the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indians is taking a very businesslike approach to 
this. That approach has been recognized by others, for example, 
in Alberta. And I would have to say that they have no desire to 
spend their limited economic development dollars on ventures 
that won't succeed. 
 
And they certainly will be working closely with us to exercise  



March 17, 1995 

 
935 

due diligence over the next six to eight months in deciding what 
is viable in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, the government may think 
that this issue is worn out, and they may really want to put it all 
behind them and move on, but it is far from being over. In fact 
there are many, many unanswered questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatoon overwhelmingly rejected the concept 
of a downtown casino for their city. And yesterday it was stated 
that Saskatoon has not been ruled out as a site for yet another 
casino. Saskatonians now realize that any casino expansion will 
not mean one, but two, casinos in Saskatoon because the 
exhibition boards do not appear to be involved despite the 
earlier policy of this government that they must be involved. 
 
My question to the minister of Gaming: Madam Minister, when 
are you going to tell us how many casinos there will be and 
what the plan is for the exhibition casinos that already exist? 
Will Saskatoon and Regina have one or two? Or will they all 
simply go out of business because you don't know what you're 
doing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will restrain myself in my answer 
here, Mr. Speaker, because we have gone over and over this. 
The agreement was tabled in the House, and certainly the 
member opposite might use some of her contacts to verify the 
fact that Regina Exhibition has been in on all of the 
discussions, is certainly one of the partners. And any of the 
market feasibility studies have to consider existing operations 
and would have to work with any exhibition association in any 
location. 
 
And if there's anything one could say about the agreement, is 
that Mr. Klein in Alberta should follow it because it's a model 
agreement for this kind of activity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Trade Agreement with Australia 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, recently Canada has 
signed a trade agreement with Australia allowing for a 
significant increase in the importation of beef from Australia. I 
noted that there was no comment from you or from the Premier 
or from the NDP (New Democratic Party) government. What do 
you think of that agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, the increase in 
imports of Australian beef was a federal Liberal decision to 
allow more beef into the country. It is a danger to not only our 
producers but to the American borders if the Americans feel 
that beef is flowing in through the back door. And I have 
written a letter to Mr. Goodale expressing concerns about this.  

They obviously are in charge of that decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, just a moment ago you said you 
didn't know anything about something going on in ACS. I am 
sure the meat industry and the beef industry in western Canada, 
let alone in Saskatchewan, would be interested in your 
comments about importing a large amount of offshore beef into 
Canada. 
 
We already have one of the highest import quotas of any 
developed country, and you have stood by as they've increased 
even more. There's no indication that we're short of beef. Cow 
kill is up 15 per cent. And you know as well that if you allow 
more beef coming into Canada, it means the jobs going from 
Intercontinental Packers; the jobs at Lakeside, the jobs at 
Cargill, are in jeopardy. 
 
And you've said nothing. There's absolutely zero coming out of 
the Government of Saskatchewan on a major industry. The 
federal Liberals have taken away the Crow and said diversify. 
Now they've opened up beef imports coming into this country 
and you have stood there and said absolutely zero. 
 
I would like to know why you haven't commented on something 
as significant as this when in fact it has major implications for 
western Canadian farmers and agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we have spoken up 
for Saskatchewan farmers. We've spoken up on the Crow; we've 
spoken up on safety nets; we've spoken up on crop insurance; 
we've spoken up on the trade . . . the wheat trade issue. We've 
spoken up. And I also have written to . . . on this particular 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberal government doesn't understand 
western agriculture. I don't think they ever have, and probably 
never will. We continue to stand up for farmers. We haven't 
always had the cooperation from the other provincial parties in 
this province, but we certainly have stood up for Saskatchewan 
farmers and we fought hard for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you're standing up for 
western Canadian agriculture, show me how you've done it in 
this issue. Show the public. I have seen nothing, no comment 
out of the NDP administration, on a major trade agreement that 
is going to hurt western Canada, particularly as a result of the 
demise of the Crow. 
 
And I haven't seen one single word. The stock growers, the 
cattlemen, the packing plants, the Moose Jaw Packer, Alberta 
packers, and other people in the meat business are very upset. 
And there's not a word coming from you. Show me that there's 
more than just rhetoric, that you really do care about it. 



March 17, 1995 

 
936 

Because in fact if we have got one of the highest quotas now, 
we're going to upset Americans terribly if we let more offshore 
beef in here and then go back into the United States — that's 
our major trading partner, and if we don't have reciprocal 
agreements or fair agreements, you're going to jeopardize 
agriculture here and you haven't said boo. 
 
What I can't understand is why you wouldn't comment on 
something as major as this, at a time like this. And if you have, 
please table it or show somebody. Because we don't agree with 
the policy of the Liberal administration; why should you? And 
by being quiet, you tacitly agree with them. And I'm sure that's 
not the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, the member should 
decide whether he wants rhetoric or he wants action. We have 
had meetings. We have taken action; we have dealt with the 
federal minister on every single agriculture issue. The member 
opposite has rhetoric in the House today. That's his 
contribution, after the fact, to stand up and beat up somebody 
because they haven't done the proper action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have stood up for the farmers of Saskatchewan 
on every single issue — every single issue — and every time we 
get support after the fact. After the Crow was cut, then the 
provincial Liberals are onside, offside, onside, offside, and you 
people who have worked hard for the last 20 years to cut the 
Crow are suddenly onside after it happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are the ones who are standing up for 
Saskatchewan farmers and we have fought hard and we have 
done our very best to protect our Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Addiction 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 
this morning to the minister responsible for the gambling in our 
province. Madam Minister, yesterday we brought up the case of 
a Kindersley man who stole from his church in order to feed 
your Premier's slot machines. Your response to this situation 
was to say that the gentleman had a wonderful learning 
experience. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, that is a callous, uninformed thing to 
say. It's like blaming the provincial churches for leading you 
into gambling, as you said. And I'm wondering, I'm truly 
wondering, whether you understand the seriousness of this 
situation. I'm wondering if you even recognize what VLTs can 
do to certain people, and that is the basic question. Madam 
Minister: do you believe that your VLTs are addictive? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think that people have difficulty with 
gaming. I think they have difficulty with alcohol. I think they  

have difficulty with bingo, difficulty with drugs. And I might 
remind you, during your 2,000 per cent expansion of gaming in 
1983 when you privatized and commercialized bingo halls, you 
did nothing for gaming addiction, absolutely nothing. And it's 
nice to find that you've had a conversion here, on the road to 
Damascus, and now you're all in support of helping people. 
 
But you had no such interest during the time that you were the 
ones that dramatically increased the activity in terms of gaming 
and people who are very much into gaming as more than just a 
recreational activity. I would say that your government very 
much promoted that. 
 
So I would have to say that I have a lot of concern and 
sympathy, and have actually spent a considerable amount of my 
life working with street children, working with addicted people. 
I understand it fully. I think it is terribly unfortunate and we 
spend a lot of money on repairing the damage to those things. 
But still and all, at some point, the individual must take 
responsibility for their decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Madam Minister, it's 
unfortunate that you continue with your religious analogy like 
that. Deny, deny, deny. That is the first symptom. That is the 
first symptom of an addicted gambler who refuses to 
acknowledge that you are hooked. 
 
Mr. Premier, you are hooked on gambling and yet you deny. 
You deny the human cost. You deny the human toll of this 
advanced proliferation of gambling opportunities in this 
province. More bucks for the government — that's what you see 
in your government-sponsored, government-promoted gambling 
in this province. 
 
And I don't believe, Madam Minister, and Mr. Premier, that you 
really understand. The Department of Health has an internal 
newsletter profile. There they say, the main problem identified 
in gambling is VLTs — your slot machines, Madam Minister. 
 
If you want your casinos fast-tracked to make sure that they get 
up and running in the minimum amount of time so that you can 
get the maximum amount of bucks, why don't you, Madam 
Minister, try to get involved in your own learning experience? 
Why don't you call, Madam Minister, this gentleman from 
Kindersley and find out firsthand what you are doing to so 
many people in this province. Will you give that gentleman a 
call, Madam Minister, and have your own learning experience? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you to the member for his 
question. Mr. Speaker, we would certainly connect the 
gentleman with people who are qualified and able to deal with 
someone who has those kinds of problems. Whereas I have 
worked in those areas, I'm not a professional counsellor and I 
wouldn't pretend to be so. And I think it would be only 
responsible that if a person has that problem, that they get the  



March 17, 1995 

 
937 

appropriate assistance. 
 
I would have to remind you of the origins of this problem. We 
never at any point decided to initiate VLTs. It was rural 
hoteliers who raised the issue with us because they wanted to be 
able to compete with Alberta, Manitoba, and the United States. 
And we were in fact suffering from a problem that was created 
by the fact that Tories surrounding us had decided that they 
were going to move ahead, much as you did with your bingo 
expansion in 1983. That was really a turning point in the way 
that gaming was viewed in the province. 
 
I'd have to say that our government has increased the budget 
that we're putting towards prevention, education. There's $1.5 
million allocated to this. We certainly hope that people will 
make good choices. But the fact is Saskatchewan is not an 
island; we're surrounded by all kinds of influences. And we 
think the responsible thing to do is the best we can do to 
mitigate and to treat in those occasions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Interior Designers 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Interior Designers. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 19 — An Act 
to amend The Business Corporations Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we see 
it, and as I see it, I believe this Bill is purely a housekeeping 
Bill that updates some business regulations. In the Bill we see 
four main reforms that are achieved by this Bill. 
 
First, the Bill clarifies definitions of how a company may be 
controlled and what is considered to be a subsidiary. For 
example, it clarifies that a company would be considered 
wholly owned by a company . . . pardon me, it clarifies that 
company A would be considered wholly owned by company B, 
but either were owned outright by company B, or if it were 
owned by two or more wholly owned subsidiaries of company  

B. These changes bring Saskatchewan regulations into line with 
the Canada Business Corporations Act. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, the Bill allows directors of a company to 
appoint a limited number of interim directors between 
shareholders meetings if the company's by-laws allow this 
practice. Again,. Mr. Speaker, this is in keeping with the 
Canada Business Corporations Act. 
 
Third, the Bill allows two or more wholly owned subsidiaries of 
a company to amalgamate without the shareholders of the 
parent company having to approve it. 
 
And fourth, Mr. Speaker, the Bill modernizes the definition of 
how corporate notices and documents may be delivered or 
stored, thereby allowing the faxing or other electronic 
transmission of notices and that storage of documents in an on-
line electronic database. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in view of these objectives of the Bill, I believe 
that these are appropriate objectives. I believe they're purely 
technical and non-controversial matters. And therefore I find no 
reason in adjourning debate, but Mr. Speaker, I'm prepared to 
allow this Bill to move on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
to amend The Co-operatives Act, 1989 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Again, Mr. Speaker, as with Bill 19, this Bill at 
least appears to be just a housekeeping Bill. And again I just 
want to point out six basic things that I believe the Bill is doing: 
(1) it removes the requirement for co-ops to register a particular 
municipality of operation and thereby allows co-ops to move 
their business offices anywhere in the province they wish; (2) it 
appears the Bill formally registers the term co-op as equivalent 
to cooperative as a business description limited to cooperatives; 
(3) we see the Bill affirms that directors can only be selected or 
fired by the membership and not by other directors; (4) it 
clarifies that only members may pass by-laws and may not 
delegate these powers to the directors; (5) it allows for speedier 
processes for dissolving inactive co-ops, particularly those 
where the remaining members, if any, cannot be located; and 
(6) a number of small grammatical wording clarifications that 
do not change the effects of the original Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what were the issues; what is the need? And we 
want to bring out a number of questions that we want to relate 
to the minister when we get into committee and therefore we 
will be allowing this Bill to move to committee. 
 
But what is the real need to allow co-ops to locate their 
business offices outside of their areas of operation? Would this  



March 17, 1995 

 
938 

not allow small town co-ops to establish business offices in 
Regina? What would be served by this? Do co-op members 
want to have sole responsibility over by-laws? Is it not an 
imposition on the freedom of co-op members that they are not 
allowed to delegate decision-making powers? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when an inactive co-op whose members 
cannot be found is dissolved, who gets the money and why? 
Who makes the determination that a co-op is inactive and how 
is that definition changed by this Bill? How many such co-ops 
are there that there is a pressing need for new regulations to 
deal with them? 
 
Mr. Minister, in regard to a number of these questions we feel 
that it would be much easier to direct the questions directly to 
the minister and deal with the Bill more appropriate in 
committee, and therefore at this time we are prepared to allow 
the Bill, Bill No. 20, to go into committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before we proceed I see that the member 
for Kinistino is on his feet. 
 
Mr. Roy: — Mr. Chairman, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
introduce to you and to the members in the Assembly, two very 
special guests that are with us today in the legislature. They're 
seated in the Speaker's gallery. They're members of my family, 
Mr. Speaker; my brother-in-law, Perry Gaudet, and his wife 
Gail. Perry is a farmer and an SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) agent in Bellevue, and Gail is a school teacher and 
she teaches in St. Louis. So I would ask the members to give 
them a very heartfelt welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, could we ask the 
minister to please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here today? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. I'd like to introduce Brian 
Woodcock, president of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation); John Law, senior vice-president, 
finance and accommodation; Al Moffat, vice president, 
commercial services; and Rob Isbister, director of financial 
planning, finance and accommodation. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
take this opportunity right away this morning to welcome the 
officials that are going to be assisting us with SPMC and will 
be assisting the minister in her endeavours to answer the 
questions, of which we have many. 
 
Madam Minister, just to start the process off as we always do, 
we have sent your department a list of what we will term as 
being global questions, as we have in the past. And my first 
question of course is, could you give us an idea whether or not 
you have dealt with those questions and when our office or 
myself could expect to receive the answers to those questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for your question. We'll be 
returning the answers to those questions at year end. I would 
think it would take probably a couple of weeks past year end to 
have all the information together, but we're very close to our 
budget year end. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you, 
Madam Minister. We will of course wait with bated anticipation 
for the answers to our questions, because there will, of course, 
be follow-up questions that relate to those answers, and I think 
this is the appropriate place for us to get into the detail of many 
of those things. Obviously it is the only vehicle that we have to 
find out exactly what's going on in many of the government 
adventures. 
 
The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, Madam 
Minister, is something that most people have a view of as being 
just another government department that really doesn't have 
very much significance, that they simply hold onto some 
properties and maybe have a few warehouses some place, full 
of old, used furniture. And in reality, because the media doesn't 
find this to be a very controversial or stimulating topic, that's 
about all the general public really seems to know about the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. It's 
something that not many people really question or talk about 
too much. 
 
But the reality is that it is quite important to our province, as we 
have delved into this a little further. And so I think it's 
important that we spend a little time trying to show the public 
just how important this part of the government's activities are. 
 
And as I've mentioned just now, we find that a lot of people 
think that there are warehouses full of materials that 
Saskatchewan Property Management has, that they sort of sit  



March 17, 1995 

 
939 

around with all of this furniture  chairs and tables and old 
desks and things  and maybe computers and what not, all 
stored up some place, and that nothing ever happens with it. 
 
So I'd like you to explain to the public, Madam Minister, first of 
all of course, are there warehouses where you do store that kind 
of property, owned and controlled by the government through 
this vehicle? If they are in existence, what is the process for 
getting rid of this sort of stuff? Or do we just rent space for ever 
and keep storing it up? 
 
One time I recall, just for an example, that somebody had 
printed up a few hundred thousand calendars, and somebody 
put them in a storage house and that they'd been there for 10 
years or something. So I'll let you respond. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for his question. I 
just wanted to get a little more information for you as far as 
how decisions whether to store or sell are made. There is a 
central furniture warehouse. The asset value of all of our 
furniture across government would be around 20 million, and of 
that about 100,000 in assets would be stored in the warehouse 
at any given time. 
 
The rest that is considered surplus, due to age or just not being 
necessary for the particular functions anymore, goes to auction. 
And that's where, I guess, if some of us aren't elected again, 
where our furniture will be too. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Of course that's a little 
bit of a start at helping with the questions that people are asked 
about — all the furniture that is stored. Now who decides what 
furniture is obsolete or no longer should be in use in 
government offices? How is that determined? What is the 
criteria to decide that this is now something you will move out 
of active use into the storage process that would go to auction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The people that are responsible for that 
in the corporation are maintenance and operations. And the 
basic rule of thumb of it is, anything that's broken or obsolete, 
although they do even repair things, recover furniture, etc. So 
we try to be as economical as possible in the reuse of furniture. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
who are they — the people that make this decision? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Are you asking for names or positions? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Both, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We do have a furniture manager in the 
head office, as well as regional managers, and we'll provide you 
with those names. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Fine. When would we expect to get those? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's no problem providing that 
within a week. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. We'll again wait with 
anticipation for the information. I take it then that you have one 
person, or is this a group of people that does this? And it seems 
that you've covered a rather large area with a very short possible 
answer here. 
 
You've got equipment scattered from one end of this province 
to the other. I'd like to get an understanding of how one person 
— or is there a team of people — can handle these decisions. 
Do they travel out into the country, for example, and examine 
the furniture every year? 
 
Or do they have somebody make a memo and send it in and say, 
we got scratches on our chair, we want a new one; and 
somebody else rubber-stamps that and says, okay you can dump 
your chair and get a new one? Does a truck go out from Regina 
and pick this chair up from, say Melfort or Tisdale or 
Shaunavon or whatever? Is it collected into Regina? What 
happens to all this stuff? What is the process? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The thing I would like to emphasize to 
the member is that this is done on a regional basis so that there 
is activity in all areas of the province, not merely in Regina. It 
does serve the rural areas directly through the regional offices. 
 
What happens is the people who are the tenants of a particular 
building would talk to the building manager responsible for 
their building and let them know what their needs are, what 
furniture has perhaps outlived its usefulness. That then goes to 
the regional manager who would store whatever looks like it's 
not repairable or retrievable in a local warehouse. 
 
And once there is a sufficient inventory assembled, the overall 
manager would review the items and decide whether in fact he 
affirms that decision to allocate them to sale. And at that point 
they would then either be repaired and returned to some area of 
the province that needed it or they would be allocated for sale. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister, when they're allocated for sale . . . Just to jump over a 
little bit that I'm going to come back to. Now the regional 
manager decides for an area. Let's suppose that . . . Well maybe 
I should ask you, if you wouldn't mind explaining, how big 
these areas are, I guess. 
 
I have no comprehension — if this means an area the size of a 
municipality, an area the size of 40 municipalities around Swift 
Current for example, or something like that. Now how big of an 
area are we talking about? And then I want to get on to the 
process of how it's sold. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, there are six regions in the 
province: Prince Albert, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, Regina, 
Yorkton, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Regina, Yorkton, and Saskatoon. And that's 
the whole ball game for regions? Well now that means that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Six. 



March 17, 1995 

 
940 

Mr. Goohsen: — Six. Okay there's altogether . . . could you 
give us a map of that? There must be a map, something that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I'll let you answer formally for the 
record so that people can get that information. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'll provide a map of the regions to 
you, along with the materials we're providing next week. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Now these sales that are 
held . . . I remember when I set up my office as an MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) I thought it might be 
nice to have a desk in my office. And someone told me, well 
the government's got a lot of surplus stuff; why don't you get 
one there? 
 
And I have to admit I didn't do a whole lot of research on it, but 
I started asking a little bit, and I couldn't find out when these 
sales were or where they were or where this furniture seemed to 
be stored or what the process was to get a hold of one. And then 
of course here came along an opportunity to buy one at an 
auction of a different sort, so I did get one and never pursued it. 
 
But I think now, with the new policy that furniture is going to 
be going back to the government from all MLA offices, then 
new MLAs again might prosper by us pursuing this matter a 
little further so that we have access to the information of how 
we can access some of this furniture in the future. 
 
So could you tell me, when are these sales held? What kind of 
sales are they? Where are they held? And how would we access 
the process and the information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can tell you that it would be a good 
idea if I loaned you my constituency assistant because he 
wouldn't let me buy a filing cabinet until he could find one at 
auction to buy. I've gone months sometimes without them, until 
he found an auction. 
 
Anyway, the advertising is done, and all sales are advertised 
and conducted by private auctioneers in the area where the 
auction is held, and they must be advertised. I couldn't tell you 
specifically what papers those local auctioneers advertise in. 
We could get that if it was important. But they do advertise 
every sale. 
 
We had about one sale per month. Most are in Regina; this year, 
two in P.A.(Prince Albert); one in Saskatoon; and when there's 
enough inventory in a region, a sale will be held regionally as 
well. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam 
Minister. I'd like to pursue this avenue a little bit further. My 
colleague did state that he did buy his desk at an auction. It 
wasn't a government auction, but it was an auction. And I 
happen to know that he did because I was at the very same 
auction and bought a bunch of my office equipment at the same 
place. 

But, Madam Minister, with our office equipment going back to 
the government now, is it possible for us, at the present time, to 
gain access to some of the office equipment that is in storage 
with SPMC? We've had two members of this Legislative 
Assembly that would have turned their office equipment over 
already to SPMC when they have left this chamber, so that 
office equipment should be available someplace. 
 
Now at the present circumstances, we have to, as MLAs, go out 
and find our office equipment, our paper supplies, whatever it 
might be for our offices, either locally, which is perhaps best 
for us as MLAs, but we have to find it someplace. We can't go 
to SPMC, who at the end of the day is the ultimate owner of all 
of the office equipment within our offices. 
 
So is there any avenue available today for an MLA to go to 
SPMC and say, I want a desk or I want a filing cabinet, 
whatever it might be, so that we can equip our offices this way, 
because the office equipment is owned by SPMC? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Today, no, there is no way to do that 
because the policy has been that the only people who can buy 
off the floor — and it's only some items they could buy; those 
with established prices — are municipalities, both urban and 
rural. No individual has been able to go into the warehouse and 
do that. 
 
Now as you would know, the Board of Internal Economy has 
been discussing this and by this summer there will be a policy 
that I think would address some of the concerns that you're 
raising. And certainly your member on the Board of Internal 
Economy could again raise that there. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, some of the 
equipment from MLAs has already been turned over to SPMC. 
What has happened to that equipment? Has that gone to public 
auction, has it gone to private sale? What happens to that 
equipment? 
 
As an example, cellular telephones. I believe some of them 
have been turned back by MLAs. Now what's happened with 
them? Have they been sold? Are they sitting in a box 
someplace? What's happening with that equipment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Could we get a clarification, please, of 
whether you're talking about an individual MLA office or the 
caucus office for the various three caucuses? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well it really doesn't matter, Madam 
Minister, whether it's the individual MLAs, because that 
equipment is owned at the end of the day by SPMC. It goes 
back to SPMC. If I cease to be an MLA tomorrow, all the 
equipment in my office comes in to the government. It doesn't 
go any place else. 
 
So it doesn't matter whether it's a constituency office, the 
caucus office, or an MLA's cellular telephone. What's 
happening with it? 
 



March 17, 1995 

 
941 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What we're just getting at here is the 
differentiation between equipment and furniture, because there's 
some equipment — for example, like cellular phones and some 
of the equipment, certainly, the furniture and what not in the 
Legislative Building — which is redistributed through the 
Legislative Assembly, and not by SPMC. So there is two 
different sources, depending on the source of funds and who's 
responsible for administering those funds. 
 
All of these issues, the equipment and the property, will be 
dealt with in the overall policy that's being developed. But until 
that time, the furniture that goes back through the route of the 
MLA office would just go to auction as all other furniture. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So you're saying, Madam Minister, the 
office equipment out of an MLA's office that no longer exists, 
goes to SPMC for auction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I should have been more specific on 
that. I apologize. It goes, first of all, to see whether it's 
redistributed within government, and then if not, then to 
auction. But not necessarily specifically, to an MLA office. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. So an MLA's office equipment, 
when he's no longer an MLA, would go to SPMC. They would 
decide whether or not it should be channelled back into the 
government stream. Do you mean into departments, Crown 
corporations, or does it come back into the Legislative 
Building, or what happens to it that way? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to mention that I think the 
problem in communications here is that we're confusing apples 
and oranges. We're distinguishing between how furniture's 
handled and how equipment is handled, like cellular telephones, 
that kind of thing. 
 
The furniture gets handled according to the government-wide 
furniture policy. There's no difference. Because it's MLA 
furniture doesn't make it different from anybody else's furniture. 
It's just furniture. And until there's some policy that 
differentiates, it's handled under the government-wide furniture 
policy and equipment is handled by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well you still haven't told me what 
happens to it. But okay so, Madam Minister, the chairs in my 
office go to SPMC to be used as government chairs. The 
photocopier in my office, what happens to that? What's the 
difference between the chair and the photocopier? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess all I can do is keep repeating 
this till we've breached our communications problem here. 
Something like a photocopier is considered equipment, not 
furniture; and it would go back to the Legislative Assembly 
until the further policy that we're discussing is developed and 
approved. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well I had a few people running 
interference there, Madam Minister. I wonder if you could 
repeat that, please. 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I hope I can. Okay, the photocopier that 
you referred to would be equipment, as opposed to furniture. So 
at this point, according to the policy, it would go back to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now when the overall policy is developed and approved by the 
Board of Internal Economy, then at that point there would be 
whatever changes are agreed to. But until then, the current 
policy is furniture, SPMC; equipment, Legislative Assembly 
Office. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I just happen to 
have a photocopier that's only good to be used for a chair. 
 
When I changed photocopiers, the company suggested if I paid 
them $100 they would take away my old photocopier. So it sits 
in my office today and does nothing. Because when I inquired 
what I should do with it, I was told just hang on to it and we'll 
let you know. So there it sits because nobody knows . . . nobody 
wants it and nobody knows what to do with it. 
 
Madam Minister, let's talk about our caucus equipment. Caucus 
equipment comes from SPMC or it comes from the 
government. Now what's the procedures with caucus 
equipment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If the furniture is purchased through 
the Consolidated Fund, it comes back to SPMC for sale. 
 
I would ask the hon. member to pay attention and we'll be able 
to get through this a little quicker. If the Consolidated Fund has 
paid for the furniture, it comes back to SPMC. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Why 
then, if it comes from SPMC and goes back to SPMC as caucus 
equipment, can't we simply order our supplies from SPMC? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because this is a time period where 
we're changing all these policies. I mean it is difficult to predict 
totally what the future will hold, but at this point I guess I can 
just reaffirm that it's handled under existing policies until there's 
a different policy. 
 
And certainly the comments that you would make into that 
process would be useful, but the existing policy stands until the 
new one is in place. And that is that the furniture gets treated 
like any other furniture and you have go to auction, just like 
anybody else, if you want to get it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, right now I don't 
want to sell anything. I want to buy something. I want 
something for the office. Now if I have that thing coming into 
my office and I decide then to dispose of it, it goes right back to 
SPMC. So when I want paper, let's say, or I want pens or 
paperclips, whatever it might be, why can't I simply phone up 
SPMC, because it comes against the caucus budget, and say, I 
want 10 pens; please send me 10 pens. But it doesn't seem to 
work that way, Madam Minister. We have to get them from 
SPMC, but we can't order them from SPMC. 



March 17, 1995 

 
942 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think I'm starting to understand where 
we're not having a meeting of the minds here. In bookkeeping, 
people try to establish cost centres. And according to the cost 
centres, you receive a budget for furniture and therefore your 
budget is what goes to pay for your furniture. And so rather 
than SPMC giving you furniture that you're budgeted to get, you 
have to then go through the normal auction process to get it. 
 
Now we are in the middle of changing this policy, but it is not 
SPMC that's driving this change, it's the Legislative Assembly 
— your member on the Board of Internal Economy; our 
members on the Board of Internal Economy. So at the point at 
which we give direction to SPMC to do it differently, then at 
that point they will, because they like to do whatever we tell 
them is the appropriate thing to do. So, I think the matter really 
resides with us more than it does with SPMC. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, what has happened 
with the telephones that have been turned back in to SPMC 
from the MLAs. Have any of them been disposed of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll just reconfirm that those go back 
through the Legislative Assembly Office, and I would assume 
they restore them back to wherever they were obtained from, 
whether it would be SaskTel or some other supplier. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So SPMC then does not get access to 
those telephones at all? The Minister is giving me hand signals 
that I'm hopefully interpreting correctly, that that's the case. 
They don't go back to SPMC. 
 
So let me ask then, what is the difference between a cellular 
telephone, which may be owned by an MLA, and the 
photocopier? I understand what the mechanical differences is, 
but what is the property difference between them? And I know 
that there are certain members with 18-horsepower hair-dryers 
that could handle a photocopier as a telephone, but I don't think 
that's quite the issue. 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I'll go back to my accounting 
explanation. It really is a matter of the source of the funds  
who's responsible  just the same as it is in estimates for 
ministers to account for the areas that they're budgeted for. 
 
So it really has very little to do with the item but the source of 
the budget that it comes from. As a general rule of principle, 
you can divide it into furniture and equipment, but it is the 
source of the funds that distinguishes who looks after what 
happens to it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Staying on the 
same theme, as far as the equipment that's being held in 
warehouses and such, when your government formed 
government in 1991, some of the election promises were to 
bring back some form of a school-based dental program. And I 
guess it was the former government that had taken out a great  

deal of these dental chairs and dental equipment out of the 
schools. And I was wondering if . . . what has happened with 
that equipment today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you for your question. 
Apparently all that was left in 1991 by the time we took over 
was the odd chair, and the rest had all been sold prior to that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. What 
happened to the odd chair? Can you give us a list of what 
equipment was left? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can provide you a detailed list of 
the specific equipment and where it went and what not and 
when it went, if that would be more helpful than guessing and 
giving generalized answers. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right. So what you're telling me is that 
you no longer have any of the dental equipment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We haven't for a couple of years now. 
And that has been of course one of the budgetary difficulties in 
reconsidering that program. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So I assume that it was put up for auction. 
Did it show up on one of your auction bills? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You're asking me to answer a question 
for activities that happened primarily before we were 
government, so I think you could just lean over and ask those 
questions to the members beside you. 
 
We will provide answers on anything that we've dealt with since 
we were elected, and we'll give that to you in detail and in 
writing. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I am talking about the equipment that 
you referred to was still there after the 1991 election, regarding 
the dental equipment. Now was it auctioned off or sold? Did 
you search out a buyer for it, or was it brought up at an auction? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Very specialized equipment like this is 
not very usefully or profitably sold in a general auction process 
because of the very specialized and limited number of people 
that use it. So it would tend to go more through searching 
through the community of people who use that kind of 
furniture: brokers — people who are acting on behalf of, 
perhaps another country even, a third-world country that might 
be looking for piece of equipment like that. So there's a bit of a 
different process for a highly specialized piece of equipment 
like that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So that then, I take it, is the list that you're 
going to provide: exactly what happened with each piece of 
equipment, how much we got for it, and who received it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that's right, we'd be happy to 
provide that. 



March 17, 1995 

 
943 

Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you tell us what 
Crowns and departments that you supply . . . or that you . . . 
SPMC has inspectors, whether it be equipment inspectors or 
building inspectors, but inspectors as a whole. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Excuse me, Mr. Chair, I can't hear the 
questions any more because there's too much discussion going 
on. 
 
The Chair: — I think the minister and the member for 
Shaunavon are both in agreement on this, and I ask all hon. 
members of the House to allow this to continue. Please to pay 
due diligence and attention. I recognize the minister. I'm sorry; 
the minister was saying she had difficulty with the last question. 
I'll ask the member for Shaunavon to repeat it, please. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The question 
that I'd asked, can you give us a list of what all Crowns and 
departments that SPMC supplies inspectors for and what their 
duties are, what it covers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'm going to have to ask you to clarify 
your question. Did you say inspectors? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well people that inspect buildings or 
equipment, do you have people that go out and . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don't have any inspectors. Building 
inspection and those types of things are done by the Department 
of Labour and other provincial and federal and municipal 
bodies that work on different codes. That's not something that 
SPMC does. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well then, Madam Minister, does your 
department supply any building managers — someone that 
would perhaps go out into the community of, say, Shaunavon 
and look at the Liquor Board store there or the court-house or 
some of the Power offices? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, I think what we're dealing with 
here is just a terminology question. We only manage the 
buildings that we own and operate. So, for example, the liquor 
stores would be done by the Liquor Authority; the Crowns' 
buildings are done by the Crowns. It would only be the 
buildings that we're specifically responsible for that we would 
do that. 
 
And yes, there is a building manager. But again I think many of 
the kind of things you may be referring to would really be 
brought to the attention of the managers by the particular people 
who are using that space and raising concerns about who would 
know maybe the age of their carpet or whatever. But there is 
building managers for the ones that we particularly own. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right then, we'll use the community of 
Shaunavon as the example. Do you have buildings in the 
community of Shaunavon that you have inspectors go out and 
look at those buildings or those furnishings or properties in that  

community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As it turns out, we don't have much in 
Shaunavon. It is part of the Swift Current region, so the overall 
management would come out of the Swift Current office, again 
referring back to the regional organization. 
 
There is an equipment storage facility for Parks, and Highways 
has space there also, but all the other space is not owned 
directly by ourselves. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Madam Minister. Do you have 
anyone from your department leave their operation in Swift 
Current to go out into some of these communities, such as 
Shaunavon, and do inspections? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that would be true. That's part of 
the regional operation and again that would come out of the 
Swift Current region. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — This is going by the long-about route here 
to ask a simple question earlier on. So now can you tell us, what 
do they inspect when they get out to Shaunavon? Which 
buildings? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's really an overall client inspection 
that's done just to see if standards that are set for government 
space and what not are being maintained. And also again I 
would remind you that there would also be response to issues 
raised by people using the space, who would certainly be in a 
better position on a daily basis to determine whether there were 
particular problems or not. 
 
I don't know if that's a sufficient answer, but that would be the 
nature of the . . . If you have a specific thing you're wanting, 
that would be very helpful, rather than beating around this bush 
for ever. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I was actually 
going to use that in my next question: that I wish you would 
quit beating around the bush, because I think the questions have 
been fairly pointed. 
 
When an inspector leaves Swift Current and drives to 
Shaunavon, can you give me a list of what he's doing out there? 
And don't . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, stop beating 
around the bush, is absolutely correct. 
 
Does he go to the court-house and inspect something there? 
Does he go to — I don't know — where the game wardens are? 
Just give me a list of the buildings that they inspect. Give me a 
list of what they do. It's simple. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I could really use the analogy that it's 
much like any building that one of us might rent and be in. And 
the landlord, or in this case the building manager, is responsible 
for things like temperature control, the level of maintenance in 
the building, the cleaning standards, just the basic kind of 
obligations that any landlord would have to his space. I'm sure  



March 17, 1995 

 
944 

you have a landlord for your constituency office space. It would 
be very similar to the relationship you would have with the 
person that you rent from as far as them making sure that basic 
standards are met. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, we're just going to 
have to stay on this subject until you give the answer. Do you 
have an inspector that goes out and inspects the buildings in the 
community of Shaunavon, inspects the buildings? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay we'll try this again and see if we 
get any closer here to an understanding. We don't do building 
inspection. We do overall building management and that would 
include, for example, either capital investments needed in the 
building or are client needs being met. 
 
For example, in the case of the specific buildings in Shaunavon, 
the equipment storage for the park, is the roof leaking? Is the 
equipment dry? 
 
There are supplementary activity though, that might be what 
you're getting at. There are preventative maintenance crew of 
specific tradespeople who have to meet certain standards for 
other departments' licensing requirements; for example, things 
like your boiler equipment. They'd have to make sure things 
were operating properly, pumps are repaired, that kind of thing. 
And that's particular types of crews that go out to make sure 
that items that are licensed by other areas are maintained at the 
level that's required. 
 
But for example, if it had to do with specific legislation coming 
out of different departments on air quality, etc., those would be 
done by the inspectors out of those particular departments 
where that legislation originates and that's not done particularly 
by SPMC. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, some of the other offices 
— and we'll use, like a SaskPower office for an example — is 
that owned and operated by SaskPower? Or does your 
department have any role to play in SaskPower or SaskEnergy 
or ACS buildings? And you know what the lists are, so you 
know what I'm getting at. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — On the operations, the answer would be 
no. But there is a space coordination function in government; so 
for example, if a department needs more space and there's some 
surplus space, things like that, just efficiency in managing over 
all public expenditures on space. But we have no direct 
operational involvement in those buildings at all. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So then what I can assume then, for the 
SaskPower building there would be an inspector working for 
SaskPower driving out to Shaunavon to look at the facilities, 
see what their needs are. The same would happen for the Liquor 
Board stores, SaskEnergy buildings, Sask Health buildings, 
Crop Insurance — there's inspectors that are coming out from 
each department to look at their own buildings? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I guess the only analogy I could 
use is the same as when you lease any space in Regina. The 
private sector does not get together and coordinate all of the 
caring for space. There are particular people who look after the 
buildings that they own and are responsible for. And quite a 
considerable amount of the space the government uses is not 
owned, it's leased, so there would be a private person that owns 
that space and looks after it. 
 
In the case of government buildings, it would not I don't think 
make a substantial difference. I know what you're getting at, 
you're getting at economy and efficiency, and I think everybody 
is always very conscious of that. But if people were not needed 
to do the job, I'm sure the job would not be there. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, that's exactly what 
I've been trying to get at. If Sask Property Management, if their 
overall goal is to manage the properties of the province, 
whether it's the Liquor Board stores or the court-houses . . . And 
I'm trying to get some understanding if there's ever been 
consideration of having one body or one inspector, perhaps 
based out of Swift Current, come out into the communities and 
look at all facilities that the government is in control of. 
 
That's what I was trying to find out — if in fact whether we 
could do it with one inspector or one manager rather than have 
each department overlapping this same service. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well as it turns out, your question's 
very timely. Because there are some places where this is already 
happening and other places such as Shaunavon that are, right as 
we're speaking, going into a process of discussion as to what 
are some ways to do this. 
 
There is places where the federal government has a presence 
where we do have an arrangement with them and that has 
resulted in reduced costs. One example is North Portal. But 
there is also arrangements with other government departments. 
Particularly the area where this can be very cost effective is in 
places like the North where the driving distances are quite large. 
 
The economy is reduced depending on the distances involved. 
But in areas where there is considerable distance, this is 
certainly worth looking at. And I understand that people are 
right now looking at whether there's ways to already improve 
the arrangements that already exist. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm surprised 
how long it took to get that answer out of you. 
 
Madam Minister, you had mentioned leased properties, the 
amount of leased properties that the government is dealing with. 
And can you provide us with a list of the leased properties that 
SPMC has with private individuals — who they are, what the 
lease terms are, and the amounts of the lease? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we are able to give you the 
following information: the location, the building, the term, who  



March 17, 1995 

 
945 

owns it, but not the specific financial details because it's always 
been an agreement with the lessors that that type of market 
information is not available to other parties due to the nature of 
that market-place. But we can give you all the other information 
related to this. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, is that a change in policy 
that you won't release this amount of monies that you're 
spending on the lease? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well that has been the tradition of this 
legislature and the unspoken agreement, I guess, with the 
industry that's involved. Now whether they would be amenable 
to that kind of a discuss, I guess, is something that could be 
explored. But at this particular time, it never has been provided. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Oh, I don't agree with you, Madam 
Minister, because SPMC has given that information before. In 
fact let me use an example. The Crop Insurance-Health office in 
the community of Shaunavon was raised in Crown Corporations 
before, and SPMC officials gave out the lease amounts. In fact I 
think it was something around $50,000 a year that the 
government spends on leasing that Crop Insurance building 
from a fellow, I believe it was from North Battleford. 
 
So I'm just now wondering . . . and I know another one that was 
raised was the Crop Insurance building in I think North 
Battleford itself, owned by I think it was Joe Remai or someone 
like this. And if I remember the figures right, it was something 
like a couple of hundred thousand dollars a year that we're 
leasing this for. 
 
Now these figures came from SPMC. So I can only assume that 
this is a change in policy? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I'm not sure of the very specific 
information that you're referring to from Crown Corporations, 
but in the legislature, it has been for the past 20 years the 
practice that that information has not come here. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, can you . . . this 
list that you're going to provide for us, it will tell the company 
name, who we're leasing it from, but also the individuals that 
are involved. And I raise it in this sense, that I was told the 
Crop Insurance office in, I think the community of Melfort, is 
owned and leased by the government. I think it's owned by the 
minister from that community. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Normally we deal directly with the 
representative of the corporation, and the cheque goes to the 
corporate name that we have listed as being the owner of the 
building. We can certainly provide you with the corporation 
name that we have the relationship with, and I do believe that 
information is available through corporations branch. I don't 
know if that's adequate to your question. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well it probably isn't, Madam Minister, 
but if you could get that, the first amount of information, to us 
as soon as possible, then perhaps when you're back in the  

House another day we could delve into this further. And do I 
also . . . I guess I can assume that all the documents that you're 
sending to the official opposition will also come to the third 
party? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, no problem with that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Just a few other questions, Madam 
Minister, and that's in the communications. Does SPMC have 
their own communications department or staff or people on 
staff that do communications work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's out of the corporate affairs office, 
and there's one person who that is their primary function. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Now communications were going to be 
held centrally from government, was my understanding. I didn't 
realize that each department and Crown and such were going to 
do their own communications work. Can you tell me why 
SPMC, as just being involved in the management of properties, 
would need a person in charge of communications? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, I'll just let you know that that's 
largely a function internal to the department. There is 900 
employees, so things like the employee newsletter, the annual 
report, and advertising for tenders within the responsibilities of 
SPMC, all those kinds of things would be done internally. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well I used a few 
minutes to research the fish war about the turbot. But we'll have 
to get back to the more important things of life which concern 
the province of Saskatchewan in the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, we have explored for some time the 
area earlier of the warehouses full of material that we have in 
this province. 
 
And I guess the bottom line here is that you did say, just to 
refresh your mind, that you have $20 million worth of 
equipment in the province that the Property Management, I 
guess, is in control of or responsible for; $100,000, at any one 
time, worth of equipment that you have that is for sale. Is there 
any reason why your department couldn't have a list of the 
auctions that you alluded to? Is there any reason why that list of 
auctions and the dates and the times couldn't be given to some 
key people — for example, MLAs and other folks, like 
municipalities — that might be interested in buying that type of 
equipment? 
 
Is there any reason why a list like that couldn't be provided to 
people, say, on a six-month basis or a year basis? These things 
must be planned ahead of time to some extent. So would that be 
possible, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll just clarify again that there is a 
difference between furniture and equipment. You mentioned  



March 17, 1995 

 
946 

equipment. Equipment is not the question here, it's furniture — 
even if it's photocopiers that you can only sit on. A hundred 
thousand does not refer to inventory for sale — it's inventory 
available for redistribution throughout the broad network of 
needs in government. 
 
The list of auctions . . . there's usually about a month notice of 
sufficient stock in order to hold an auction. But we certainly 
could at that time send out notices to the MLA offices to 
facilitate finding out about them so that you don't have to hunt 
through the newspaper. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Can I interpret the word could as will? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'd be happy to do that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now you 
differentiate between furniture and equipment, and furniture 
now is going to be on the auction, I understand, and I'm going 
to get a list of that so I'll know where to go to buy some 
furniture if I want. 
 
Now if you have a computer that's been turned back to you — 
and that's equipment — and it's sitting in your warehouse, how 
could I as an MLA save the taxpayers some money and access 
that piece of equipment to go into my office rather than to have 
to use my allocated funds and spend them to buy furniture from 
a new or other source? There must be a way that we can save 
the taxpayers some money. 
 
You could put a price on that, I'm suggesting. I'm not 
suggesting that MLAs should have the chance to access both 
their account and free furniture. What I'm saying is you could or 
should be able to designate a price and then take that much out 
of my MLA account for buying equipment and subtract it and 
doing all the bookkeeping and keep it all straight, but use that 
piece of equipment then and get some more life out of it if is, 
well, I guess a piece of equipment that is better than being just a 
chair, as my colleague's photocopier seems to be. I'm talking 
about something that still physically works and has some value 
to it. Is there a way that I can access that and could we not put 
that process into place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, the particular question you raise 
is going to be addressed in the new policy with the Legislative 
Assembly. And again it would have to be ratified by the Board 
of Internal Economy which you have input into. 
 
As far as people being able to access computers now without 
having to go to an auction process, it would be school boards, 
municipalities, people like that, who under the existing policy, 
have the ability to do that. 
 
But one of the things we might mention . . . because I have 
pursued this question on behalf of, for example, non-
government organizations who tend to have small operating 
budgets. And really the problem is, is that by the time the 
equipment makes it there, most of it is considerably out of date 
in terms of modern computing standards and is not functional in  

many instances and is also equipment that may not be 
compatible with a lot of current systems. 
 
So it's really not, I guess, an area where there's much potential, 
although whatever limited potential there is would be dealt with 
in the new policy. And I urge you to have your members on the 
Board of Internal Economy make sure that that new policy 
satisfies your concerns. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you sell 
equipment to a municipality, how do you establish the price of 
what you're going to charge them for that equipment? Who 
decides what it's worth? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The method is like it is, I guess, in 
most things in the market-place. It's the condition that the 
equipment's in and the average resale price that would be 
comparable in the market-place. And again, because of the 
condition of the equipment you previously referred to, you'd be 
looking at around almost the 60, $70 range, because the person 
may well be purchasing a liability as much as an asset with an 
old piece of equipment like that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well maybe, maybe not. I can't quarrel 
because I haven't specifically said this is the piece of equipment 
so this one might be good or bad. Who is the person responsible 
for deciding what the cost of that piece of equipment should 
be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That person would be the director of 
sales and salvage. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Is there some protection against conflict of 
interest with that person? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again the people that are being sold to 
through this process, which would be the only place where 
there would be any room . . . because obviously when 
something goes to auction, it goes to auction, and anybody can 
put their hand up and bid. 
 
So it's only within the framework of the school boards and 
municipalities that have access to the floor that there could be 
any question. And certainly those people are acting as agents on 
behalf of their boards and municipalities. 
 
The amount of material that would be distributed in that way 
would be worth about 25,000 in a year, out of 400,000 in total 
sales. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well just to clarify my point, Madam 
Minister, it is not inconceivably impossible to have a 
municipality come in and buy equipment at a rather attractive 
price, take that equipment home and resell it and make a profit. 
And they may be in fact the laundering process to get that 
equipment into private hands, in certain cases. And I'm not 
suggesting that anyone is doing that; I'm saying that the 
potential would be there. 
 



March 17, 1995 

 
947 

So what mechanism is built into the system to prevent that from 
happening? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This would be much like I think the 
sale of vehicles or anything else that you might care to mention. 
There is a market price established. The value is set through the 
fair market value and other sales that are held and what those 
items have attracted in terms of what people are prepared to pay 
for them. So really I could say that fair market value would be 
the guideline. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — In my scenario, Minister, though, who would 
police that person or those persons who are in charge of that 
process? What is built into the system to protect the taxpayers' 
interests in conflict of interest potential there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess to reiterate, if you're dealing 
with fair market value, there's no advantage to someone to 
getting something because they could only resell it for fair 
market value and couldn't resell it for more. So there really is no 
room for anybody to capitalize on that sale, but I would say that 
there is a review done on a regular basis of the items that go for 
sale, and what they go for. And that's done by Mr. Moffat here. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well I'm glad to hear that there is a person 
actually in charge of watching this because what is fair market 
value to you might be considerably different than what is fair 
market value to me. 
 
You might say this computer is worth $5 because it will take 
that much effort to carry it out of the building. I might be a 
computer hack who knows that there's a lot of good chips or 
something in there, and say, hey, there's a thousand dollars 
worth of equipment inside that thing. All I have to do is get it. 
And so the reality is, then, that if a municipality were able to 
access that thing for $5 and take it home and then resell it for 
$1,000 to a private individual, there would be a potential for a 
considerable amount of profit there. So I'm glad that somebody 
actually is watching this, and I think that it is an area that needs 
to be watched. 
 
I want to move on to some other areas, Madam Minister, for 
example, now CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) vehicles. Are 
they under your control in your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I own quite a fleet of ageing 
vehicles. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Will we be getting a list of what vehicles are 
in your department's control and the condition of them and the 
age of them and the related kinds of important information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. We can give you a nicely detailed 
list by department. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now you've 
alluded to having $20 million worth of equipment under your 
department. That would include a lot of different kinds of  

things. Would that also include things like — oh, let's say — 
salt trucks in the Department of Highways and fire-fighting 
equipment up north? How far does this list of equipment go? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. I'll just clarify a little bit because 
we had been discussing furniture previously and the $20 million 
figure referred to furniture; 53 million refers to vehicles, and up 
to three tonnes is basically as big as we get, and then after that 
it's the department that handles that equipment and uses that 
equipment that manages it. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well of course now we've expanded your 
responsibility considerable, Minister, and it makes me wonder 
just what all is in your jurisdiction and under your authority. 
Could you give us a list of the inventory that your department 
actually does take care of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think we'll have to be a little bit 
specific because if we get down to detailing every item in 
government it would go to a fair extensive list. Are you 
speaking specifically about things with wheels, vehicles? Are 
you talking about airplanes? What is it really specifically that 
you want? I mean I'm sure you don't want everything down to 
the hammers; there must be some way to define what 
specifically it is you want. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Are you suggesting, Madam Minister, that 
you do not keep inventory lists of what the government owns 
and controls? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Starting on page 16 and running 
through to page 23 of the annual report, there's a fairly 
extensive list of the nature and kinds of equipment and assets 
that Sask Property Management has, and certainly it would be 
possible to provide further details on most of those line items. I 
mean if you really want that, there is a possibility to provide 
quite a bit of detail, but I would hope that this would be 
information that you have a need for because this is a 
substantial amount of paper being reproduced. If you have a 
particular concern, it would help to focus it. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well I would like the detailed list, Madam 
Minister, as cumbersome as that may seem to you. I think 
somebody has to police what the government is doing with the 
taxpayers' money and the taxpayers' already-purchased 
equipment. 
 
I can't understand if you don't have records and lists of 
inventory, how you can be in control of that inventory and how 
you can be sure that someone like myself might not just simply 
go into the Department of Highways and pop into a 3-tonne 
truck and drive over to the warehouse and load up a load of 
these chairs that are stored over there and drive home with 
them. You must have some inventory lists, and somebody must 
be in charge of policing those lists to see that in fact a person 
like myself couldn't do that. I might walk in and say, I'm an 
MLA. I have an office; I'm entitled to equipment. I want a set of  



March 17, 1995 

 
948 

keys and away I go. So what do we do about this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I was reading the list last night 
before bedtime, and I can assure you it does exist. And if you 
require that detail, we can certainly provide you with detail, and 
you can assess if that's adequate to your needs, and if not we 
would provide further information. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Madam Chairman, I feel really sad 
about your bedroom life being so boring but . . . Yes, I think we 
have to go into some detail now because as much as you want 
to do a good job in your role as the minister, I think it is 
incumbent on me to do a good job as the critic of this area and 
to try and find out as much as you know about what your 
department does; otherwise I couldn’t possibly be considered in 
any way possible to be a good critic. 
 
So whatever lists you were reading before bedtime and all of 
the other inventory types of lists that you have I would 
appreciate having so that I can have something to do with my 
spare time before I go to bed for the next few weeks. And I'd 
like to know how do you police these inventories. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's regular audits that are done of 
inventory that support the information provided in the annual 
report. And this would be done according to best practice 
principles for these kinds of activities for people who make this 
their profession. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — What people make this their profession? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have internal auditors, and our 
auditor for the annual report is Deloitte & Touche. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well that's good. I'm glad somebody's 
watching over the equipment that the taxpayers have got all 
over the area. 
 
In the fire-fighting equipment, you said that there is 3-tonne 
limits and that sort of thing, but we understand that there's a 
possibility that your department is in charge of a lot of the 
northern fire-fighting equipment. Could you brief me just a 
little bit on what types of fire-fighting equipment you would 
have up north? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don't have specialized fire-fighting 
equipment. That's all purchased out of the resource protection 
development fund out of Parks. And we don't have . . . we 
would have just vehicles and what not, not specialized fire-
fighting equipment. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Earlier you alluded to the fact that you have 
some buildings that you actually do own, although a lot of the 
buildings are owned and sort of operated by other departments. 
What kind of buildings in my constituency, the constituency of 
Maple Creek, would you own or take control of or have specific 
direct control of? Would there be any? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In Maple Creek the only two that are  

owned are the visitor reception centre and the highway 
equipment repair building. The rest is all leased space. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Now you said Maple Creek. Are you saying 
specifically the town? When I asked, I was referring to my 
constituency, which would have like 14 towns — Gull Lake, 
Leader, Burstall, those kinds of places. Would they all have 
those same kinds of facilities then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If this is a matter of some import to 
you, we could prepare the information that way, but we don't 
maintain it that way. We would certainly have it by town, but 
not assembled as per your constituency, especially the way the 
boundaries keep changing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's your fault. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — My colleague makes a good point. It's your 
fault the boundaries are changing, not ours. 
 
Yes, I do have a specific point to my questions or I wouldn't be 
standing here asking them, and that is to find out information. 
And we're doing rather well actually, of course if you do come 
through with your commitments to give us the information here. 
 
So sure, let's pursue this a little further. It's important that I 
know what's going on in my constituency, even as it stands 
now, so let's work on the present boundaries rather than the old 
boundaries. And I will ask you then for a commitment to get a 
list of the things that we have in the towns in my constituency, 
and in the rural area too; maybe you own something out in The 
Sand Hills for all I know. I guess I have to bring myself up to 
speed on what's going on and that's the best way to do that. 
 
I wanted to ask you — and I know you'll answer that, along 
with the next question — but I want to ask you, Minister, a few 
questions about the specific things that ordinarily will be 
answered in the generic list of questions, because last year we 
didn't get some of the specific answers. So in those areas where 
we didn't get specific answers, we would like to go into some 
detail. 
 
And I would like to ask you, noting that you have not been the 
minister in charge of this portfolio for long, if you could 
provide us with a list of the detailed minister's travel — not 
yourself I guess in this case, but the minister ahead of you, and 
of course any that includes yourself, if that happens to have 
happened — and who accompanied you or him on each trip 
over the past year that we're talking about in the estimates here; 
all of the costs incurred including the accommodations and fees 
as well as the purpose of each of the trips that were taken in that 
period. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — To your previous question about 
assembling the information, both according to towns and other 
areas in your constituency, the answer to that is yes, we would 
prepare that for you. 
 



March 17, 1995 

 
949 

Detailed ministerial travel along with questions that you 
outlined, yes, we can provide that to you. We'll do it at year end 
so that you have complete picture to March 31. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, and I do 
hope that you are more diligent in delivering this information. 
That happened apparently last year, because our officials had 
gone through it and said there were some things that were 
missing. 
 
So I suspect that probably that's just an oversight, and we 
wouldn't want to point any accusing fingers or anything like 
that. We would ask though that there be a little more diligence 
in trying to cover the whole package so that we aren't short on 
some of the answers. 
 
How many staff members, Madam Minister, do you have 
currently working in your office? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Are you referring to my ministerial 
office? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Six. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Could you list them for us and tell us what 
pay range they're in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can hand this list across to you if 
you'd like. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, we'll wait 
that anxiously. 
 
An Hon. Member: — With bated breath. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — With bated breath, as the member has pointed 
out. 
 
Have there been any promotions over the past year for any of 
these staff members, any changes in the staff members that are 
there, any change in status or description of their work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — These staff were just hired as of 
February 3. And for staff that were existing in the organization 
previously, there was no change in their status. Obviously for 
someone who just obtained the job the change in their status 
would be they had gone from where they had worked before to 
working here. But for the staff that were already within the 
Legislative Building, there was no change in their status or pay. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, the new people in your office, can you indicate which 
ones on these lists those would be? Would it be Jill McKeen, 
Cory Oxelgren, Rick Ellingson, Erna Pearson, Margaret 
Giannetta, or Doriole Jeworski? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There were two new people. One of  

them would be Jill McKeen, my senior MA (ministerial 
assistant); and Rick Ellingson, the junior assistant. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Madam Minister, where did Jill 
McKeen come from? What were her qualifications? And where 
did she come from prior to this appointment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Jill McKeen was attending the 
University of McMaster on a scholarship from the University of 
Regina. She had won the president's medal here and had gone 
on to get a scholarship, at both the master's level, and was 
working on her doctorate when I called her and asked her if she 
would please move herself back to Saskatchewan because I 
desperately needed her skills. 
 
And she has an extensive background. She's a person of about 
my age who has an extensive previous work history in libraries, 
research, and related items. And she had done some previous 
research work for myself when I worked at the university, and 
found her skills to be at just a superior level, as of course the 
university did when they awarded her the president's medal. So 
I was very pleased to have hired her. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, I wonder if you could 
provide us with a copy of her qualifications? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, I think she'd be happy. If you're 
willing to give her a better offer, she might consider it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I think you started that sentence off with 
a no, Madam Minister. So will you give us the qualifications or 
not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Absolutely. I have her résumé in my 
desk and I'll provide it to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you very much. And how about 
Rick Ellingson, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can provide you with a brief 
overview. He worked both in the NGO (non-governmental 
organization) sector and in the Department of Health before I 
hired him. And he previously worked in my constituency office 
and did such a fine job there and had such good rapport with 
people in the constituency that I was very pleased that he was 
willing to move over into the Legislative Building in the junior 
position. 
 
But I can also provide you with his résumé. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 
And how much of an increase in salary would both Jill McKeen 
and Rick Ellingson receive from their previous employment or 
placements? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it would not be fair to compare 
a student salary, someone who has been a student primarily  



March 17, 1995 

 
950 

working to supplement their student income in libraries and 
other things over that time — that would not be a fair 
comparison. I could compare her to what somebody with a 
doctorate would make working in her profession. 
 
Rick Ellingson, I think, it's an increase of about . . . but see, it's 
a different job, it's different responsibilities and a different job, 
so he would have received the pay that's assigned to the bottom 
level of the range that he was hired into, but certainly 
commensurate with his skills and experience. 
 
If I would suggest anything, it's that our constituency assistants 
work at a very modest salary. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you might think 
that they work at a very modest salary, but a good number of 
the public believe that they're very well paid. And since he was 
your assistant in your constituency office  and I have no idea 
whether or not he was the only assistant  that looks like a 
salary increase of about 12, $13,000 a year, Madam Minister. 
 
You mention Jill McKeen should be compared to a doctorate 
salary level. Does Jill McKeen have a doctorate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — She's just in the last year of her 
program and works as a . . . worked previous to coming here as 
an instructor within the department there at McMaster, so 
certainly was considered well qualified by her educational 
institution; again reaffirmed by the fact of continual 
scholarships to continue her work. 
 
I'm not sure if I've answered your full question there. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, perhaps for Jill 
McKeen a better comparison would be to a sessional assistant 
for a pay scale, comparison-wise. Do you have any idea what a 
sessional assistant would make at the duty she was performing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Her qualifications and reimbursement 
are comparable to the level of any other staff that would be 
receiving that salary. And I think in fact I'm very lucky to have 
someone with those kinds of qualifications working for myself 
in a ministerial office. This sets a very high standard for the 
conduct of our office. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. You 
may believe that this person is very qualified and good, and 
perhaps she is — I have no idea — but as the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are concerned . . . is whether or not she's 
receiving the proper remuneration. And in their sense proper 
means as low as possible for the qualified person. 
 
Madam Minister, the other people in your office — Cory 
Oxelgren, Erna Pearson, Margaret Giannetta, and Doriole 
Jeworski — have they received any salary increase in the 
previous year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They weren't my staff until February 3 
so I would have no idea what happened to them previous to  

that. If it's important to you, we can find out, but I certainly 
don't have any idea of what happened prior to my hiring them. 
They received no increase upon joining my staff. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, where did these 
people come from then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Erna Pearson, Margaret Giannetta, and 
Doriole Jeworski were previously in the Minister of Health's 
staff. And many of them go back a long way in the employ of 
government, predating our government in fact. And they have 
just been very good staff who I've been particularly pleased to 
have, because starting out with four portfolios wasn't 
particularly easy, and they certainly have been excellent staff. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you named 
three. What about the fourth one? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Cory Oxelgren was previously in Mr. 
Penner's staff in CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) and associate minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — And what was the level of pay he was 
receiving there, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The same as he's receiving now. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Did he receive that same level of pay for 
the entire previous year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again that's something I wouldn't 
know. I'd have to find that out for you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, we would like to 
have that information if you would, please, for the past year for 
each one of the individuals on your staff; whether or not there 
has been any changes in the salaries or in the categories in 
which they're in. 
 
They very well may have jumped into a different category while 
retaining the same salary. But if you go from the top range in 
say A to the bottom range in B, which might very well be the 
same salary scale, but it leaves you a lot of room then to go up 
incrementally. 
 
And so it's very important I believe, Madam Minister, that the 
public knows that this sort of thing is not happening; that 
people aren't simply jumping around. 
 
When all of these people left their previous areas, other than Jill 
McKeen who was not employed in government, did they 
receive any severance before or when they left Health or when 
they left the other areas? When Rick Ellingson left your 
constituency office to come to work for you, was there any 
severances involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You will  



March 17, 1995 

 
951 

provide us though with all of the scales and what they were at 
before and categories? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll provide that for people who were 
previously in the employ of this building. I don't think it is 
either my right or my responsibility to reveal what people were 
making in another university in another occupation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm 
prepared to accept that one for Jill McKeen. 
 
Madam Minister, to go back to SPMC's inventories and items 
such as that, do you have an inventory of all of the computers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have a listing of all of our 
computers for SPMC, but not government-wide, no. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — For the computers that are owned by 
SPMC, you have a list for all of those? Okay, the minister 
indicates yes. 
 
Madam Minister, how many computers have you purchased 
within the last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can certainly provide that to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, can you give any 
justifications or rationale for those computers that you may 
have purchased? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can provide that with the 
information that we're going to be giving you. But I just might 
add that SPMC does have responsibilities for things like the 
GIS (geographic information systems) system, etc., and these 
are business-related computer usages. And so there would be 
things like that. But we'll explain those in the attached briefing 
notes with the computer expenditures. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, would you mind 
explaining just what GIS is. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That's a system that, I think, has been 
emerging more and more in wide use throughout a number of 
departments. That's a geographic information system that gives 
a wide range of surface geographical survey and even below-
ground information about any particular area. 
 
It's quite an amazing thing if you've ever seen one in operation. 
And in fact I invite you over to have a look at the thing because 
I got a chance to look at one a while back with one of the 
private companies that operates a system in my constituency, 
and it really is quite an amazing operation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. We 
may indeed take you up on that as the hydrographic 
information, I think, would be very interesting. 
 
But, Madam Minister, when it comes to computers, as we all 
know that you can . . . to purchase new computers today, you  

can get some very powerful equipment in very small packages. 
But within an office system, you may not necessarily need the 
top-of-the-line computer system to provide the service that is 
needed. 
 
As an example, the Clerk's offices in here, in the Assembly, run 
on old Wangs that came over with Noah and the Ark, and yet 
they still manage to get the work down — although they would 
argue, very slowly. 
 
So perhaps, Madam Minister, I think it's very important to know 
what kind of equipment you're buying and for what service and 
location you're buying it for. So that's the kind of information I 
would like to have as to what was the justification of buying a 
particular piece of equipment. If you bought a Pentium when all 
you needed was a 386, I think there's a question to be asked 
there, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll give you a few answers to that. One 
of them is because of the explosion in networks and different 
ways of using computers, e-mail, etc. We have set up an 
information technology committee which will be bringing in 
expertise of the public and private sector and looking at the 
broad-based information highway needs. 
 
But certainly for the purposes this specific question, we still 
have a lot of old stuff, two old XTs and what not, and we have 
new equipment that's being purchased in strategic areas related 
to information technology and business needs in the province. 
But we will provide you with that detailed list and statement of 
mandate regarding the particular areas that that's used in. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, is SPMC setting 
up this new information system? Is that what you're telling us? 
And then exactly what kind of information is SPMC then 
gathering and what are these strategic objectives? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again specific to our corporation, we 
will tell you where this equipment is, what it is, what area it's 
being used in. And I think that will give you sufficient 
information for the questions that you're interested in. If you 
have broader questions, you'd have to address that to people 
like SaskTel and other people that are involved in the whole 
information highway venture. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minster, is SPMC 
involved with the other departments in supplying equipment or 
in supplying technical information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, as you know, in the past in the 
days of the horse and buggy, SPMC took regular mail around. 
Now with the information highway, they coordinate all the 
voice and data services of government, and that includes the e-
mail system, government-wide e-mail system, enabling us to 
eliminate a lot of paper, a lot of handling, and a lot of travelling 
back and forth through this system. 
 
Through the purchasing agency, any computer equipment 
purchased for executive government goes through SPMC, and  



March 17, 1995 

 
952 

they also provide or retain technical consultants to help the 
various areas design their systems and ensure within that 
network compatibility. 
 
I don't really know what else I can say other than this. It's all a 
very new area, and it's requiring some restructuring, some 
rethinking, and some new investment to be able to deliver the 
new kinds of services that are expected with the information 
highway. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I'm 
very glad to hear that SPMC is in the modern age because when 
we look at health care in this province, it is going back to the 
horse and buggy. And I'm glad to see that SPMC is not one of 
those departments that is returning to the horse and buggy. 
 
Madam Minister, when you do technical support for another 
department, you said that the other departments purchase 
equipment through you or acquire equipment through you. Do 
the other departments pay for that technical support? And do 
the other departments own the equipment, and therefore SPMC 
is paid for it? Or does SPMC own it and rent it out? Or what 
kind of a transfer is made in that area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They really just look after the process 
of purchasing, the procurement and the retaining of consultants. 
Everything else would be the responsibility of the department 
because of course it's in their budget, and it's their responsibility 
related to their budgetary decisions that they make and the 
relative importance that they place on the different things that 
they're doing. So we're really more of a facilitator of the 
process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — When you're providing technical 
support, though, Madam Minister, does SPMC receive 
compensation for that? Are those SPMC personnel that are 
providing that technical support? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Our technical expertise that is provided 
into this is at the stage of procurement and purchasing. We 
don't actually go into the offices and set up the computers and 
stuff like that. That's not what we're involved in; it's the process 
of procurement and retaining  helping people locate the 
expertise that they need, rather than any direct delivery of that 
expertise to them. 
 
An additional response is that it's provided for free, that level of 
service there. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. You 
mentioned the information highway; the e-mail system is 
operated by SPMC. Is SPMC getting involved in the Internet 
system by providing equipment or terminals or access onto the 
information net? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — SaskTel is the deliverer of Internet, and 
we will work with them as that system unfolds to determine  

exactly what the department's role might be in helping to make 
that happen. But at this moment we have no direct involvement; 
we're really at the customer end of things, and SaskTel is the 
deliverer. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, when you're 
talking the customer end of things, are you talking about SPMC 
as a customer? Are you talking about, say the Crop Insurance 
offices around the province as being . . . you have supplied 
equipment to them, and they are the customer end for the 
Internet from SaskTel , or who are you referring to as the 
customer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's really more of a coordinating role 
on behalf of all of government as it relates to the Internet 
because again it's important that there be . . . I'm sure you know 
as well as I do how easy it is to spend money in this area 
without getting the result that you hoped for in terms of your 
equipment or your systems or even your software. And really 
what the job is here is to coordinate that as various departments 
link up to the Internet with SaskTel. It's a facilitative function. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Does SPMC's office itself act as a 
customer on the Internet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — At this point SPMC has one station. 
SaskTel has provided one station to a number of areas to try 
them out and monitor them and see how they might apply and 
how useful it is being hooked up to the Internet for any area of 
government that's part of, I guess, the initial pilot to see what 
the utility of this. So SPMC in that sense is a customer, and 
they're trying out how the internet system might apply usefully 
within the kind of matters that SPMC deals with and works 
with. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Would SPMC be supplying equipment for any other locations 
of a similar nature within other departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, it's up to the departments again to 
identify their needs, and we would assist with procurement. But 
any relationship they would have on the Internet would be with 
SaskTel. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
What kind of a cost is involved with SPMC with their one 
station? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — During the pilot phase, there's no cost 
because it's really very experimental to see what is possible and 
what is useful. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I would like to 
be able to connect up to the Internet at no cost. Even if SaskTel 
was providing me with that connection for free, there's still a 
cost because there's equipment sitting there that somebody had 
to purchase. So what's the cost for this for SPMC, not just for 
the connection to SaskTel's line but for the equipment that's 
sitting there? 



March 17, 1995 

 
953 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I know this is a bit of a difficult thing 
to understand when we're used to using other systems. There are 
no real new costs because the equipment was already there. 
Modems were already there for the purposes of e-mail and what 
not, and what it is, is a new line that's really in the nature of a 
long-distance line. And there already were long-distance 
exchanges occurring, only occurring via telephone instead of 
via a direct computer link. 
 
So what it is, is more of a changing of the way of doing 
something, as opposed to substantial new costs of any kind. 
 
So at this point, there is no real new cost. SaskTel is likely 
absorbing a small amount of expense in terms of their desire to 
check this out and to pilot it and to see what its utility is before 
suggesting broader application of it. I would call it I guess a 
research and development phase. 
 
But there are no real new costs because this equipment and the 
modems, etc., all existed. It's really just a new use of them. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So the 
modem and the computer that you're using was already on-line 
with your e-mail system. So am I to assume then . . . can you 
answer whether or not there was any new equipment gathered 
in from some place to make the Internet connection  any new 
software? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. There was 
no new software either purchased . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — It's nice to get a clear, crisp, one-word 
answer, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I have two questions related to your staff in 
your ministerial office, if you could answer please. Were the 
positions advertised? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I essentially had two days between 
when I was appointed and when I started being a minister. No, 
they were not advertised. 
 
The only real new person that wasn't already within the system 
would have been Jill McKeen. And I very specifically wanted 
her specific skills and her specifically because of my experience 
with her very excellent work, although when I had hired her on 
a previous occasion, it was through competition which is how I 
got to be familiar with her skills. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the case 
of Jill McKeen, was your office or any of the departments 
involved in moving costs for her? You mentioned she was 
going to school, I believe, in Montreal. Did your office or any 
department pay any moving costs for her? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's standard government policy that 
would apply, but I would add that being a student she really 
didn't have a lot to move and has begged and borrowed 
furniture and what not here, so there really wasn't any 
substantial cost involved there. And whatever cost there would 
be would be according to normal government policy of what's 
acceptable. But it's been very low in this instance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I wonder if you 
could outline for us then what the normal practice is for an 
employee coming into government, seemingly for the first time. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — How about if we just send you a copy 
of the relocation policy and then you'll have all the details. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm not 
sure, though, if you would call this employment a relocation. To 
me, the term relocation means if you have an employee working 
at P.A. (Prince Albert) and you move him to Maple Creek, that's 
a relocation. 
 
But when a person comes on to a job for the first time, that's not 
in my mind, a relocation. When you hire on to a new job it's up 
to you to get there. Now you could try to negotiate with your 
new employer that they pay some of your costs, and perhaps 
this is what you're talking about, but I find it surprising that 
every employee that would get hired by the Saskatchewan 
government would be automatically provided with moving 
costs from wherever it might be they were coming from. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again you would realize that the 
Government of Saskatchewan does also have to provide similar 
standards to other employers and to the private sector, and there 
are two policies regarding this kind of thing. 
 
One is do with existing employees, and another one is to do 
with new hiring, and there's two policies that refer to those two 
distinct situations. But I might add that even Canada 
Employment Centre recognizes the need to occasionally pay 
costs so that people can relocate to other employment in 
Canada. 
 
And I think if you're going to talk about an open Canadian 
economy where people relocate according to skill to where 
they're needed and where their skills can be used, I think it is 
not unusual for relocation costs to be paid, particularly for 
people who are working at this level of expertise. It's fairly 
common. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:57 p.m. 
 
 


