


















































February 13, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 13, 1995 

 

 
149 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Bradley, seconded by Mr. 
Knezacek. 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to begin my remarks this evening by saying thank you to my 
constituents in Saskatoon Idylwyld. It is an honour for me to 
continue to represent them in this Assembly, and I do appreciate 
their support and encouragement, guidance, and advice which I 
receive on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker, and without it I would 
not be able to do my job the way that I would like to do it. 
 
I'm very pleased to rise this evening, Mr. Speaker, to participate 
in this debate on the Speech from the Throne which was 
delivered by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor a week ago 
today. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that I will not in my remarks get too 
carried away in a partisan vein. I think we tend sometimes to 
engage in exaggeration about the good job we're doing — 
although it is a good job — and just as the opposition 
sometimes could be accused of being maybe a bit too critical of 
the government and its record, and engages in some 
exaggeration as well. 
 
So I hope that politics will not unduly pervade my remarks this 
evening, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to stick to the facts as I see them 
and talk about some of the things that are going on in our 
province and the way I think that my neighbours see them based 
upon what they tell me in my community of Saskatoon. 
 
Now in terms of how my neighbours are seeing things these 
days, Mr. Speaker, I can only go on the basis of what people are 
telling me in Saskatoon. And I must say that for the first time in 
quite some time, and certainly as a stark contrast to when the 
last election was held in 1991, there is a real feeling of hope 
and optimism in my community and, I think, throughout the 
province. 
 
People do not believe these days that government is perfect, that 
any government is perfect or doesn't make mistakes, and they 
don't believe that we have all the answers. But I feel that it's fair 
to say that they do believe that this government is made up of 
competent individuals who are providing good fiscal 
management to us and engaging in proper planning of our 
affairs. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that if I could sum up the Speech from the 
Throne and its message to the people of the province in a few 
sentences, I would say this. I would say that the current 
Government of Saskatchewan has built a solid and firm  

foundation in our province and we're at the stage now where we 
can begin to build on that foundation with, as I said, some 
optimism and hope. 
 
I think that's what competent management gives the people. I 
think it gives them two things. First of all it gives them 
confidence, confidence that we're back on track in 
Saskatchewan and our institutions and our assets are being 
properly shepherded and managed  institutions like our 
public utilities, our low-cost insurance system and our public 
system of medicare, systems we want to see sustained and we 
want to see improved upon. 
 
So the type of management we're getting from our government 
gives us optimism and it gives us hope. It gives us hope that 
we'll never again be in fear of the total financial collapse of our 
province, and hope that good management will mean we won't 
have to increase taxes and over time that we can reduce taxes. 
We've already seen in the area of our public utility, SaskEnergy, 
that proper management of that corporation has meant that it is 
not operating in a deficit situation and when the corporation has 
a saving it can properly pass that saving on to the people of the 
province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that people in our province believe that 
things are under control. They know that a solid foundation has 
been laid in our province and they know that we're going to 
build on it. I think they expect that the government will 
probably go to the polls in the relatively near future and I think 
it's fair to say that they expect that the government will be 
returned. 
 
It doesn't mean that they agree with all of the measures we've 
taken or everything we've done. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it 
would be a sad day in our province if we had no controversy 
about government. It would be a sad day if Saskatchewan 
people, who are really among the most politically sophisticated 
people in the world, were in complete agreement with 
everything the government did. I think that good government 
depends upon a questioning and informed public. I think we 
have that. All of which is to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the 
Speech from the Throne delivered last Monday really captures 
that mood in our province. 
 
The speech begins by talking about the fiscal management of 
our province, and it points out that when this government took 
office in the fall of 1991, Saskatchewan faced one of its darkest 
hours. We had had a decade of deficit budgeting where the 
government was spending about a billion dollars more each 
year than it took in. We had a lot of division in our province, 
and people were feeling a lot of doubt about our future. 
 
And I'd like to contrast that dismal mood with the mood that we 
have today in the province of Saskatchewan. We have, as the 
Speech from the Throne makes clear, a legislative agenda that 
doesn't speak of deficits but of sustained balanced budgets and 
balanced budget legislation. And it doesn't speak of failed  



February 13, 1995 

 
150 

megaprojects but of expanding local business sector and job 
growth. 
 
I think that a lot has been done in that regard in just three short 
years. And I'm very proud to be associated with a government 
that doesn't just talk about getting its fiscal situation under 
control but actually takes action to do so. 
 
I'm pleased that the Premier and the Minister of Finance will be 
asking us to approve in this session of the legislature the 
balanced budget Act, requiring the government to have a plan 
for long-term financial stability and integrity in our finances. 
And the reason I'm pleased about that, Mr. Speaker, is I know 
that without that kind of planning, we may get ourselves into a 
situation such as we faced three years ago. And I think we all 
agree that never again should we in Saskatchewan find 
ourselves in that situation. 
 
I'm pleased as well that in the area of the members of the 
legislature, the government has appointed an independent 
committee to make recommendations on our salary and 
allowances. I think that we need procedures to make us appear 
to be accountable and in fact to make us accountable for the 
monies we receive from the public. 
 
And those two things, Mr. Speaker, financial stability and 
public accountability, will not only inspire further confidence 
and trust in the public, but they will in the long run place us in 
good stead to provide proper government to the people of the 
province. 
 
The solid foundation that is being laid by the government, Mr. 
Speaker, has seen some results which I think are not a result 
purely of what the government has done, but are a corollary or a 
logical consequence of what the government is doing. Because 
we have more confidence in ourselves, our population has 
increased since 1992. It's now at the highest level in five years. 
And in the last 12 months, 12,000 more people are working 
than they were a year ago. I think that's also an indication that 
we're making a comeback in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I suppose in terms of the theme in the throne speech, 
which I said a few minutes ago was one of having built a solid 
foundation, now moving to build on that foundation, that theme 
really means this. It means that having got our fiscal house in 
order, the government can move on to what is a new and also 
important priority, and that is the priority of job creation. 
 
And I was very pleased at some of the remarks of the Premier in 
the last few weeks where he said, and the throne speech says, 
that the government will show the same focus and 
determination with the job challenge as it has already applied to 
the deficit challenge, because I believe, Mr. Speaker, that's what 
the people want. They know that the deficit is behind us. 
They've heard a lot about deficits and gloom and doom in the 
last few years. What they now want to see is a government 
committed to getting people to work in Saskatchewan, even 
more so than has occurred in the last 12 months. 
 

There are some good things happening, I think. In northern 
Saskatchewan, the mining sector is expanding. There are 
several projects under way at the present time which will result 
in hundreds of new jobs. I think it's positive too, Mr. Speaker, 
that northern residents currently represent 45 per cent of the 
workforce at these projects, but the target is 60 per cent 
northern employment. And I think we can all agree that in a 
province with a vast northern portion where I think 
unemployment is 70, 80 per cent in many communities, we 
have to recognize that one of the objectives we should have is 
to share the fruits of the earth with the people in the North and 
get them working. And in the long run, when we realize that our 
province is big enough for all of the people that live here, we'll 
all be better off if we pursue that kind of policy. I think what is 
happening in the mining sector is very positive. 
 
I'm pleased as well that the government is committed to putting 
increasing resources into our highway system and acting in 
partnership with communities and businesses and other 
governments to modernize our highway system. That certainly 
is something that is an important part of economic development 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, about our energy needs 
and energy development. The Speech from the Throne indicates 
that the Saskatchewan energy strategy for security and 
prosperity will be presented to this House, and I'm very glad to 
hear that. I know that the work of the energy development and 
conservation institute in Saskatoon has been very, very good 
work. It has been factual in the sense that, rather than have a 
megaproject mentality that you can spend a billion dollars and 
solve our economic problems even though you put the people in 
debt by doing so, rather than doing that the Authority has 
looked at the facts in Saskatchewan and looked at our energy 
needs. 
 
The Authority has indicted in its preliminary reports that we 
have enough energy generating capacity to meet our needs, I 
believe, into about five years into the next century. And the 
Authority has looked at the costs of each kind of energy 
development and concluded that we can do just as much by 
trying to conserve energy, just as much both in terms of meeting 
our needs and economic development and employment, by 
looking at energy conservation, as we can by having a 
megaproject mentality which I think is a dated mentality, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1915) 
 
And when I hear some of the opposition politicians in this 
House get up and criticize the government because we're not 
committing ourselves to spending a minimum of $1.2 billion of 
public money to build a nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan, I 
really wonder where they're coming from. I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that when they do that they're misleading the people in the sense 
that they're talking about a development which of course would 
create some jobs in its development, but which would result in 
a facility which would produce about 450 megawatts of energy 
per year which there wouldn't be any market for. 



February 13, 1995 

 
151 

And I think that the proponents of that kind of thinking have to 
take the next step, Mr. Speaker, and explain to the people of the 
province how the acquisition of massive new debt is going to 
help the people of the province, how it will help the people of 
the province to spend a lot of money on something we don't 
need. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, we have to move beyond that and we 
need people who will seriously and rationally and in a factual 
way look at the energy needs of our province and make rational 
recommendations which will serve our purposes. And I have to 
say that I have not seen that, unfortunately, from the opposition 
parties in this House, but I am very glad to say that I think the 
approach being taken by the government is such a rational 
approach, and I'm very proud to associate myself with that kind 
of clear thinking rather than the alternative. 
 
The alternative to the megaproject mentality, that got us into a 
lot of trouble in the '80s, Mr. Speaker, would be the kind of 
approach being taken by the Minister of Economic 
Development and the government and the chambers of 
commerce and the regional economic development authorities 
in the Partnership For Progress, which is the economic 
development strategy of Saskatchewan which has been in print 
for about two years, I believe. Because what it recognizes is that 
we should put our resources into things that make sense. 
 
And I was very pleased to hear His Honour in the Speech from 
the Throne talk about future prosperity in Saskatchewan being 
dependent upon the growth of knowledge-based industries such 
as information technology, which we are world leaders in, 
telecommunications, and biotechnology. 
 
In my home city of Saskatoon the number of firms engaged in 
biotechnology at Innovation Place has increased I think almost 
threefold in the last three years. And of course the United 
Nations recognizes Saskatoon as one of five centres of 
excellence for agricultural biotechnology in the world. And of 
course we're the leading centre in Canada. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that what is going on is the kind of 
development we need and the kind of thinking we need, in 
contrast to those that believe that you can spend a bunch of 
public money on megaprojects and with the snap of your 
fingers solve all of our economic problems. What we need is 
rational thinking, factual thinking, and thinking that leads to 
sustained economic development that makes sense. 
 
And what makes sense in Saskatchewan is relying upon our 
strength in telecommunications, as we're doing by building 
telephone systems at the Chunnel between England and France, 
building telephone systems around the world, and selling the 
expertise we have in Saskatchewan to people that need it. 
 
And what makes sense is to develop the agricultural 
biotechnology industry that now employs over 600 people in 
Saskatoon, and to continue to identify our strengths and build 
on them. 
 

I would note in regard to the agricultural biotechnology industry 
that 30 per cent of Canada's agricultural biotechnology sector is 
located in Saskatchewan, and especially in the city of 
Saskatoon. And we're acquiring a world reputation for 
excellence and our sector is expanding. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that hundreds and hundreds of people are going to be 
employed in that field, which is good news for the people I 
represent in Saskatoon and good news for our province. 
 
The development of agricultural biotechnology and the 
communications . . . telecommunications and information-based 
industries depends upon training. And in line with the job 
strategy the government . . . the economic development strategy 
of the government, the government is starting to train people 
through the Future Skills program, which is a $10 million 
program, and through a new program, JobStart, which is going 
to be an important new initiative which will help young people 
make the transition to the workplace. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that those are very important initiatives and it's more good news 
in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
The people, Mr. Speaker, I think have been watching carefully 
what's happening in our health system, and it's my belief that 
what has been done by the former minister of Health, the 
member from Regina Hillsdale, and the current Minister of 
Health, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, is a very good 
thing. And the reason I think it's a good thing is I think it is 
needs based. It looks at the health care needs we have in our 
province, and it tries to bring about a rational system of delivery 
of health care through the health districts. 
 
In my city, Saskatoon, the three hospitals formerly had each 
their own hospital board and would compete for public dollars 
for their departments and different technologies that they have 
in the hospitals. I think it makes a lot of sense to have a 
coordinated and integrated approach in health care and to have 
those three hospitals governed by one board along with home 
care, some of the nursing homes like Parkridge and Sherbrooke 
and the Community Health Unit, to name some of the 
components of that health care system. 
 
And the reason I think it makes sense, Mr. Speaker, is it is sort 
of one-stop shopping in the sense that I used to get calls from 
people in my constituency office that had a parent that needed 
some kind of care, and sometimes the home care people would 
say, well she's really not somebody we should be looking at; she 
should be in a nursing home. But the nursing home people 
would say well, no, she's not somebody we should be looking 
at; she should be in a hospital. But you'd go to the hospital 
people, and they would say, well actually she should be in a 
nursing home. 
 
And with the Saskatoon Health Board there's a responsibility 
there, and the buck has to stop within that system because they 
have to do an assessment of the person's needs, and they have to 
make a decision as to what kind of care that person needs. Do 
they need to be in the hospital? Do they need to be in the 
nursing home? Or do they need to be in their own home with  



February 13, 1995 

 
152 

nursing care through home care or meals through home care or 
housecleaning through home care? 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that when you examine the budget 
and the health care spending we now have in the province, 
where the home care budget has gone up dramatically in the last 
few years — I think by 50 or 60 per cent — that when you 
consider the real desires and health of Saskatchewan people, 
they want to be in their homes, and they want to be as 
independent as they can be, and they want somebody to come 
into their home and provide them with the care that they need. 
And in the long run they're going to be happier and healthier 
because we're moving to that kind of community-based health 
care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — The other aspect of it that I think is crucial is that 
when you change your health care system to spend smarter — 
and essentially that's what we're doing; we're spending smarter 
— you are trying to make a system which is sustainable. And 
more importantly, you're trying to have a public system which is 
sustainable. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that one of the important principles 
of medicare, which was founded in our province in 1962 and 
later implemented across the country, is that everybody should 
be treated the same, and I don't care if you're a member of the 
legislature or the Premier or someone living in my constituency 
of Saskatoon Idylwyld or someone living in Rosetown or 
someone living in northern Saskatchewan. If that person needs 
a medical procedure such as cataract removal or an MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging) to assess them, I think that the 
rules should be the same for all of those people and all the 
people in the province, and they ought not to be able to jump 
the queue and get treatment faster just because they have the 
money to pay. 
 
And one of the things we do when we properly organize our 
health care system, and we spend smarter because we're trying 
to keep it a public system, is we maintain medicare the way it 
should be maintained, in contrast to other places like Alberta 
where, if you have more money, you get better care. 
 
I got a call at my constituency office about a year and a half 
ago, Mr. Speaker, and a man phoned me who was very angry, 
and understandably angry because he was upset because his 
wife needed back surgery — and it was elective surgery — and 
she had waited two months for her surgery because, when 
there's an emergency, sometimes elective surgery doesn't take 
place. The person has to wait. And the man was upset and his 
wife was upset, and I don't blame them for that. I think that 
that's an upsetting kind of position to be in. 
 
But having said that, I should say before I go on that the 
waiting-lists for surgery in Saskatoon are actually lower than 
they ever have been, because the system is better organized and 
people aren't taking up hospital beds that shouldn't be taking up 
hospital beds but are receiving care in the community. 

But the man was angry and the man said to me, Mr. Cline, I 
know that if it was your wife waiting for elective surgery, she'd 
be in just like that, but my wife has to wait several months to 
get her back surgery. And I said to the man, now just a minute; 
it just so happens that my wife is waiting for elective surgery. 
She had to have arthroscopic surgery because of a knee injury 
— playing ball, I might add, in a game where the husband of 
the Minister of Finance also was injured, which led us to 
speculate that perhaps there was some kind of conspiracy 
against spouses of members of the legislature, but I don't think 
that's true. 
 
In any event, I said to the man, look, my wife needs elective 
surgery. She's had to wait seven months for her surgery, and it's 
the same for all of us. It doesn't matter who you are in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I just think that's the way it 
should be. I think that's the way it's going to stay in the province 
of Saskatchewan as long as we have people at the helm of the 
health care system — which we do — who believe in public 
health care, who don't believe that the more money you have, 
the better service you should have and the faster service you 
should have, and who want to maintain and improve upon the 
health care system that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — And just before I leave the topic of health care, 
Mr. Speaker, let me say that I want to join with others in paying 
a small tribute to the former minister of Health, the member 
from Hillsdale, for the work that she did in reorganizing our 
health care system, because she did a tough job. She was 
subject to a lot of criticism. And I think in this House and 
elsewhere she conducted herself with a lot of dignity and 
showed a lot of competence. And we owe her a debt of 
gratitude for the job that she did. 
 
And while I'm on that topic, Mr. Speaker, I might also add that 
the former associate minister of Finance, the member from 
Swift Current, also did a superb job in the cabinet as Associate 
Minister of Finance and before that, Minister of Energy, two 
areas where, I might add, the performance of the government 
has been excellent. I think everyone would agree. And I'm very 
proud to be associated with that member as well as the former 
minister of Health. And I know that even though they're not in 
the cabinet, they will continue to do what they're primarily 
elected to do which is to serve the people that elect them and 
send them to the legislature. 
 
(1930) 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I'm very happy and proud 
that we will balance our budget in this term for the first time 
since 1982; that we will be the first province to introduce 
balanced budget legislation and provide a long-term plan to 
maintain financial stability. I'm proud that our economic growth 
rate is among the strongest in the country and I'm proud that 
we're investing in industries which hold great promise for future 
growth and not grasping at megaproject straws. 
 



February 13, 1995 

 
153 

I'm also proud that we're going to be introducing some 
innovative training programs and, as I said, I'm proud that we're 
going to secure the future of the medicare system that our 
province and the party with which I'm associated, the New 
Democratic Party, began in Canada over 30 years ago. 
 
The solid foundation that our province now rests upon did not 
come about easily; it came about because of a lot of hard work 
and it involved some decisions which were very difficult and 
politically unpopular. But decisions that eventually came to be 
accepted by people. Why are those decisions accepted? Because 
there have been results. 
 
And I would contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with an example we've 
seen from Ottawa under the previous federal government when 
the GST (goods and services tax) came in; because when the 
GST came in, it was politically unpopular — it's still politically 
unpopular. The federal government of the day, led by Brian 
Mulroney, said that, well we needed it because we had a deficit 
problem, a debt problem, and it would go to pay the debt. And a 
lot of people I know said to me, well I don't like it but if it 
solves the debt problem, solves the deficit, I guess I'm willing to 
put up with it. 
 
But what those people saw was that it didn't make any 
difference at all because there were no results out of the federal 
government in terms of deficit and debt reduction; they're still 
aren't any, I might add, with the new government that promised 
to do away with the GST as part of its plan, a promise that I 
doubt will be kept, quite frankly. 
 
But in any event the contrast in Saskatchewan is this: that when 
the government took some decisions that were politically 
unpopular in order to solve the debt problem and the deficit 
problem, people didn't like some of the decisions, but now 
they're willing to accept them. Why? Because the difference is 
this: the people have seen results. They have seen a government 
that just doesn't talk about solving problems but actually 
resolves problems. 
 
And that is in contrast to the previous government in this 
province that was in power until 1991, and it's in contrast to the 
previous government in Ottawa, and, Mr. Speaker, I dare say 
that in a year's time we'll find it's in contrast to the government 
we now have in Ottawa. 
 
We don't have some shifting target in Saskatchewan where one 
day you're solving the deficit problem by some system of social 
reform and the next day that's thrown out the window and the 
Minister of Finance supplants what the Minister of Human 
Resources says and comes up with a totally different plan, or an 
example of the federal Minister of Health talking about ending 
private medicare in Alberta one day and the next day the federal 
government talking about getting rid of national standards in 
health care altogether, which I think would be a horrendous 
mistake. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at this government 
and we look at NDP (New Democratic Party) government and  

ask, well what does a government by the New Democrats mean, 
it means planning on fiscal management and planning in health 
care and planning in jobs, planning that gives the people 
confidence and planning that gives the people pull. 
 
And I think today Saskatchewan people do have confidence in 
our future and they do have hope. Things are looking up, things 
are going to get better, things are getting better all the time, and 
I'm very pleased to associate myself with this government and 
the throne speech. And I say to the people of the province, let's 
build on a solid foundation and continue to get on with the job. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud and 
pleased to be able to enter into the debate on the throne speech 
which opened this, the fifth session of the twenty-second 
legislature, and I will be supporting the motion before us. 
 
I remember the privilege bestowed on me to second the throne 
speech for the second session, which is almost three years ago 
now. And I also remember what a nerve-racking experience it 
was to be chosen and honoured in that way, and to be able to try 
and reflect my views but also to be able to support the throne 
speech in being a seconder of the motion. And so with that 
experience behind me and feeling the responsibility that is 
placed on a mover and seconder, I want to heartily congratulate 
the mover and seconder for their excellent opening of the 
debate. 
 
I know well the work of both members, the member from 
Milestone and the member from Saltcoats, because they serve 
on the committee of which I am privileged to chair. They make 
strong representation for both local government and education. 
 
The member from Bengough-Milestone is also vice-chair of our 
caucus and provides a strong voice for her constituents. She is 
also a wife and a mother of three children and balances all her 
responsibilities with equal aplomb. 
 
The seconder, lovingly known as Coach K to all those who 
know him and fear him, is known for his strong team skills. 
He's an outspoken booster for his communities, a husband, and 
father of four. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member from Milestone said, there will be 
a better time and a place for us to pay proper tribute to the two 
members who have retired from cabinet, but I want to echo 
their comments. I don't think that there's been a time in our 
history — and I would say that I don't feel this is an 
exaggeration, Mr. Speaker — that we have had people who 
have been faced with more difficult jobs. And all of us 
appreciate and will remember those two members who served 
us well and wisely and justly. 
 
And by the people of Saskatchewan I think they will in the 
future be remembered heroically for what they have done to 
secure the future of the province for future generations in the  



February 13, 1995 

 
154 

area of financial integrity and the foundation of strength in our 
economy and for the work on the ground-breaking health care 
reform, a very difficult task that was placed before our member. 
With the portfolios they managed, they managed them with 
dignity and competence, and especially in the case of the 
member from Hillsdale, with grace under pressure. 
 
To the new Leader of the Opposition, well it's nice to see him 
on the front benches, Mr. Speaker, so we can now all keep an 
eye on him. And seriously, it's a major task that has been given 
to the member from Kindersley, and despite the many columnist 
remarks, a worthwhile one. 
 
I join all members also in welcoming the pages and in 
congratulating and welcoming Meta Woods to our Assembly. 
She becomes part of an able team of an Assembly official line-
up that includes Gwenn Ronyk and Greg Putz and of course 
yourself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know from past experience with you, you jealously guard our 
parliamentary system and a commitment to democratic debate, 
and to furthering the knowledge of the members in the areas of 
democratic process and a growth within our own personal lives 
in the understanding of how governments rule, not only in 
Saskatchewan but around the globe. We are well served by you 
as we exercise our duties, and we know this if we don't always 
show it to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The debates we enter into in this Assembly are valuable to us 
for at least two reasons. First of course, they allow us as all 
members to state our views on issues and policies under review. 
But they also give us a chance to reflect and to state publicly 
and personally the reasons why we came to the important 
decision in our life, and that was the decision to serve; a 
decision to commit ourselves to public service. 
 
I have enjoyed over the previous sessions listening then for 
instance to the members from Regina Lake Centre, Saskatoon 
Wildwood, Kelsey-Tisdale, and Biggar, just to name a few, all 
who very eloquently discuss their private reasons for being 
involved in public service and public policy development. 
 
That is a commitment that we all share; we all shared and have 
many influences that affect our common goal. But I believe the 
goal is a strong democratic tradition which is the heart of 
Saskatchewan public life and at the heart of that democratic 
tradition I'm convinced that is our party system, a system which 
some recent voices have criticized. 
 
Other members can speak of the traditions and principles of 
their parties, and in fact if you listen to the Liberals and the 
Tories at any given time, you know that they can speak for both 
because they are eternally interchangeable, as we listen to the 
dialogue and debate that they put forward on their philosophies. 
And from time to time we're not certain whether or not we're 
addressing a member from a Liberal philosophy or a Tory 
philosophy. 
 

We look at the debate and the recording of the proceedings and 
find that often, and I'd say in most cases, that when the vote is 
taken the members opposite stand up together and chant in 
unison. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you about the opportunity 
presented to me by the New Democratic Party. It's an 
opportunity to be part of a tradition, to be guided by a set of 
principles, and to be led by a vision of a decent, compassionate, 
and prosperous society; a party led by a Premier respected 
across the nation because he draws his strength from the 
immediate community which he serves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that this party and this 
government, in our actions and in our decisions, reflect the 
beliefs of the many organizations and individuals which we all 
find in our constituencies. And I'm talking about a bottom-up 
democratic process. 
 
When you make a commitment to serve in a public way and be 
in the public eye, you wonder why people are willing to set 
aside the many hours of time and commitment that it takes to 
become a member of service. And I would say that each one of 
us looks around our communities and the leadership that's 
provided by individuals in our communities as continually 
bolstered and cheered on by the number of hours and 
commitment of volunteers who serve to make our communities 
a stronger place to live and provide a good quality of life for all 
its members. And in that way we can do no less but try and 
match their skill and their ability and their determination and, if 
we care about the communities that we live in, to try and put 
our name forward, and if privileged, Mr. Speaker, to be able to 
serve them in a elected way. 
 
There are the many volunteers who make up the boards and the 
committees of community organizations who work selflessly 
for a quality of life which consists of cooperation and 
compassion. These people work to give something back to 
society which gave much to them. And this government, as their 
larger instrument, attempts to reflect their dedication. 
 
I see this every day in my constituency of Wascana Plains. I see 
it in the church boards, in the business and labour leaders, in 
the teachers and coaches to whom our youth are entrusted. They 
work not only for their own advancement but the betterment of 
all; good people working toward a good society. Other members 
can tell the same story about their constituencies. I draw my 
strength from them and I'm proud to represent them. 
 
And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to represent them 
within the parliamentary system which has been tried, tested, 
and trusted for close to a thousand years now. 
 
I'm not one of those people who says we need to throw it out in 
favour of something totally new and untried, but I'm not one to 
close my eyes to the idea that systems grow and can be 
reformed to become stronger, to reflect the community that they 
serve. And to paraphrase Winston Churchill, the parliamentary  



February 13, 1995 

 
155 

system is the worst system of government in the world except 
for all the other kinds. 
 
Of course it can be improved and modernized as we in this 
House do consistently, as we are doing in this session, as 
reflected by some of the initiatives in the throne speech. The 
system works and those who try to make up cheap political 
points by pointing to its supposed faults not only undermine the 
institution of parliament that they serve within and that serves 
us all so well, but they are themselves then undermining the 
service that they can provide. And in fact I would say that it 
becomes no service at all to the greater good and to the whole 
system. 
 
(1945) 
 
Liberal and Tory cynicism are not the way to bring about 
democratic reform. Let me give you one glaring example, Mr. 
Speaker. Four thousand years ago God gave Moses the Ten 
Commandments — ten laws which pretty well cover all human 
conduct if they were to be listened to. Since then we have piled 
law upon law, regulation upon regulation, on top of these ten, 
and I don't think we've quite achieved perfection yet. 
 
Now we have the Leader of the Third Party saying that if she 
were elected to government she would pass a law saying all 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) should be good. I 
guess God didn't know how to draft that kind of legislation. 
 
The answer to responsible government is not another law. The 
answer is to have decent people running for office, people who 
know right from wrong without a law book always in their face, 
people like Douglas, Lloyd, Blakeney, Steuart, and about 99 per 
cent of the people who serve and have served in this Assembly 
in the past. Mouthing reform is easy; achieving it is even easier 
if you want to be willing to set aside the political rhetoric and 
get on with the task. 
 
The Tories can't seem to get past the rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, so 
they say, let's have a LURC (legislative utilities review 
committee); let's have a taxpayers' protection Act; let's have free 
votes in the Assembly; and let's put all these restrictions on 
paper so we can say we've passed a law. What nonsense. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What good will that do? 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — What good will that do exactly, from the 
member. I remind them that we've had a public utilities review, 
a PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission) in the past. Who 
paid for a public utilities review were the taxpayers of this 
province. And let me remind the members opposite, who are 
now calling for a new and revitalized process of PURC, know 
as the LURC, what the experience of the past had been. 
 
Let's put together a utilities review commission similar to the 
one of the PURC from the past, where the Tories set up an 
administration that the taxpayers found was very expensive. 
And administration, of course, if they're going to look at utility 
rate reviews, then had to have a number of people to serve  

them, not only in a technical capacity to determine whether the 
rates would be fairly set or not, but in a legal capacity. All the 
while the taxpayers' purses were opening wider and wider to 
pay for the PURC. 
 
Because the Crown corporations then must go before the PURC 
and talk about their utility rate review in the context of what 
they want to achieve and the stability that the organizations 
need in a financial manner. They also need some very expensive 
people on staff to be able to justify the rate increases. And 
perhaps if there are any legal questions from the PURC 
committee itself, they would also need to have some strong 
legal advice to get them out of some of the binds that might tie 
the hands of an organization that must compete within the 
community. All the while the taxpayers' purse opening up to 
pay for the needs to have this very expensive, publicly funded 
utilities review commission. 
 
What was the result of PURC? Well in every instance that came 
before the Public Utilities Review Commission, the rates that 
were suggested and requested and reviewed by the Crown 
corporations were approved — in every case. 
 
Well not exactly every case, Mr. Speaker. There was one time 
that there was a rate that came before the Public Utilities 
Review Commission and was rejected. And the former 
government, the Conservative government, decided that to 
provide for the stability of that Crown corporation the rejection 
would lead to an underfunding of that organization and put 
them in financial difficulty. So off with their heads; off with the 
PURC. And now to add to the public cynicism, on to LURC. 
Just what this community needs, Mr. Speaker, a LURC. 
 
If they had been paying attention and the members of the third 
party were paying attention to the Crown utilities committee, 
they would know that the expanding mandate of the committee 
is to have the public involved in a review of the goals and 
objectives of the Crown corporations and, through their 
members, be able to challenge and to suggest and question what 
is the need for the utility rate increases in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that when we're looking at a growing 
of a mandate, you'll be able to see more public accountability in 
those processes in the future without us standing up and saying 
we're going to add to a situation of the past, that was a bad 
mistake of the past, under a utilities review commission that 
was cancelled by the members opposite. 
 
And most recently we've seen the response to the public and to 
the sometimes fluctuation in the market-places in the Crown 
corporation sector by the decrease in the utility rates as the 
Crown corporations looked at and reflected what their costs 
were and what their requirements were for purchase, and could 
pass on those savings to the public. And as one of my members 
says, a saving of six and a half per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remind them of course then of a totally unworkable and 
incredibly expensive system for the taxpayers, the taxpayers that 
they said they wanted to protect and are now trying to  



February 13, 1995 

 
156 

protect with the LURC. And I remind them also that they are 
the authors of the flat tax, several bumps in the sales tax, the 
harmonized PST (provincial sales tax), and the reinstatement of 
the gas tax. And the list goes on and on. Where was the 
protection then? 
 
The best taxpayer protection is a government living within its 
means, operating in its people's and its own best interest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Some near-sighted journalists seem to think 
it's strange that a government wants to be re-elected. Of course 
they do. This government wants to be re-elected because we 
have a commitment to move beyond not only strengthening the 
foundations of this community, but wanting to be able to see 
some of the plans that have been put in place come to fruition 
and to be able to make sure that the mistakes of the past don't 
happen in the future, and in particularly the near future under 
the members of the third party who strangely now look like 
members of a renewed and vitalized Tory Party that have sort 
of, Mr. Speaker, come across from one robe wearing the robes 
of the Conservatives now to become new Liberal members. 
And we've had many examples of that happening. In the past 
we've had people introduced in the House that were strong 
supporters, financial advisers, and now advisers of the Liberal 
Party, who once were advisers of the Tory caucus. 
 
Some near-sighted journalists seem to think, as I said, Mr. 
Speaker, that it's strange that governments want to be re-elected, 
but it's the best way to have people treat the taxpayers with 
respect and openness  go before them and ask them to judge 
them on the performance of not only the things that come 
before the House and they can see through the televised 
proceedings, but also in a consistent and constant and 
consultative manner in the formulation of policy and in the 
ongoing work of government. And I believe we're doing that. 
 
Let me say just one word about the call for free votes, the call 
that we hear most often from not only the Conservative 
members opposite and the Liberals, but most often from 
someone in the federal arena called Preston Manning who 
would call for free votes. Now — free votes, whatever that 
means — would that mean more democracy in the Assembly? 
Mr. Speaker, not on your life. And I ask people in the 
constituencies to understand what they're saying when they fall 
into the trap of believing that a free vote says their member is 
going to stand up and vote for whatever the last person on the 
telephone asked for, or whatever the largest lobby group that 
has the largest sack of dollars can provide that member to vote 
in the way that they see would best serve the needs of their 
short sighted interests and most often their corporate gain. 
 
I ask members to look at the federal government that's to the 
south of us. That's a government of free votes. It's a government 
that operates almost under paralysis. Is it more democratic? No. 
Are we well served by a system that operates through lobbyists, 
through members responding to the highest bidder, through 
more back room deals than we can even imagine in our one  

lifetime? And is this what people want? I say no, Mr. Speaker. 
And I say if they questioned what the motive behind the call for 
free votes would be, they would understand more clearly what 
the members opposite are up to. 
 
Besides, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, I'd ask you, don't you 
already have a mechanism for free votes within your caucus? I 
know within our caucus, we have a party discipline that allows 
for a member who feels strongly on principled issues to share 
that with his caucus, and if it weights strongly on the mind, then 
the member can vote according to their conscience. Why 
wouldn't that be in the member of the opposition party or the 
member of the third party? And if not, I'm asking, are their 
caucuses well served? And maybe this is why their members are 
crying for free votes. 
 
I find it very interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, that both parties 
opposite are already saying their idea of balanced budget 
legislation is better than ours. It's taken 10 years for the 
members of the Conservative Party to come up with, or the 
Conservative caucus, to come up with an idea even thinking 
about a balanced budget. But, Mr. Speaker, I can't imagine why 
the Liberals would feel they have better ideas than ours when 
they haven't even seen our balanced budget legislation and 
already, not in the spirit of cooperation or offering alternatives; 
outright rejecting what they haven't seen yet. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I will be proud to support our Bill when it 
comes forward, but I am prouder of the fact that we have 
balanced our budget just because it makes financial sense. Not 
because the Liberal leader has suggested another law, not 
because the members opposite feel that they found a new idea 
of coming to a balanced budget and weren't able to do it over 
the number of years that they served. I am proud that in three 
years, the three years ago when we announced the plan, that we 
stuck to it and that we'll be presenting a balanced budget, and 
with it the balanced budget legislation Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — And actually I could echo the words of the 
former minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) last year who said: the Minister of Finance did not 
stick to our deficit reduction plan; in fact she exceeded it by one 
year. 
 
She didn't do that alone, Mr. Speaker; she did it with the 
political commitment of all the people in this province, and she 
did it with the support and the hours of deliberation of this 
caucus. And we're proud; every member, proud to stand up and 
support the budget that'll be presented in this House. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, whatever are the Tories even doing whispering 
balanced budget legislation? I believe there's a biblical story 
somewhere about looking behind and turning into a pillar of 
salt. There are 15 billion reasons why Tories and balanced 
budget legislation don't mix. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 13, 1995 

 
157 

Ms. Hamilton: — During the last session and just two days 
following the budget address there were double the reasons why 
it seems incredible that the Liberals want to talk about balanced 
budget legislation, when they increased the deficit twofold in 
48 hours. I will be interested to see how the members opposite 
under the leadership of the third party, the Liberal Party, are 
going to handle the idea of balancing the budget, cutting taxes, 
enhancing programs and services, and saying that that's all 
within the balanced budget legislation that they propose. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with many of the mechanisms that we've put 
in place, accrual accounting systems, the expanded mandate of 
the Crown Corporations review, the accounting systems and 
practices that the auditor has lauded, that we've put in place and 
have been consistently following, the financial plan that we've 
put before the people of Saskatchewan, a four-year plan, 
including the economic forecast on which the plan has been 
based, now, Mr. Speaker, we have a good system and at the 
moment we have a government which believes in the system. 
 
I remind the Leader of the Third Party of what she was told at 
her own convention two years ago. The resource person who 
was on the same panel with the Leader of the Third Party stated: 
the way to have responsible government is not to elect a right-
wing party to government. And that about wraps it up and says 
it all, Mr. Speaker. We've seen them in operation, we've seen 
them at work, and soon we're going to see them at work 
federally. 
 
Also, I said a minute ago, the way to have responsible 
government is to have a government committed to consulting 
with the people before acting. We have that and therefore we 
have community-based approaches to the challenges before us. 
 
We have community-based health care reform, discussed very 
well from the member from Milestone, discussed this evening 
by the member from Saskatoon. 
 
We have the Partnership for Renewal, discussed ably by the 
member from Saltcoats. We have Ag 2000 and we have the 
child action plan. 
 
All of these innovative approaches have come about as a result 
of intense discussion and consultation with the people directly 
affected and the people directly involved. And that is why they 
are working. 
 
(2000) 
 
Responsible government leads to workable solutions. We have 
Future Skills and soon we will have JobStart, both responding 
to perceived needs and both involving the appropriate 
institutions. 
 
In cultural development, in aboriginal policy, in gaming, in 
municipal affairs, we're consulting first. We're asking the 
questions, then we're acting. 
 

Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I was at a meeting of the space 
allocation committee, under the auspices of SPMC, and we had 
a presentation by a man from the occupational health and safety 
department who ran through the background to occupational 
health and safety legislation. And it went something like this. It 
wasn't until 1973 in the province we really had the rights of the 
workers legislation. And the manual for protection of the 
workers was a little booklet that fit in the pocket of the 
individual who was going to oversee and look out for the safety 
of the individual in the workplace. 
 
And that was done by people in the department kind of looking 
briefly over the information they had secured in the areas that 
workers may be under some duress or receive some injury and 
putting together the booklet. 
 
It wasn't until 1979 that we had the first occupational health and 
safety legislation in the province. And at that time consultation 
was with the umbrella groups, the groups that oversaw by an 
elected process the workplace, perhaps the employers that were 
involved and so on. 
 
Compare that to the update of the legislation and the regulations 
in 1994-95, Mr. Speaker, when the individual says that we now 
have established working committees that membership comes 
from all areas and all disciplines from the workplaces to the 
employer to the umbrella groups, broad consultation in each of 
the areas, sector by sector, to come to an understanding and a 
consensus building that now sees the working committees into a 
mode of about 92 per cent consensus on the occupational health 
and safety regulations that will come before us — a broad 
consultation process, a broad process of listening to people, 
understanding what the issues are, and then acting. 
 
To contrast that, Mr. Speaker, we have a member of the third 
party who has said what are those yahoos doing; talking about 
legislation is inconsequential as workers' compensation and 
occupational health and safety — an élitist attitude, Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at someone who's trying to say that 
they want to see improvement in the economic forecast in this 
province that doesn't include strong occupational health and 
safety guidelines for workers and doesn't include the 
improvement of workers' compensation systems. Mr. Speaker, it 
also doesn't include in the way the members opposite had voted 
on the labour standards regulation that was for us when you're 
talking about maternity leave, pro-rated benefits for part-time 
workers, and the list goes on, talking about protection for those 
people who are greatest in need, most often the youth in our 
province and single parent families. 
 
Check the approach, the broad, consultative approach, and 
balance that against the opposition poleaxe style of Alberta. 
When you look at a style that comes in and says this is the way 
it's going to be, and it's politically dictated from the capital à la 
Klein style, compare that with the Leader of the Third Party and 
the dictatorial hand that's at work in New Brunswick with 
health care reform that says today it was this way, but tomorrow 
here it is. Here's the map. Like it or lump it; you're going to 
work in this system. Get on with it. 



February 13, 1995 

 
158 

Compare that to a system of consultation, of broad consultation 
from all sectors of the community, and of empowering people 
at the local level to become involved in making decisions on 
what's most affecting the people and their families: health care 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of these programs have had their beginnings in the people 
themselves. They have worked themselves through our caucus 
and its committees, which have further consulted before 
moving them along. And then they have been put before this 
Legislative Assembly for much debate, more consultation, and 
final passage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final test of course of responsible government 
is the test of being willing to submit to every four years or so — 
five if you're a Conservative or a Liberal . . . based on the 
substance of this throne speech and today's budget, along with 
the record of our last three years, I am eager to stand the test 
and to put ourselves before the electorate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the initiative of this government will 
carry us in good stead as we go out and put our programs before 
the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I'd like to spend a few minutes on some of 
the initiatives that I've personally been involved in. I may have 
mentioned them earlier in my speech, but just to give you a 
reflection of some of the things that I know from personal 
experience and have been involved in over the past number of 
years, not only on city council but now in the role as the caucus 
chair of local government and education, and in the caucus as a 
whole. 
 
And the first one I'd like to speak to, Mr. Speaker, is something 
called Future Regina. If you think back to a time when I was on 
city council, we were faced with an economic plan of the Tory 
government of the day, that was called Fair Share 
Saskatchewan. And their idea of an economic renewal for this 
province was not to consult with communities, not to draw a 
broad base of people together and say, what would you like to 
see happen in your communities; what could your community 
sustain; and then be part of a responsible government that 
would facilitate the opportunity and to create a climate where 
the people who are involved in those industries would like to 
locate there in the community that's chosen that industry for 
themselves because they know they can sustain it, but to 
arbitrarily remove parts of government that had been 
established in Regina and other places and to move them 
throughout the province based on political whim and will. 
 
It was even more devastating to the city of Regina because we 
thought we had come up with a plan that would show the Tory 
government that there was another way to do it. There was a 
way through economic development authorities to bring people 
together, to bring together business and labour, community 
leaders, people in the community who were actively involved in 
business and in development, and to set them down and decide  

for themselves in each area of the province. Now it's happening 
through regional economic development authorities, but 
through . . . Regina Economic Development Authority put 
together a plan called Future Regina. 
 
And at the time I was involved in setting up the first Regina 
Economic Development Authority and excited about the 
presentation to government of Future Regina and told, all of 
that aside, we're still going ahead with Fair Share Saskatchewan 
as our economic development plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today we see through Regina Economic 
Development Authority and other regional economic 
authorities, their strategies and their plans. And I'm glad to be a 
part of a strategy that presents itself in a holistic manner, in the 
manner of the circle. Because part of that circle includes 
aboriginal economic development. It includes equity 
employment programs. It includes the initiatives that have been 
put forward recently by the minister of Gaming. And it includes 
being involved in the manufacturing and sectors of the 
economy that Regina can see itself being sustainable over the 
long term, such as the telecommunications and information 
industry, the development of infotech and telecommunications 
technology that is being put forward by our minister responsible 
for interprovincial affairs. 
 
It states and speaks to a policy of positioning Regina as the 
centre of prairie economic cooperation, and now becoming a 
member of a new organization of economic cooperation and 
having people from Regina who are very active in developing 
and furthering the ideas of economic cooperation, but seeing 
Regina as a centre for that development. 
 
And it speaks to the strategy of tying in the University of 
Regina for its research and its development, its software 
technology centres, and enhancing the knowledge and 
development of the software technologies that will go hand in 
hand with becoming a part of the information highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a strong plan. A plan from people across this 
community of Regina that came together and had a vision, and 
ask of government that when we look at developing 
opportunities that it follow a vision of the communities. What 
our government is doing in economic development, it's called 
partnership, Partnership for Renewal. 
 
Well that's one of the areas that I was involved in and I watch 
with interest, and I will continue to watch with interest as we 
look at developing opportunities and particularly in the exciting 
area of information technologies. 
 
But another one through the work of our committee, Mr. 
Speaker, one that responds to the community is called just that, 
Responding to the Community. And in Responding to the 
Community, it's a proposal for cultural development. In 
launching the paper, which is an extensive work, it's the 
proposals for cultural development, a discussion paper, the 
minister, the hon. member from Melfort explained to us. 
 



February 13, 1995 

 
159 

And in the words of the minister, she says: may I underline that 
the Government of Saskatchewan currently invests a total of 
$13 million in arts, cultural industries, multiculturalism, and 
heritage sectors through general revenues, plus another 9.8 
million through lotteries. The total investment of $22.8 million 
levers additional dollars from earned revenues, donations, 
corporate supporters, the federal and municipal governments. 
The multiplier effect by the involvement in the arts and the 
culture in our community is phenomenal, Mr. Speaker, and it's 
one of the six strategic areas we've identified in our Partnership 
for Renewal. 
 
This is a plan that culminates the work that's done as I talked to 
you about our government's involvement in extensive 
consultation. It takes nine studies and two task force reports 
which were collectively representing all of the groups in the 
community and the investment they had of over a million 
dollars to bring forward the information to our minister, and to 
formulate the plan that has been put for and approved by our 
caucus. And I was proud to be a part of a committee that would 
help the minister and support the minister in launching the 
discussion paper. 
 
We know that when our community is strong, when the culture 
in our community is strong, and through the release of this 
paper, that we will clearly and irrevocably demonstrate to these 
four vital sectors and the public that Saskatchewan government 
looks forward to the challenge of effecting change for the 
benefit of all Saskatchewan people. Change that will prepare us 
for a dynamic, enthusiastic and unique cultural community for 
the 21st century. And I'm looking forward for the results that 
come from Responding to the Community, and in particular in 
one of the key sectors of arts, culture, heritage, multiculturalism 
in our community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the area of education, I was so disappointed in the member 
from Regina North West, when our minister was kind enough 
to give her a review of what was planned in education, what our 
plans had been in education over the past number of months, to 
find that she used that information to put together a little paper. 
She could have consulted with some of her members, in 
particular someone who's nominated to run in Regina Wascana 
Plains who works in education, who could have put her on the 
right path to knowing that plagiarists, as the minister says, Mr. 
Speaker, plagiarists fail. 
 
We briefed her. The minister took her aside and spent time 
talking to her about the Future Skills program, and an idea that 
says not only the Labour Force Development Board brought it 
forward, but many groups in the community that which we'd 
consulted said, we can no longer afford to have a community 
that disregards the skills of the people who've been out there 
working in the workforce. Can no longer afford, when people 
are changing jobs and have been involved in other experiences, 
to not take those components of their experience and training 
with them, to not have it recognized as a component of their 
training to be involved in the workplace. And that's exactly 
what Future Skills does. 
 

We've put $10 million into provincial funding to provide 
recognized training leading to full-time, ongoing employment 
for the unemployed, including social assistance recipients; to 
provide employers with trained workers for new positions; to 
provide equity group members with employability skills leading 
to employment; and to improve the responsiveness of public 
training institutions to industry and individual training needs — 
to work with the community and find out where the jobs are, 
where the areas we can train our people that it will lead to 
meaningful jobs and employment. 
 
With those areas of the business community, find out who those 
people who have components of those skills; work with SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) to 
have them recognized so they can quickly be retrained and go 
into an employment opportunity that is full time and will lead to 
full-time employment for those individuals, rather than enter the 
revolving door of going into training, training that leads 
nowhere, getting into the workforce and finding out what they 
were trained for isn't applicable to the market-place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(2015) 
 
With that we've developed a package under Future Skills called 
industry skills, the components that I've talked about; 
community skills, the skills that are needed to become 
employable in our workplaces. Skills training for the future is 
what we're talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We shared that with the member opposite. We shared with her 
the apprenticeship programs for post . . . for secondary school 
education and we shared with her the ideas of integrated school 
services that provide a holistic approach — community and 
education working together in the areas of health and social 
services and education — to provide the supports for those 
children greatest in need; and to provide the nurturing of their 
skills and the development and growth of the children of our 
future, the workers of our future, in the development of their 
skills through the integrated school services program. 
 
And we look forward to announcing more and more details of 
the JobStart program, which we shared with the member 
opposite, only to find now that it's quite encouraging that 
Liberals agree with what we're doing in education, but it's very 
disconcerting to find out that people of the stature in the 
community, the leaders in the community that people look to, 
would take that information and develop their paper and put it 
out as their own plan for education in the province and their 
own discussion paper on how things could go. 
 
So as I said, I echo a strong disappointment of my colleagues 
and in particular the minister who took the time to do that and 
then found out how the information was being used. 
 
We're moving ahead, Mr. Speaker. We're moving ahead in high 
tech and in cultural development. Saskatoon is rightly proud of 
its biotech industries and we're holding up the bottom of the 
province with ours. 



February 13, 1995 

 
160 

I was particularly pleased with the release by the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs, as I mentioned, on the cultural discussion 
paper. 
 
Last Wednesday we received terrific news on the economy. 
And it was from an unlikely source. Unlikely because according 
to, as I at one time had referred to her, as had the minister and 
the member from Elphinstone, as the princess of darkness . . . 
we now look on her as the queen of doom, particularly after her 
address to SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), the member of the third party who went around 
saying gloom and doom to the economy; all is dark. You can 
use the figures of StatsCanada and you'll see how bad it is. 
 
And then all of a sudden had to change their tune and say, well 
we're going to look to some new figures because we're not 
really happy that we have to get out there and talk about the 
positive economic news in this province. The news that it says 
employment in our province averaged 450,000 workers during 
1992, climbed to 455,000 in '93, and reached 457 in 1994. And 
this included a late year-over-year surge of 11,000 jobs in 
November and 15,000 jobs in December. 
 
Youth employment in Saskatchewan has also shown signs of 
growth. Since 1992 when there was an average of 74,000 
employed youth, the rate has steadily increased to 76,000 in 
1994. 
 
So our princess of darkness, who's now graduated to the queen 
of doom, has said, oh it's terrible out there for the economy and 
it's terrible out there for their youth. Well you can tell what kind 
of encouragement that gives to our business community and 
others who want to relocate here or are interested in our 
community, if they hear that from the members opposite. 
 
So much better we have the chance to stand up in our return 
speech to the throne speech and tell people what the story is in 
Saskatchewan. And as we hear in some of the reporting, as we 
hear in some of the reports on health care, something wonderful 
is happening, Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, something is 
happening right across the economy in Saskatchewan. 
 
This Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, is about fiscal 
renewal, about economic development. There is an air of 
optimism in the province because the two together are on the 
credit side, not the debit. 
 
But it is also about community, about health care, about social 
responsibility. This government recognizes the earthly 
equivalent of the biblical verse: what does it prosper a man to 
gain the world and lose his own soul? 
 
We believe that gaining financial respectability by turning loose 
the unprotected and vulnerable is not worth the candle.. We 
take it as an article of faith that both sides of the ledger have to 
be balanced, the fiscal and the human — or as the technocrats 
say, the hard side and the soft side. 
 

We are proud that we will balance the budget. We're equally 
proud of the child action plan, the integrated school services 
plan, Future Skills, Responding to the Community, regional 
economic development, the rise in employment  a credit to 
the partnerships in our community, a partnership of renewal. 
We're equally proud of The Victims of Domestic Violence Act 
that is a reminder that jobs aren't everything. Hard side, soft 
side, jobs and security, the yin and the yang of this 
government's philosophy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I believe in reflecting and serving the 
people who put their faith in me to serve in the first place, 
because I believe in what the New Democrat governments of 
the past have done and what this government is putting before 
this Assembly, because I believe in the form of government in 
which we now are serving, and because I'm proud and confident 
of the plans outlined in this throne speech, I will support the 
motion and reject the amendment before us. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I rise in the legislature tonight to speak in support 
of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I want to first extend a welcome to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and also to Mr. Speaker, back for another session, and to 
compliment you both on the job that you do in keeping things 
running smoothly during the proceedings of the legislature. It is 
sometimes a hard task but you do it with such authority and 
grace and always with the utmost in fairness. 
 
I would like to congratulate the mover of the throne speech, the 
member from Bengough-Milestone, as well as the seconder, the 
member from Saltcoats. You both did a fine job. 
 
I would like to congratulate the new members of cabinet, the 
member from Regina Lake Centre, and the member from 
Athabasca. You both add experience and knowledge to your 
respective portfolios and I'm confident that you will both do a 
fine job in cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to acknowledge the 
wonderful constituents which I represent. Some of the finest 
people are located in the constituency of Redberry and it is an 
honour and a privilege to represent them here in the legislature 
and out and about in the province. 
 
It is of course a particular honour to speak after the good news 
that was delivered in this Chamber to the people of 
Saskatchewan by the Lieutenant Governor, the Hon. Jack 
Wiebe. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. 
Wiebe on his appointment to the position of Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan and to commend him on his speech. 
I am sure he will continue to fulfil his role in an honourable and 
dignified manner. 
 



February 13, 1995 

 
161 

The good news covered many areas of concern: job creation, 
economic development, and educational opportunities. But the 
Speech from the Throne contained an even more important 
message, what I perceive to be the single most important 
message announced in this Chamber in over a decade. I am of 
course referring to the message that on February 16 the Minister 
of Finance, the Hon. Janice MacKinnon, will introduce . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I just want to remind the 
member that we do not refer to other members by name, but by 
their title or by their constituency. Carry on. 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. She will introduce the 
first balanced budget since the 1982 election of the Tories. The 
massive debt burden introduced by the Tories is a burden that 
will continue to plague the good people of this province for 
many years to come. It will require the continued good 
management and development skills that have brought us, after 
just four years, to this first balanced budget in more than a 
decade. The elimination of the total provincial deficit is 
impeded by the more than $2 million that must be paid each and 
every day, 365 days a year  over $2 million a day just to 
service the inherited Tory debt. 
 
Three times in the last half century, the CCF and NDP 
governments have come to power facing huge provincial debts. 
Three times the people of Saskatchewan have been burdened by 
a Tory or Liberal administration that has devastated this 
province. Once again through the efforts of a responsible New 
Democrat government, this province is well on the road to 
recovery. 
 
This is the fifth session of the twenty-second legislature, and a 
great deal has changed since I first rose to speak in this 
Chamber. A great deal of progress has been made, progress that 
all Saskatchewan people can be proud of. 
 
As mentioned in the throne speech, our population is on the 
upswing and unemployment is on the decline. Local business 
sectors are expanding and our health care system is a world 
leader in health care reform. The outlook for the future is much 
brighter. The people of Saskatchewan, led by this government, 
can take full credit for this brighter future. Not only are we in a 
balanced budget position, but this session will ensure the 
security of our future through the introduction of the balanced 
budget Act. 
 
The balanced budget to be presented has resulted in increased 
worldwide confidence in this province, confidence that is 
producing major economic recovery for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Our government has, through good 
management, with the help of the citizens of this province, 
produced a remarkable comeback, a comeback resulting in 
thousands of new jobs, new jobs that produce more income for 
business and for government, thus assisting in economic 
recovery of Saskatchewan. 
 
With the deficit under control, we as a government will now 
tackle the job creation with the same optimism that will enable  

us to initiate programs for more employment opportunities, 
opportunities that will promote economic and social recovery 
for the people of Saskatchewan. For example, the forest 
resource management Act will provide for the sustainable 
management of our forests, thus allowing for a viable lumber 
industry, therefore providing many long-term jobs in logging 
and related industries. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan energy 
strategy, security, and prosperity will be introduced. The 
strategy identifies a way to help the province economically 
through responsible production, processing, and transporting of 
energy. 
 
The Speech from the Throne indicated that net farm income in 
Saskatchewan reached $925 million last year. That's the highest 
figure since 1988. However a major storm cloud looms on the 
horizon for net farm income with the threatened changes to the 
method of payment. If the federal government is successful in 
removing the Crow benefit, Saskatchewan farmers will lose 
more than $300 million from that net figure. In other words, 
925 million will suddenly drop to less than 625 million. 
 
(2030) 
 
At times we hear the statement: Tory times are tough times. 
That statement may well be true, but let's not forget that the loss 
of the Crow's Nest Pass Agreement followed by the Crow 
benefit was and is being thrust upon us by the federal Liberal 
government. 
 
In addition, devastating interest rates that ruined many farm 
families were the direct result of changes to the usury Act by 
the former Liberal government. It is very clear to Saskatchewan 
farmers that Jean-Luc Pepin, Lloyd Axworthy, and of course 
Otto Lang and his trainee, the present Liberal Minister of 
Agriculture, are not friends of the farmer. 
 
At the present time farmers are receiving a better return from 
the market-place, but with the continued high interest and input 
costs, they cannot absorb another $300 million cut-back as 
proposed by the removal of the Crow benefit. 
 
We, the Government of Saskatchewan, must strive to prevent 
further erosion of farm income by the federal Liberals. 
 
On another venue, in the past three years a great deal of 
progress has been made in the second major step in health care. 
T.C. Douglas, when introducing Saskatchewan's health care 
system, saw two steps to produce a world-renowned level of 
health care services for the people of Saskatchewan. To 
complete the second step in T.C.'s vision, the present session 
will see the medical professions Act pass. This Act will 
accommodate the transfer of employees to the 30 district health 
boards. The board structure allows local control of the major 
thrust of health care. 
 
In addition, we are committed to health board elections to be 
held in the fall of 1995. These elections represent the first time  



February 13, 1995 

 
162 

Saskatchewan people have had the opportunity to directly 
choose their health care representatives. 
 
In Hafford, in the heart of Redberry constituency, the parkland 
district has implemented a salary-doctor arrangement that has 
attracted two doctors to our community, the first time this has 
happened in over 50 years. 
 
In addition, the home care management for the district has now 
opened an office in Hafford. Improvements in first response 
and ambulance service are now on the agenda. 
 
As well I recently took part in the official opening of a beautiful 
palliative care centre. These kinds of improvements in the 
delivery of health care are being well received throughout my 
constituency. I am honoured and pleased to be part of a 
government that has initiated these changes. 
 
I want to acknowledge the positive contribution made to our 
health care system by the previous minister of Health, the 
member from Regina Hillsdale. She will indeed go down in 
history as one of the great leaders in our proud record of 
compassionate health care. 
 
I also want to congratulate the new Health minister, the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: — As I know that he will be successful in completing 
the health reform in a caring and compassionate manner. 
 
In the area of education, Mr. Speaker, we will be introducing a 
new program aimed at young people. This program is called 
JobStart and will soon be announced. The initiative will focus 
on young people needing training to get a first job and those 
facing special barriers to employment. Young people are the 
future of our province, of our world, and we must put in place 
good programs now to ensure they have a future. 
 
Education is a great concern to many people these days, Mr. 
Speaker, especially with what the federal Liberals have in store 
for post-secondary students, outlined in the Liberal document, 
Improving Social Security in Canada. Students could see their 
tuition costs soar and at the same time see student loans 
virtually eliminated or nearly impossible for a student to ever 
pay back. This will be a very sad day when it is too expensive 
for a young person to be able to attend university or any other 
post-secondary institution because he or she cannot afford it. It 
will be a sad day indeed. 
 
It would be really nice to finally see a federal government who 
places some of the debt burden on those who can actually 
afford to give a little, like the huge corporations and the rich, 
who seem to squeeze through available tax loopholes in our 
federal system. It would be really nice to see, Mr. Speaker, 
instead of squeezing money out of our poor and our youth. 
 

This year marks the 90th anniversary of our great province. We 
have seen many remarkable things happen to Saskatchewan in 
those 90 years. We have seen bumper crops, frost, and famine. 
We have seen triumph, loss, and defeat. We have seen growth, 
prosperity, and riches. Throughout all of it, Mr. Speaker, we 
have seen some of the finest people in all the world living right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
This year as well, Mr. Speaker, we will be hosting the 1995 
Grey Cup for the very first time — another first in 
Saskatchewan  many things to celebrate this year. Ninety 
years as a province and bringing home the Grey Cup  just two 
more reasons for Saskatchewan's people to feel optimistic. 1995 
will be a great year for us, for the people of the greatest 
province in Canada. And as we look ahead to our centennial 
anniversary, the year of 2005, we can all look ahead with much 
hope and anticipation. We can look at what we've done as a 
government and as a province over the past three and a half 
years with much pride and build on that pride. After all it is true 
that Saskatchewan people do have a lot of pride and now have 
plenty of reason to show that pride. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wormsbecker: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise this 
evening to speak in support of the throne speech for the fifth 
session of the twenty-second legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to reflect upon the past three and a half 
years. As you probably are aware of, I have announced that I 
will not be contesting the nomination of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
in the next election. And perhaps I can take a little liberty to 
reflect upon the events of the past three and a half years. 
 
I remember walking through the main doors for the first time 
when cabinet was sworn in, and as I walked through those 
doors I could not help but think of the MLAs who preceded me 
as MLAs for the constituency of Weyburn, men like T.C. 
Douglas, Auburn Pepper, and Lorne Hepworth. These men 
represented their constituents admirably and have done an 
excellent job, and I was pleased to follow in their footsteps. 
 
And as I entered through those doors on February 6 past, I 
looked around and saw the guests sitting here on the main floor 
and also in the gallery, and I could not help but recall the first 
time I also walked through those main doors, came around and 
sat right here in this same desk that I'm speaking from. And on 
that first occasion as I sat down and looked around at all those 
folks who had elected us, basically representatives of the people 
of Saskatchewan, I asked myself the question, is this a job I 
really want? 
 
And the reason I asked the question is because it was a difficult 
task that was handed to all of us as elected representatives, and 
the difficult task was to open the books, restore sound fiscal 
responsibility and management to this province. And I was one  



February 13, 1995 

 
163 

that questioned just whether it could be done in the space of the 
first term, as we had promised to do. 
 
And as I sat here on February 6 looking around, I said to myself 
once again, when we undertook this task we undertook it one 
day at a time, one year at a time, and with a little bit of good 
luck and darn good management we were able to deliver one 
year earlier than anticipated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wormsbecker: — On February 16 next, this coming 
Thursday, the Minister of Finance will deliver a balanced 
budget and I must commend her, my cabinet colleagues, and my 
colleagues here on the government side of the House, for the 
hard work that has been done over the past years. 
 
I also must commend the people of Saskatchewan for having 
given us the opportunity to serve them and also for sticking 
with us during the past three and a half years. There were many 
challenges that we faced and there are many tasks and 
difficulties that we also had to face. 
 
Now that I'm retiring, Mr. Speaker, there'll be many things I will 
perhaps miss and perhaps not miss. For example, I'm not going 
to miss having to travel 70 miles back and forth to this 
Legislative Assembly. I don't think I'll miss the cafeteria meals. 
I assume that I've probably consumed at least 300-plus meals, 
and notwithstanding that the staff are excellent staff, it's 
sometimes the gourmet food isn't the same as what my wife 
cooks for me. And I begin to appreciate more her good cooking 
and occasionally even a meal that I prepare for myself. 
 
What else won't I miss. Well, the bricks and mortar. The 
building is beautiful. I recall the first time I entered this 
Legislative Chamber on a tour looking at the building as a 
student attending the University of Regina, having been forced 
to take a fine arts class because I at that time was enrolled in a 
liberal arts program and one of the prerequisites was a fine arts 
class. I took art history, and I had to write a paper on the 
architecture of this building. It is beautiful. At the time I was 
writing the paper, I didn't really appreciate it that much. I spent 
several hours sitting out in my vehicle just looking at the 
architecture from the exterior of the building. But now that I've 
sat in this Legislative Assembly, I have a different view of 
things. 
 
Some of the things I will miss, of course, is question period — 
the energy of this Legislative Assembly. Also I'm certain I will 
have fond memories, perhaps fond dreams, of you, Mr. 
Speaker, getting up, calling this House to order. Some of my 
colleagues say nightmares, but no. These will be fine, fond 
memories that I will have as I grow old. Some people may say 
I'm already old. 
 
The other thing that perhaps I will miss most, of course, are the 
fine individuals that are gathered around here tonight listening 
to me waxing and waning in my retirement years. There's no 
doubt that the heart and soul and body of this building is  

embodied right here in those of us that are around here, the 
members that have been elected, the Clerks of the Legislative 
Assembly, also the pages, and all of the support staff that 
occupy the corridors of this building — the MAs (ministerial 
assistant) and secretaries. These are the individuals whom I will 
miss. 
 
(2045) 
 
And as I leave this Chamber for the last time, I realize that I 
will become part of the history of the building. My photograph 
will be perhaps not permanently displayed because I assume at 
some point in time I may move into a dusty hall, but in any 
event I will be there for a few years and I have appreciated the 
time that I have spent here. 
 
Well I'd like to move on now, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps just 
comment briefly upon the Speech from the Throne. This 
perhaps can be described as the great Saskatchewan comeback. 
The Premier has coined this phrase and I think it's applicable 
and it's appropriate. 
 
And on February 6, as I was walking through this building into 
this legislative Chamber with my colleagues, I couldn't help but 
notice the four young students that I brought with me that day 
as my visitors, two of whom are residents of Weyburn, two of 
whom are international students, one from Japan and one from 
Denmark. And these students, they're the individuals who are 
going to have to pick up the mantle and govern this province in 
the future. They're the ones whom we basically directed our 
energy towards in terms of turning this province around. We did 
it for our children; we did it for our grandchildren. 
 
And I'm proud to say that on February 16 we will have laid that 
firm foundation upon which we can build for the future  
build those surpluses, pay back that accumulated debt of 
approximately $16 billion, and at the same time hopefully 
provide for some modest increases in some of our programs for 
the people of Saskatchewan, because over the last several years 
there's no doubt that they did accept the challenge that we 
presented them with. And that challenge was that they've got to 
do their part in order to assist us in wrestling this deficit to the 
ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I reflect upon the past three and a half years, I 
see that there's a significant improvement in agriculture. The 
1994 crop receipts were up more than $1 billion. That's 43 per 
cent in comparison to the previous year. And total realized net 
farm income was up 108 per cent. 
 
At the time we were elected, agriculture was in the doldrums, 
the international price of commodities, farm commodities that 
is, was significantly depressed. And I recall one of the first 
demonstrations out here in front of the legislature dealt with 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). And I recall walking 
through that crowd of farmers and speaking to them about their 
frustrations and how they wished that they would be able to 
obtain their income through the farm gate rather than depend 
upon subsidies. 



February 13, 1995 

 
164 

And I'm happy to see that the international grain prices for 
coarse grains, specialty crops, has increased and that agriculture 
looks more promising today than it did three and a half years 
ago. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, oil sales were up significantly over the past 
year, 22 per cent. And in the constituency of Weyburn, there is 
an oil patch, primarily to the east of Weyburn. And the activity 
that has occurred in the oil patch over the last two years has 
been significant, and it has added a lot of extra dollars in our 
economy. All of the motels are full, and even the tavern keepers 
have indicated that their business is prospering considerably 
more than in the past. I must commend our government for 
restructuring the tax royalty structure, and it has significantly 
resulted in the additional activity that has taken place in the oil 
patch over the last several years. 
 
Also manufacturing is up. Retail sales are up. Sales of vehicles 
are up. Pretty well every thing is on the rise including our 
population. I can recall there were years when our population 
was declining, and since 1992 it has been steadily increasing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to looking at the positive economic factors that are 
signals that our economy is growing, if you also take into 
account the dependency rates — that is welfare and also 
individuals on unemployment insurance — we in Saskatchewan 
rank second to Alberta as the province with the lowest 
dependency rates. And that is a positive sign that our economy 
is doing very well. 
 
One of the things that I'm proud of, Mr. Speaker, is the 
approach that we have taken in terms of presenting our budget. 
When we introduced our first budget, we introduced a plan. 
And basically the plan was over a two-year period, indicating to 
third parties that we funded what they could expect to receive 
so that the communities, rural municipalities and urban 
municipalities, could do some planning, that the educational 
institutions could do some planning, and also that the health 
boards could do some planning knowing what their funding 
was going to be. 
 
We also indicated when we put out our budget what the 
economic forecasts were, what the information was that we 
relied upon in determining our forecasts. And we received 
positive reviews from all of the agencies, bond rating agencies, 
and that has assisted us in basically establishing some 
credibility, amongst all of the other provinces, in Saskatchewan. 
And I challenge the other provinces to follow our lead, to put 
forward a plan in each and every budget year so that the public 
knows exactly the direction the government is going and also 
how we intend to get there. 
 
The other significant component of our budget this year, Mr. 
Speaker, will be jobs and job creation. We will be targeting 
certain funds towards job creation. And the industries that we 
would like to target are basically the agricultural industry, in 
order to help diversification, also targeting agri-biotech, 
transportation, environment, forestry, mining, tourism, and  

information technologies. Our approach is to build upon our 
God-given strengths and to add value and diversification. 
 
In relating this to my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I can recall just 
within a couple of months of being elected that I was 
summoned to a meeting, and it was as a result of the community 
bond project that our community had initiated. And our 
community was attempting to attract a business called 
Advanced Test Technologies to Weyburn and I'm pleased to say 
that we were successful in obtaining the necessary capital by 
selling bonds in our community and that this particular industry 
is now in Weyburn and is operating. 
 
It's initiatives like this where we as government work with our 
communities in partnership with our communities to develop 
jobs . . . Perhaps in the past the public were of the opinion that 
government must create jobs. I'm not of that philosophy and 
neither is our government. We work in partnerships with 
communities, with industry. 
 
We're there to provide some of the support, research, 
development, marketing, to give our residents in the province of 
Saskatchewan an opportunity to be entrepreneurs, to employ 
people. Statistics once again show that the majority of jobs are 
created by businesses with fewer than 50 employees, and we in 
Saskatchewan must — and I emphasize must — continue to 
support small business. That is the mainstay of our economy, 
together with agriculture. 
 
And I'm pleased to say that, as my colleague from Saskatoon 
has mentioned, that we are developing an ag biotech industry 
that is recognized as a world leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wormsbecker: — Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor, 
in the Speech from the Throne, stated that there are now nine 
REDAs (regional economic development authority) in 
Saskatchewan. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that over the next year 
that this will multiply by another nine. And hopefully the whole 
province will be divided into regional economic development 
associations. And once again, Mr. Speaker, this development of 
regional economic associations is once again reflective of our 
commitment as a government to empower communities, to 
encourage communities to work together in partnership, in 
order to be competitive and attract businesses as opposed to 
working against one another. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we will initiate a JobStart program. And this 
program will assist young people to acquire skills in order to 
enter the workforce. For example, Mr. Speaker, just last fall 
Bourgault Industries was in need of additional skilled workers, 
and we helped to train some workers in order to provide jobs 
for them. And this is an example, once again, of government 
working with private business to train the necessary people in 
order to provide employment for them. 
 
The other thing I would like to comment upon, Mr. Speaker, is 
our movement to the information highway. Over the past few  



February 13, 1995 

 
165 

weeks I noticed that business is beginning to advertise surfing 
the Internet. And every household will have the opportunity to 
link up with this information highway. And there's no doubt 
that this is the way of the future. Schools are being approached, 
the service is being offered to the schools in order to get the 
students familiar with the new technology. 
 
I have four children, Mr. Speaker, three of whom are still in 
high school and grade school and they're very familiar with 
computers. And it's this type of technology that we must 
implement in schools in order to give our children the 
opportunity to take advantage of the information highway, the 
Internet, so that they become very familiar with this technology, 
because most of the jobs that are going to be created in the 
future will be information-based jobs and these will be the 
high-paying jobs. 
 
(2100) 
 
So in summary, Mr. Speaker, as I stated, in this fiscal year, in 
this budget year that is coming up, we will be targeting certain 
areas, we'll be focusing on economic development and 
diversification. We will be focusing on REDAs (regional 
economic development authority) as being the vehicle for 
providing this development. We'll be focusing on job training, 
youth employment, building an information society and the 
information highway, and basically trying to support our 
industries here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I'm confident, Mr. Speaker, that in the future 
Saskatchewan will do very well. Back in 1991 when we were 
elected, my constituents in Weyburn were hopeful that the new 
government would be able to turn the economy around. Perhaps 
they were not very optimistic but they were definitely hopeful. 
 
The thing I noticed today, Mr. Speaker, is that my constituents 
are very optimistic. They're optimistic that we will be able to 
provide the necessary training for the young folks, the students, 
for our children and our grandchildren, and they're optimistic 
that tomorrow definitely is going to be a brighter day. 
 
So in summary and in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
have been given this opportunity to speak tonight. And as I 
indicated, this probably will be the last session that I will be 
sitting in this Legislative Assembly, so I would like to extend to 
my colleagues on both sides of the House the best in the future. 
I know for those that are going to be retiring that they will 
continue on with their futures, that they will do very well, and I 
wish them the best of success. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I'd like to do is to move adjournment 
of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:04 p.m. 
 
 


