






















































February 24, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 24, 1995 

 

 
415 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like today 
to present petitions from the people in the Tompkins and Gull 
Lake area of my constituency. The prayer reads as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm very proud to present these and table them for the people of 
our area today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from constituents of the Shaunavon constituency. The 
prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
And these constituents are from the Glentworth, McCord, Fir 
Mountain area of the constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding to the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day 20 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Public Service Commission: (1) are any 

of the following persons employed in any provincial 
government department: Allan Barss, Susan Bates, Fred 
Bird, Paul Faris, Nina Francis, Yvonne Gray, Tom 
Halpenny, Michaela Keet, Ethel Korol, Sharon Lyons, 
Carol Marynook, Ian McCuaig, Debi McEwen, Stewart 
McPartlin, Andy Prebushewski, Janice Stocks, Elaine 
Torrie, Wendy Ward, Gail Wartman, Tim Whelan, 
Virginia Wilkinson, and Taisha Wingerchuk; (2) if yes, 
(a) what department employs each individual; (b) what 
is that individual's title and current monthly salary; and 
(c) did that individual obtain their position through an 
open competition? 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, an Act 
to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (property 
rights). 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to make this introduction on behalf of my colleague, the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Indian Head-
Wolseley. 
 
I'm pleased to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the legislature, seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, a group of Scouts from Indian Head . . . or Cubs, I beg 
your pardon — Indian Head Cub group, from Indian Head. 
There are 11 of them and they're aged 8 to 11 years old. 
 
They're accompanied by their chaperons, Wes Danbury, Greg 
Pike, and Allan Gorin. They're going to visit in the gallery for a 
while, then have a tour of the building, and I look forward to 
meeting with them later on after question period. 
 
So I would ask all my colleagues here to join me in welcoming 
them this Friday morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
morning I would like to introduce to you and members of the 
Assembly, seated in your west gallery, Mr. Randy Nelson and 
his wife Isabelle, who are visiting here today from Saskatoon. 
As you know, Mr. Nelson represented the constituency of 
Yorkton from 1975 to 1978 and did a very admirable job of 
doing that. And although he and Isabelle now live in Saskatoon, 
those of us from Yorkton always welcome him back and say 
that this is really his home, Yorkton. 
 
So very pleased to see you in our Assembly today and adding to  



February 24, 1995 

 
416 

the decorum of this legislature. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I would say I'm slightly confused — but you probably 
would agree with me, so I won't say that. 
 
But on behalf of our friend and hon. colleague, Andy Renaud, 
Minister of Highways, I would like to introduce a person who 
he told me was going to be in the gallery today but whom I do 
not know, Bill Hayward. Bill's a long-time, hard-working 
Tisdale School Division board member, has come to Regina, 
and will I'm sure enjoy the proceedings. 
 
So on behalf of my hon. colleague, I welcome Bill to . . . is Bill 
here? There. Welcome, Bill. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

IRIS Research Projects 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want you to know right 
at the beginning that I do not understand some of what I am 
about to report, nor will you, Mr. Speaker, but it is good news 
for the University of Regina and for the research reputation of 
Saskatchewan universities. 
 
The University of Regina has been awarded 3 of 28 Canadian 
projects sponsored by the Institute for Robotics and Intelligent 
Systems — IRIS for short. IRIS is part of the network of 
national centres of excellence. The University of Regina, in my 
constituency, has these projects because of the excellence of its 
researchers in the computer science program. 
 
Now listen closely, Mr. Speaker. One project is called the 
system X project, and it involves developing intelligent 
interfaces to information systems, in particular practical natural 
language interfaces to databases. The project is lead by the 
associate vice-president of research, Dr. Nick Cerone. 
 
The other two projects are called the DBlearn project and the 
intelligent scheduling project, but I have only 90 seconds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these 28 IRIS projects are located at 22 
universities and involve 130 faculty and are managed by 
PRECARN Associates, a consortium of 40 Canadian 
companies engaged in cooperating, pre-competitive research. 
The fact that we have three of these projects is a tribute to the 
quality of our programs and especially of our people. 
 
I congratulate the researchers and the university, and I will not 
repeat this for anybody. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prairie Venture Show 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm going to make a 
slightly more intelligible and comprehensible statement. 
Yesterday the member from Redberry reported on a seminar in 
Moose Jaw devoted to agricultural diversification and 
entrepreneurship. He said, quite correctly, that although it was 
being held in Moose Jaw, the information provided was 
valuable for all people throughout the province. 
 
Well yesterday, today, and tomorrow, a similar kind of event is 
taking place in Saskatoon. For those unable to visit the fine city 
of my two Moose Jaw colleagues, please come to the equally 
fine city of Saskatoon. Prairie Ventures, produced by the 
Saskatoon Prairieland Exhibition Corporation, is happening for 
the second year. It promises to become an annual event. Last 
year, 7,000 visitors attended. I was one, and I will be there 
again this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an exhibit, a forum, a display, or a centre 
for everybody. The one connecting theme is opportunities for 
diversification and economic development in the prairie region. 
A venture development forum features knowledgeable speakers. 
There is a business development centre, and there are 
representations by associations, private operators, and 
government departments — something, as I said, for everyone. 
 
For those interested in exotic birds or speciality game farming, 
for someone wanting information on irrigation, specialty crops, 
processing and so on, please come to the Prairie Venture show. 
Mr. Speaker, this show is just one more example of the 
atmosphere of optimism obvious to almost everyone in this 
province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lake Alma's New Skating Rink 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last March I spoke 
in this Assembly about a determined community effort of the 
people of Lake Alma in my constituency. The roof of the 
skating rink collapsed from the heavy weight of snow. No one 
was hurt, fortunately, but the loss of a vital recreation facility 
was a blow to the town and surrounding area. 
 
I reported then that through almost total volunteer labour, the 
rink was repaired quickly, on time and on budget. More than a 
facility was restored; a centre of community life was 
maintained. Last Sunday, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to attend 
the dedication of the new skating rink which had already been 
in use for the season. 
 
It was a touching and fitting ceremony because the rink was 
named and dedicated to a person whose name was practically 
synonymous with Lake Alma community activity. 
 
Al Haider was the SaskPower district operator for years until 
his retirement in October of 1993. He assumed responsibility 
for maintaining the old rink and he jumped into almost any  



February 24, 1995 

 
417 

project the community began. 
 
Sadly, Al died of cancer shortly after his retirement. In his 
honour the rink was dedicated as the Al Haider Memorial Rink. 
On behalf of SaskPower, in memory of Al, a donation was 
made to the fund-raiser for the rink, and I was pleased at the 
dedication ceremony on Sunday to honour them with a plaque 
with a beautiful poem written by Al's daughter, Corinne, about 
her dad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will just say that I was glad once again to be 
reminded of the fine people I represent in the Bengough-
Milestone constituency. They well exemplify the qualities of 
community, compassion, and cooperation. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jean Norman Figure Skating Competition 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Continuing on 
the subject of arenas, this week in Moose Jaw our community is 
absolutely alive with figure skating. We have in our community 
this weekend over 400 skaters, most of whom seem to be in our 
kitchen, competing in the annual Jean Norman figure skating 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Moose Jaw Kinette 
figure skating club for hosting the Jean Norman’s this year and 
for their hosting of the provincial championships later this year. 
I am very pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, that SaskTel has 
become the major corporate sponsor of the Jean Norman's this 
year. 
 
And I'm very much looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to this 
evening. This evening the three days of competitions are set 
aside for a public show, and the best of Saskatchewan skaters 
will be skating tonight in Moose Jaw at the civic centre at 7:30. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to compete at the Jean Norman for any skater 
represents hours and hours of hard work on behalf of the skater, 
coach, and parents. And I simply, on behalf of this legislature, 
would want to congratulate all of the skaters, all of the coaches, 
all the volunteers, and all of the parents of the Jean Norman this 
year, with a particular congratulation to one Stephanie Calvert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Justice Minister 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, there 
already appears to have been a serious mistake made in your 
department's handling of the independent investigation into the 
former Justice minister. 
 

In his letter to the independent prosecutor, deputy minister 
Brent Cotter said there is no case of this nature has ever been 
tried in Saskatchewan. And in the only similar circumstance, no 
charges were laid, as the offence was determined to be an 
accident. 
 
Mr. Minister, this information is simply incorrect. On February 
1, 1995, the North Battleford Telegraph was found guilty of 
publishing the name of a young offender and fined $500, even 
though the publication of the name was felt to be the result of 
human error. 
 
Mr. Minister, why was this information left out of Mr. Cotter's 
letter to the Justice McIntyre? What steps are being taken to 
correct the serious omission? And can you guarantee that your 
department will thoroughly research the matter to determine 
that no other similar cases have been missed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I thank the hon. member for his 
question. In fact I became aware of this controversy only a short 
period before the House commenced, before the Speaker called 
the House this morning. I am looking into the matter and will 
be certainly correcting any erroneous information as soon as 
that's possible. 
 
As for the second portion, whether or not we will thoroughly 
research, I'm going to review that as well. It may well be that 
we should be asking Mr. McIntyre to do his own research rather 
than having the department do research for him. Perhaps if he's 
to be truly independent, he should be doing his own research 
rather than us doing it for him. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, Justice McIntyre apparently asked for 
information regarding all previous cases of this nature in 
Saskatchewan. And I would think it would be appropriate for 
the Justice department to have researched this information 
thoroughly before passing on erroneous information, instead of 
simply asking around the office and providing anecdotal 
information. 
 
Won't you agree that this is pretty sloppy work by a provincial 
Department of Justice, and what disciplinary action are you 
taking against your department officials for this shoddy work? 
Mr. Minister, will you respond. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. It's a little 
premature to be speculating on what might happen. I think first 
of all we have to figure out exactly what did happen. And once 
we know that, we'll be in a position to take any appropriate 
action. I really think it would be inappropriate to speculate 
about what sort of action might be taken until we know what 
the facts are. And as I say, I just became aware of this shortly 
before the House commenced this morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 24, 1995 

 
418 

Insurance Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 
are also for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, 400 insurance 
brokers from across the province are sounding the alarm bells 
regarding your legislation which would allow credit unions to 
sell insurance services. Can you confirm that you are indeed 
contemplating such legislation during this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Well I guess I could be cute and 
answer the member's question by saying no. But let me be a bit 
more forthcoming. The former . . . my predecessor in office had 
commenced the process by which the IBAS (Insurance Brokers 
Association of Saskatchewan), the independent association of 
insurance agents, and the credit unions, were meeting 
attempting to reach a compromise on this issue. 
 
As I understand it, that's still ongoing, although I also gather 
from news reports that the negotiations have been difficult. So I 
understand it's still ongoing. Until that process is complete, we 
are reluctant to speculate about what we might do if the 
negotiations break down. 
 
If they do I think that will be time enough for the hon. member 
to put questions to me and time enough for me to answer them. 
But at the moment I think we simply say we hope the 
negotiations succeed and we hope there's a compromise reached 
which everyone can live with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business has 
surveyed their members and found that 66 per cent of 
Saskatchewan's small businesses do not want the credit unions 
to enter into the insurance business. In an open letter to you, 
Mr. Minister, the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business) said: 
 
 We are especially concerned to hear rumoured reports of 

such legislation when there has been minimal 
consultation with those outside of the Credit Union 
system, and certainly no consultation directly with small 
business and other insurance customers. 

 
Mr. Minister, can you shed some more light on this and are you 
going to consult with small businesses in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I also got a copy of the letter from 
Mr. Botting and I received it, I suppose one might say. I think I 
can say that we're familiar . . . To be fair to the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business, they may well represent 
some legitimate fears on Main Street about what will happen if 
legislation succeeds. 
 
Those are certainly some of the considerations we'll be taking 
into account if and when the negotiations break down and if  

and when we're called upon to make a decision as to what we 
should do. So those concerns raised by the Canadian Federation 
of Independent Businesses are legitimate considerations for the 
government to pass over. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the talks that were 
originally scheduled between the credit unions and the 
insurance brokers seem to have little effect on what you're 
doing. We received a letter sent to your appointed facilitator by 
the president of IBAS and he says that you have changed your 
mind in spite of progress in those talks. He says, and I quote: 
 
 Government is now prepared to introduce legislative 

amendments which would grant credit unions the power 
to act as insurance brokers because no final agreement 
has been reached in our discussions. 

 
It goes on to say that: 
 
 The government should not enact legislation which 

would make a further attempt at an agreement for 
service futile. We are prepared to continue working 
immediately with credit union representatives to build 
on the provincial ties which have been identified 
between our two groups. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, your government is famous for 
implementing unilateral legislation. How about changing your 
tune this time. How about allowing the meaningful talks 
between these two groups to continue before you use your usual 
heavy-handed tactics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I may say I greet that question with 
an enormous sense of relief. That's exactly what we hope to do, 
is to let the talks continue. With the member attempting to get 
myself and the government to intervene on one side or the 
other, you're imperilling the talks. I'm really delighted to see 
that the members opposite concur in our position that these 
talks should proceed without a whole lot of political 
interference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture Job Loss 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to table in the House today a document that 
demonstrates this NDP (New Democratic Party) government's 
total lack of concern for rural people around the province, and 
this document is the revised figures of the StatsCan labour force 
survey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the NDP came to power in 1991, over 
18,000 jobs have been lost in the agricultural sector across 
Saskatchewan. That's 18,300 jobs in a province that was once  



February 24, 1995 

 
419 

dominant in agriculture. My question is to the Minister of 
Agriculture. Why has your government done so poorly that it 
exterminates 18,300 jobs in rural Saskatchewan in just over 
three years? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I sincerely thank the 
member for that question. I'm glad to see the Liberal Party 
finally getting into the area of agriculture. What is absolutely 
astonishing to me is that what the Liberals are not talking about 
is the upcoming federal budget and what it would mean for 
agriculture. 
 
What I want to ask you, Mr. Member, is what have you done to 
talk to your colleagues in Ottawa about the fact when the targets 
came out for departments in Ottawa, the targets for cuts in 
agriculture were 40 per cent; the targets in cuts for 
transportation, which affects this region dramatically, were 40 
per cent; the targets for other departments were 20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a very grave situation here. And you have 
the nerve to stand up in this legislature and start talking to us 
about what we're doing in agriculture. What are you doing with 
your colleagues in Ottawa, Mr. Member? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's surprising to 
see that the Minister of Finance has to come to the defence of 
the Minister of Agriculture. It's their government's figures, Mr. 
Speaker, it's their government's figures that are on the record, 
18,300 jobs that they have to answer for — no one else. You're 
the government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has also shown its disregard in 
more subtle ways. Last week in their budget, the government 
took one more kick at rural residents in Saskatchewan. The 
NDP government increased expenditures in 22 of 27 
departments. 
 
But three of the ones not to receive fair consideration were the 
non-urban areas. Mr. Speaker, these three would be Highways 
and Transportation, Environment and Resource Management, 
and of course Agriculture, what we're talking about today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question once again to the Minister of Agriculture. 
Government is about choices, Mr. Minister. How do you 
explain the choice of moving hundreds of millions of dollars, of 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) dollars, out of the 
farmers’ pockets at a time when the agriculture is losing jobs by 
the thousands? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I honestly have to say 
I'm astonished by the questions being asked by the member 
opposite. First of all, I would refer him to an article in the 
Lanigan Advisor: plenty of jobs available for agricultural 
students. 
 
In the torrent of stories about unemployed university graduates 
the success of agriculture schools in getting jobs for their grads 
is slipping by virtually unnoticed. 

But I'm astonished that the member would stand up in this 
legislature and ask us what we've done with our share of the 
GRIP surplus. We've taken our GRIP surplus and put 70 per 
cent back into agricultural programing. 
 
What is astonishing is that his colleagues in Ottawa took their 
GRIP surplus and kept more than half of it. I am truly amazed 
that the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan, when a budget is 
coming out of the federal government that is going to have 
grave implications for agriculture in this province, is standing 
here asking these questions. What have they done to talk to 
their colleagues? Because we will be asking them that next 
week when that budget comes down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Finance should be ashamed of herself. Taking the money out of 
GRIP that rightfully belonged to the farmers and saying, well 
we'll give you a little bit back and hopefully you'll be satisfied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this massive loss of jobs has reached a critical 
point. These 18,300 jobs are the equivalent of losing all the 
populations of the city of Melville, towns of Battleford, Tisdale, 
Shaunavon, and Humboldt combined. This mass exodus has 
occurred in only four years of your government, Madam 
Minister. 
 
My question once again to the Minister of Agriculture, if he can 
answer it: will you table today in the House any documents that 
prove your government has stopped the significant outflow of 
jobs from rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
opposite might take a lesson from the Leader-Post editorial. It 
talks about our use of the GRIP surplus and talks about how 
justified it is. It does not mention the key fact that what we have 
put our surplus back in — 70 per cent of it. The federal 
government, his colleagues in Ottawa, are the ones that are not 
giving proper support to farmers in this province. 
 
But  excellent advice that the member may want to think 
about over the weekend — the energy that the Tories and NDP 
are expending on their GRIP fight would be much better 
focused on federal changes that could seriously damage 
Saskatchewan farmers in the years to come. Already agriculture 
in this province, in the last three years, has taken a hit of 60 per 
cent. Agriculture in Ontario and Quebec has taken hits of 20 to 
30 per cent. 
 
Agriculture has been hit in a way that no other industry in 
Canada has been hit, by your government in Ottawa, sir. And 
my concern that members of this legislature should be uniting 
today to share, is that this federal government in Ottawa is 
going to carry on and once again hit agriculture and this region 
in a way that is not fair. The test of this federal budget will be 
fairness and I'm holding the member opposite accountable as to 
whether or not that will be a fair budget. 
 



February 24, 1995 

 
420 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Underground Power Lines 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning my 
question is to the minister responsible to SaskPower. I've been 
trying to obtain a meeting, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, with the 
minister of SaskPower for a year and a half and haven't been 
successful. The new minister of SaskPower I tried a week ago, 
and have not heard, and my question that I wanted to ask is 
concerning constituents. But the question I want to ask this 
morning, Mr. Minister, relates to a good program the 
Progressive Conservatives put in, is burying power lines 
throughout Saskatchewan. And last summer my community was 
all buried underground. 
 
And for unforeseen reason that all my neighbours . . . And I 
thank the government for carrying through the Progressive 
Conservative program. But all my neighbours were buried all 
around me — all their power lines were buried — but for some 
reason my farm was the only farm that was missed. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you, my question to you, 
Mr. Minister, is this: that maybe I should not be discriminated 
upon now that I do not belong to the Tory Party, this 
administration, and will you see that SaskPower will now come 
and take care of my farm and give me the same benefits as my 
neighbours. 
 
Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a 
preface to the answer, I would want to suggest to the member if 
he's had difficulty in getting a hold of the minister in charge of 
SaskPower for over a year, he might want to check his 
telephone index; he might be having the wrong number that he's 
been phoning. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, my office and the people in 
my office are more than willing to accept calls from you or any 
other member as we do with the general public. It's our 
intention to serve all customers of SaskPower, and any of the 
other utility Crowns take the same approach. 
 
Our programs are based on a province-wide basis and based on 
area. And I can assure the member that there has been in the 
past no discrimination and there will be in the future no 
discrimination. Our programs are there to provide cost-effective 
power, to provide cost-effective service for all of the people of 
the province. 
 
So I ask the member to recheck his telephone numbers. There 
are people that will answer my phone at 787-0615. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary. 
Perhaps instead of me checking my numbers and you checking 
your numbers, you should ask your staff, because I was  

personally in your office one week ago today. I was personally 
in the past minister of SaskPower about seven or eight times 
with no return call. So I do not blame you, Mr. Minister; please 
ask your staff. Never mind talking about telephone calls. 
 
Do I get a commitment from you, Mr. Minister, that you will 
meet with me  I am requesting now  to discuss these very 
important matters: my constituents from a year ago, and about 
this problem that's up today. Do I get that commitment from 
you  and never mind telephone calls or checking with your 
own staff  to say that they will be back to me on Monday and 
you refused. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me answer the 
member in this fashion. I have been accessible in any portfolio 
that I have ever been responsible to all of the members of this 
legislature. 
 
I've had easy access. You've sat in this House for a week; I've 
been in here every day for most of the days when I wasn't away 
on government business, and you haven't approached me once. 
You walked by me here the other day. You passed me by 2 feet, 
and you never said a word. So don't tell me you haven't got 
access. Don't tell me that you can't contact people in my office 
and get your personal, your individual, concern heard. That's 
bunk, and you know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Government Tendering Policy 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the new minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. This is the third CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) minister in less than 
a month, so let's see if we can get a straight answer out of this 
one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, our sources in the construction industry tell 
us that you are now very close to finalizing your union-
preference tendering policy. They also tell us that it is precisely 
the policy that we outlined some time ago now, including the 
requirements that three-quarters of the employees must be hired 
from union halls, and the remaining quarter must pay union 
dues, even if they don't join the union. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that you are in the process of 
finalizing this policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 
answer the question posed by the member and make it very 
clear to the member opposite that it is the intent of the 
government  and we have attempted for some time  to 
develop a policy which is fair to the contractors who do work 
for the Crown corporations, that is fair to the employees who  



February 24, 1995 

 
421 

work on those job sites, that is fair to the Crown corporations 
and the taxpayers. 
 
And we will continue to try to come up with the kind of 
solution that does provide that and which includes, as I might 
add further to the member from Thunder Creek, a clear policy 
on free and open tendering which is the appropriate way for 
tenders to be made. Unfortunately that will be a very great 
change from the way they used to be made in the 1980s under 
the former administration. 
 
No policy decisions have been made. There are discussions that 
are taking place. They've been taking place for some time. And 
when some resolution to this issue is brought about, I can 
assure the member that he will be one of the first to know 
because I will be indicating it to him and to the public and to 
the people who are affected at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have three different 
ministers, and we still can't get a straight answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, the industry people that we have spoken to tell us 
that this is going to be the policy and that in fact you do have a 
policy that the 75 per cent union hiring rule is very close to 
becoming an absolute, guaranteed policy for the Crown 
corporation tendering. Unfortunately the minister doesn't have 
the courage to confirm this policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let's go at it from a different angle, Minister. Are you 
denying that this is the policy? It would be a great relief to hear 
the 75 per cent of union hiring rule is not going to become the 
policy of your government. So can you provide us with this 
absolute assurance today, Mr. Minister, that you will not have 
this as your policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I 
might say to the member opposite that this is a government that 
believes in applying policies fairly to everyone. And that's why, 
rather than having specific policies for a specific situation and 
one policy for a Guy Montpetit and his operation and another 
policy for somebody else who was close to the former 
government, this government deliberately and carefully 
considers the kinds of policies that will apply fairly and 
everybody will be fairly affected by them. 
 
And that means, Mr. Speaker, that just because people happen 
to be unionized, by their choice, they should not be 
discriminated against as they once were under the 
administration here, and as in other provinces of Canada they 
are discriminated against by Liberal governments. That's not 
going to happen in this policy; we're going to be fair to 
contractors whether they're unionized or not; we're going to 
have a policy that is fair to the taxpayer because we're going to 
have a fair and open tendering policy, and it's a policy that's 
going to work well 

There is no conclusion of such a policy at the present time. The 
member probably knows that. I have met with the construction 
association as late as early this morning to talk about it, and 
when the conclusion of these discussions are finally resolved, I 
can tell the member opposite I will be most happy to tell him 
what that policy is at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is just as 
good at sidestepping this issue as the last two were. The truth of 
the matter is, Minister, that you are not giving 25 per cent of the 
people a choice; they are forced to pay union dues whether they 
are in the union or not. That's not a choice and that's not fair. 
 
Now you won't confirm your policy; you won't deny your 
policy. I've got a novel idea for you, Minister. Why don't we try 
something brand-new? How about a straight answer? How 
about if we just put it right on the table today for the folks in 
this province? Tell them exactly the truth of what's going on. If 
you don't have a policy, or you do have a policy, or you're never 
going to have a policy, why don't you tell us the straight goods 
here, Minister? Put it on the table. Tell the people what you're 
talking about to the people this morning in your own office. 
Don't tell us that you don't have a policy if you're sitting down 
and talking to them. Now will you put it on the table today, 
what you talked about with those people this morning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my fear is that a 
straight answer — which the members opposite get every day 
— does not seem to persuade them to the merits of the 
argument. I have given the member the straight answer. The 
answer simply is: there are discussions which have been going 
on for some time with the people involved in the construction 
industry — both on the behalf of the employees and on behalf 
of the contractors — and indeed involving the Crown 
corporations themselves, to try to come up with a policy that is 
going to be workable and it's going to be fair to everybody. That 
is a straight answer. If the member opposite doesn't want to 
accept that, that's fine with me. But I say to him that it's his 
credibility with the public that's at stake here, not the credibility 
of the government, which is going to have a policy that is going 
to be fair and workable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. 
Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I appreciate the help from the 
Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, but I think it's best if I deliver  



February 24, 1995 

 
422 

this speech, being the minister in charge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to speak in support of the 
second reading of The NewGrade Energy Inc. Protection Repeal 
Act. This Bill is the final step in a process begun more than 
three years ago to renegotiate and restructure the financial 
arrangements governing the NewGrade upgrader project in 
Regina. 
 
Now before I get into details of the Bill itself, I'd like to provide 
a bit of an historical perspective to the NewGrade project and 
the history surrounding the NewGrade Energy Inc. protection 
Act which this Bill is designed to remove from the books of the 
province. NewGrade Energy Inc. was established in 1986 to 
construct, own, and operate a heavy oil upgrader in Regina. 
NewGrade's outstanding voting shares are owned 50 per cent by 
the Province of Saskatchewan through Crown Investments 
Corporation, and 50 per cent by Federated Co-operatives Ltd. 
through Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.. 
 
The project was initially budgeted to cost $793 million, of 
which only 159 million was actual equity. The balance, 80 per 
cent, was in the form of debt. And we all know that any project 
financed on that kind of basis cannot possibly work. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan contributed 154 million of 
equity. The $635 million in debt was guaranteed 57 per cent by 
the province and 43 per cent by the Government of Canada. 
There were no provisions made in the original agreements as to 
how cash deficiencies would be covered or who would cover 
such deficiencies as they occurred, if they occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction of the NewGrade upgrader was 
substantially completed in 1988, on time and on budget. But 
start-up problems in 1989 and 1990 resulted in cash 
deficiencies of almost $76 million which were paid exclusively 
by the province of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, despite the fact that NewGrade is a 50/50 
partnership. As well, the province of Saskatchewan provided an 
additional 7 million of financing to cover year end cash 
deficiencies up to December 31, 1993. To this point, the 
province of Saskatchewan's total investments in NewGrade had 
totalled $236.7 million, but because of continued cash losses, 
the province wrote its entire investment down to zero by 
December 31, 1993. 
 
And although NewGrade was a technological success, a fact 
later acknowledged by former justice Estey, it was a financial 
failure for the province of Saskatchewan and in imminent 
danger of financial collapse unless the province continued to 
pump money into it. Its financial problems were a direct result 
of the price of heavy oil in relation to the price of light oil and 
huge amount of money needed to service the project's $635 
million debt load. 
 
In the event of financial default, Mr. Speaker — and this is 
important — the province would have been called upon to 
honour its $360 million loan guarantee, and the Government of 
Canada would likewise be called upon to honour its guarantee  

of 43 per cent of the project's debt. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's only recourse was to the 
assets of NewGrade which, as specified in the original 
agreements, would have had to be removed from CCRL's 
(Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.) property and sold. 
Under such a scenario, the province would have recovered only 
a very small fraction of its investment. The Financial 
Management Review Commission's report in 1992 shared this 
concern and urged the province to actively monitor the 
situation. 
 
The Gass Commission stated the following, and I quote: 
 
 The province's ability to monitor the performance of this 

project and to work with its joint venture partner, 
CCRL, to reduce its financial exposure is severely 
restricted under the agreements. It is therefore not 
actively involved in operations management of the 
project and a strained relationship appears to have 
developed between the two parties. 

 
(1045) 
 
This was, Mr. Speaker, by all measures an understatement. The 
province and the Crown Investments Corporation attempted to 
renegotiate the terms and conditions of the contract during the 
first half of 1992, with no success. In the fall of 1992 the 
province and Federated Co-ops Ltd. agreed on the appointment 
of former justice Mr. Willard Estey to carry out a review of the 
deal, make recommendations about changes, and act as a 
mediator between the two partners. 
 
Mr. Estey submitted his report in March 1993. Subsequent 
negotiations failed to find a resolution, and as the province's 
fears of NewGrade's financial collapse grew, in May 1993 this 
Bill, Bill 90, was introduced — An Act to protect the financial 
viability of NewGrade Energy Inc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 90 was passed in this legislature in June 1993 
but it was not proclaimed into law. The Bill included a 
provision, section 17, which would rescind the Bill should a 
negotiated settlement be reached. And negotiations continued 
and on August 18, '93 a statement of settlement principles was 
signed which detailed the financial restructuring of NewGrade. 
 
Because the Government of Canada was a guarantor of the 
project, their consent and participation was required for 
restructuring. In early 1994, discussions began with the new 
federal government with respect to their proposed role in the 
restructuring. 
 
On June 15, 1994 a memorandum of understanding was signed 
with all three parties whereby they agreed to contribute a total 
of $235 million toward paying down NewGrade's debt. And in 
addition, the original agreements were changed to specify who 
was to be responsible for any future or ongoing cash 
deficiencies. 
 



February 24, 1995 

 
423 

Final agreements were signed on October 21, 1994, bringing 
into effect the statement of settlement principles and the 
memorandum of understanding. At the same time an order in 
council was passed rescinding Bill 90 as stated in the original 
unproclaimed legislation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, under the terms of the final agreement, the 
Government of Canada has made a one-time payment of $125 
million to the project in exchange for being relieved of any 
future obligations. 
 
CCRL has made a payment of $50 million for an asset 
purchased from NewGrade, and the CIC has made an equity 
injection of $50 million as well. 
 
CCRL and CIC each also made a $5 million grant to 
NewGrade. During 1995 and 1996, CIC will provide another 
$20 million in grants to NewGrade, will match CCRL's 
payments toward future cost efficiencies of up to $40 million, 
and will be responsible for any deficiencies above that amount. 
 
The new agreement also provides for improvements in 
governance, monitoring, and dispute resolutions procedures. 
And as a show of goodwill, the province agreed to the inclusion 
of a penalty clause in the final agreement that bound the 
province to pay a $25 million penalty to Federated Co-
operatives if legislation was not passed before July 1995, 
formally repealing Bill 90. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation that is before this Assembly today, 
the NewGrade Energy Inc. repeal Act, is here because of some 
of the events that I have alluded hereto earlier. The 
renegotiation and the restructuring of the NewGrade upgrader 
project has been a long and sometimes painful process. But it 
was handled by the three successive ministers of Crown 
Investments, and no less than three federal ministers of Natural 
Resources, and two federal ministers of Finance. It places a 
severe strain on our relationship with the co-op movement in 
western Canada. 
 
But at the same time, I submit that it was a necessary and useful 
process that fostered a closer working relationship with the 
senior level of government, and in the end brought a greater 
degree of understanding and respect to both partners in 
NewGrade — understanding of the need for partners to share 
the good with the bad, and respect of the partners for their need 
to serve the best interests of their shareholders. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the 
role of a few key players in the process of restructuring the 
NewGrade deal: Mr. Vern Leland, the president of Federated 
Co-operatives Ltd.; the senior management staff of Crown 
Investments Corporation; and my predecessor, the minister of 
Crown Investments Corporation, the hon. member from Swift 
Current, who did an outstanding work on this agreement and 
brought it to its conclusion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those comments, I am pleased at this time 
to move second reading of the Bill which I have spoken to  

and which I have referred to in the remarks which I have just 
made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
make a few comments before I move adjournment of debate on 
this Bill for today. 
 
I'd like to first of all acknowledge the fact that this government 
has been obsessed with renegotiating deals and it seems, even 
as the minister has indicated today, they've been more interested 
in renegotiating and putting their stamp of approval, whether or 
not those negotiations really mean a lot to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers or even benefit the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
But let me add this, Mr. Speaker. As I was driving in this 
morning, it was interesting to note that one of the items on the 
news was that the heavy oil upgrader at Lloydminster made a 
profit last year, which is an indication that this project here in 
Regina, as well as Lloydminster, in the long run have been and 
will continue to be a benefit to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact we raised the question the other day and we hope that 
the minister, as he was indicating earlier this afternoon, is going 
to be as forthcoming and respond to that question and letting us 
know what the government has derived in royalties and 
benefits, because there's a heavy oil upgrader tied on to the Co-
op refinery here in Regina. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is very 
willing to repeal the NewGrade Act, which I believe is 
unnecessary, but at the same time is unwilling to address a 
major concern in this province and that is The Labour Standards 
Act, which is inflicting a hardship on people right across this 
province, especially the small-business communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the government looks at repealing an Act 
and patting itself on the back, one is going to have to ask — and 
as we get into the debate there's going to be some very specific 
questions — as to what the deal holds and whether or not this 
deal is really a benefit to taxpayers; or maybe at the end of the 
day, all it is is window-dressing and, for all intents and 
purposes, maybe even a deal that brings a greater cost and a 
greater burden to the taxpayers. 
 
But we want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this heavy oil upgrader, 
the NewGrade upgrader here in the province and here in the city 
of Regina, has brought a net benefit to this city in the way of 
job creation. It's bringing a net benefit to the province of 
Saskatchewan in the way of royalties that they're reaping in the 
processing of heavy oil, which wouldn't be done if the upgrader 
wasn't here. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this piece of legislation, I 
think we will be able to show at the end of the day that this 
legislation wasn’t necessary and that is just another way in  



February 24, 1995 

 
424 

which the government tries to put its stamp of approval on a 
good project brought forward by the former administration. 
 
I know there's many other things I could add at this time, but I 
would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, after my remarks I will be moving second reading of 
The Environmental Management and Protection Act 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sustainable development requires the protection of 
air, land, and water quality. Improper waste disposal, in 
particular hazardous wastes, is a serious threat to these 
important resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, used oil is the largest single source of waste 
dangerous goods in the province of Saskatchewan. Because we 
have not had a comprehensive collection system in place for 
used oil, containers, and filters, people have talked to me 
personally and written me letters like this one. It says: 
 
 Dear Sir: 
 
 First I want to congratulate you and the other members 

involved on getting our financial affairs under control. 
The main reason for congratulations for having done it 
and still not having disrupted our way of life like has 
been done in Alberta. According to the news in Alberta 
worse is yet to come (there). 

 
 A subject I would like to raise with your department is 

disposing of used oil on the farm. 
 
 Our son and daughter-in-law are farming 2 farms . . . On 

both they have close to 25 . . . barrels of used motor oil. 
We have run short of barrels to put it in . . . We are 
hoping sooner or later this can be re-manufactured. 

 
I share these concerns, Mr. Speaker, and we are acting on them. 
Waste or used oil can contain heavy metals and cancer-causing 
compounds. When used oil is improperly disposed, these 
contaminants can threaten air, soil, and groundwater quality, 
endangering the environment and the health and safety of 
individuals. As the letter suggests, oil is a valuable, non-
renewable resource which can be recycled and reused through 
environmentally safe techniques. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province has taken a new and proactive 
approach to dealing with wastes by involving key stakeholders 
in industry, business, government, and the environment through 
consultations, advisory groups, and partnerships, and designing 
and implementing new solutions. 
 

In March, 1993 I established and met with a new joint group 
which we called the waste management advisory group to ask 
them to recommend ways to develop a province-wide system 
for collecting used oil, filters, and containers. This group had 
ongoing representation from oil marketers, used oil collectors, 
Crown corporations, urban and rural municipalities, and the 
province. Information and advice was also collected through 
two workshops involving more than 100 stakeholders. Mr. 
Speaker, we are taking a leadership role in developing this 
industry-run, province-wide used oil filter and container 
collection system. 
 
The amendments we are proposing today are a first for 
Saskatchewan and are based upon the recommendations of the 
advisory group. This legislation establishes a framework where 
industry and manufacturers take responsibility for the life cycle 
of their products. This, Mr. Speaker, is what we call the 
stewardship model. Mr. Speaker, this is a major 
accomplishment and can serve as a model for the handling of 
other waste goods such as batteries and tires. 
 
The amendment to The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act will allow the development of the regulatory 
framework required to implement an industry-delivered, 
comprehensive used oil collection program. The waste advisory 
group, industry, and the department will, over the next year, 
work together to develop the details of this used oil collection 
system which industry and stakeholders support. 
 
Industry, as I said, will assume stewardship of the program and 
be responsible for establishing the collection infrastructure. 
This collection program may recover up to 37 million litres of 
used oil annually. The availability of a dependable supply of 
used oil will also encourage the development of new, 
innovative, used oil recycling and reuse options in 
Saskatchewan. I extend my appreciation to the members of the 
waste management advisory group for their hard work and 
dedication to examining this critical environmental resource 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Council of Ministers of the 
Environment has developed a used oil action plan for the 
recovery of used oil in Canada. By developing this program, the 
Government of Saskatchewan, with the stakeholders, will be 
among the first provinces to achieve the goals of the CCME 
(Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment) action 
plan. We will do it in a manner which is responsive to the 
requirements of Saskatchewan while working in cooperation 
with and parallel to work going on in Manitoba and Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am extremely excited to announce this new era 
in waste management that has been led by this industry and 
public group that has worked with us in establishing this new 
system for the collection of an important waste good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Environmental 
Management and Protection Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 24, 1995 

 
425 

(1100) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to enter 
the debate at this time and make a few comments before I again 
would move to adjourn the debate. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, many people will be pleased to see this 
Act and the fact that we're looking at addressing some of the 
concerns that have been across rural Saskatchewan for the past 
number of years. 
 
I believe it's unfortunate though, Mr. Speaker, that we had a 
piece of legislation regarding the environment passed three 
years ago, that really put a lot of small-business people in a 
difficult position — not only small-business people, but in fact 
people right across rural Saskatchewan, as far as the 
management of waste oil products. And it's not just waste oil 
products. Even our large urban centres have been affected by 
the labour legislation. 
 
The minister talks about a new way of managing used oil. Well 
I think the minister may, and if he isn't aware, maybe he should 
talk to the people who run Lost Horse Hills oil collection 
system and find out how they have put together a collection 
system that has been working in the south-east. 
 
And it's unfortunate, Mr. Minister, that we're bringing in this 
legislation to address ways in which we can manage our waste 
oil when that probably should have been the horse . . . or the 
cart was put before the horse before; now we're finally getting it 
in the proper order. We should have had this in place prior to 
changing the environment Bill, whereby you would have had a 
process in place that would have helped communities and 
business people, farmers across our province, in how they 
manage and how they handle waste oil products or other 
substances of waste material. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it'll be interesting to note the 
debate that will take place as we get into further debate on the 
Bill, and certainly I think there are a number of questions. 
 
And while the minister laughs from his seat and takes lightly 
some of the concerns that have been raised with us, I think it's 
going to be very important when we start addressing it and 
bringing the concerns that still are out there with regards to the 
waste management in the province of Saskatchewan — how we 
manage it so that people are treated fairly. 
 
Therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention on Protection of Children 

and Co-operation in respect of Intercountry Adoption 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to move second reading of 
The Intercountry Adoption Implementation Act, 1995. Mr.  

Speaker, this is a very positive Bill and I am confident that all 
members of the Assembly will support it. 
 
Over the past few years, people wishing to adopt a child in 
Saskatchewan, or indeed throughout Canada, have been faced 
with the prospect of a five- or six-year waiting period before 
placement of the child. As the number of infants and children in 
need of adoption homes has steadily decreased, Mr. Speaker, 
and for many positive reasons . . . but as a result of that, the list 
of prospective adoptive parents continues to grow. 
 
The situation, Mr. Speaker, combined with the deep 
compassion felt for children living in deplorable conditions 
created by war, drought, and natural disasters, cause many 
people to inquire about the status of these children throughout 
the world. They asked how they could adopt a child from 
another country who appeared to be in desperate need of a 
loving, caring family in a safe, secure environment in which to 
grow. 
 
In Saskatchewan, as I expect you are well aware, Mr. Speaker, 
there have been a number of very successful international 
adoptions over the past several years. Since 1990, for example, 
over 70 children, most of them from Romania, have been 
adopted by Saskatchewan families. The current adoption 
procedures worked well in these adoptions. And when 
Romanian officials visited Saskatchewan in January of this year 
to observe the current status of these adoption placements, they 
were reassured and pleased as they watched happy, well-
adjusted children interact with their new families, with each 
other, and in their new communities. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, people in every country have not 
been so caring and compassionate as in Saskatchewan and 
Canada. As intercountry adoption became an increasingly 
popular option, complex problems emerged. Some adoptions 
were arranged through fraud or for monetary gain. Parents who 
sometimes felt they had little choice because of their economic 
status were pressured to relinquishing their children or child for 
adoption. These tragedies occurred, Mr. Speaker, because there 
were no legally binding international standards in place and no 
system to ensure the rights of children would be protected. 
 
In 1988 the subject of cooperation between countries of origin 
and countries of destination and international adoptions was 
discussed at the Hague conference on private international law. 
Discussions include creation of a system of central authorities 
which could communicate directly with one another, country to 
country. 
 
On April 12, 1994, Mr. Speaker, Canada, among 66 
participating states, signed an intercountry agreement for 
regulation of international adoption. This agreement, the 
uniform intercountry adoption Act, is referred to as the Hague 
Convention. The convention regulates international adoption by 
establishing standards and criteria with respect to: eligibility for 
a child for adoption; reports concerning suitability of adoptive 
parents and their background; thirdly, parental consents in the 
countries of origin; and fourthly, reports outlining the child's  



February 24, 1995 

 
426 

background to be provided to parents in the countries of 
destination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act before us today provides that this province 
can request the Government of Canada to declare that the 
Hague Convention extends to Saskatchewan. Each province is 
addressing the issue in a similar fashion, Mr. Speaker. This Act 
also provides that the Hague Convention is the law in 
Saskatchewan and it prevails in the case of a conflict between 
the convention and The Adoption Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intercountry adoption implementation Act, 
1995, identifies the Minister of Social Services as the central 
authority with sole responsibility for regulating and providing 
international adoption services in Saskatchewan in accordance 
with the Hague Convention. It provides as well that the minister 
may delegate specific functions to qualified individuals or 
agencies in Saskatchewan. An example of such a function 
might be the development of home studies on prospective 
adoption parents. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, in response to public opinion I 
recently announced the expansion of post-adoption services in 
this province. The intercountry adoption implementation Act 
will ensure that an internationally adopted child is guaranteed 
the same access to adoption information as a child adopted in 
this province. 
 
Children throughout the world represent the future, Mr. 
Speaker. I think we would all agree that as responsible members 
of a society we must do everything within our power to ensure 
that the interest and rights of every child, regardless of where 
they are born, are respected and preserved. The intercountry 
adoption implementation Act, 1995, is a step in this direction. 
 
Agreements which can be negotiated between Saskatchewan 
and other countries as a result of our acceptance of the Hague 
Convention will greatly facilitate intercountry adoptions by 
Saskatchewan families. By becoming a party to the Hague 
Convention, Saskatchewan will help to ensure that intercountry 
adoptions take place in an atmosphere of honesty and trust and 
that the interests and well-being of children remains paramount 
in any adoption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of the 
intercountry adoption implementation Act, 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it's certainly a pleasure to stand and make a few 
remarks regarding the Bill just introduced by the Minister of 
Social Services. I think, as the minister indicated, and I'm sure 
many people across the province of Saskatchewan will be more 
than pleased to see that we have such a Bill coming forward. 
 
Certainly there are people who are very concerned and very 
interested in becoming parents, and would like to provide a  

loving home to a lot of children who have faced some very 
traumatic situations in their lives. And so this Bill, as certainly 
appears to me as the minister was giving his second reading 
speech, will facilitate that process. And I think the minister 
ought to be commended for that. 
 
It's certainly a debate we've had in the House before and 
discussed the matter of adoption. I think, as well, as we've seen 
the pictures in the news when individuals have gone to other 
countries and brought children back that were just sitting in 
agencies where they were just basically a number and really 
didn't have anything to identify them as a home, it provides 
another avenue for the children to feel that now we've got a 
home; now we've got a place where we can feel wanted; now 
we've got a place where we've got the food and the shelter and 
the care that we've been looking for. 
 
And so I would just like to say that I appreciate the comments 
made by the minister. I certainly welcome the comments and 
welcome the further review that we're going to engage in as this 
Bill goes through the hoops of this Assembly; and look forward 
to being a part of opening the doors that make more open 
adoptions and readily adoptions . . . or adoptions more readily 
available to the many couples who have been waiting for years 
to establish that home atmosphere. And so I thank the minister 
and I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It's my pleasure today to move second reading of The Freehold 
Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
The Act being amended provides the authority for the taxation 
of non-Crown oil and gas produced in the province. The 
amendments contained in the Bill will introduce new powers to 
assist in the collection of unpaid taxes, provide for the use of an 
average price in the determination of taxes on freehold natural 
gas production, and introduce minor housekeeping changes. 
Many of the amendments in this Bill are similar to the ones 
being proposed for The Crown Minerals Act and will maintain 
consistency in the treatment of Crown and non-Crown oil and 
gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provisions are being added to the Act to improve 
our ability to collect unpaid taxes on freehold oil and gas 
production. Similar provisions are also being added to The 
Crown Minerals Act. These new revenue-collection provisions 
will allow the minister to collect unpaid amounts from a third 
party who is, or is about to become, indebted to the delinquent 
taxpayer. A purchaser of the freehold oil and gas would be a 
logical third party to approach for the recovery of unpaid taxes. 
 
Before serving a third party demand, the minister would have to 
certify the unpaid amounts in a certificate and file it with the 
Court of Queen's Bench. Adequate and appropriate notice  



February 24, 1995 

 
427 

would be given to the delinquent taxpayer before attempting to 
recover the unpaid amounts from a third party. I can assure you 
that we would view these measures as a last means . . . or a 
means of last resort for the recovery of amounts owed to the 
Crown. I wish to point out, Mr. Speaker, similar provisions for 
the collection of unpaid amounts are contained in The Revenue 
and Financial Services Act and The Income Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to further parallel changes to The Crown Minerals 
Act, this Bill includes a provision to allow regulations to be 
made providing for the use of an average price in the 
determination of taxes on freehold natural gas production. 
Alberta recently introduced the use of average prices to simplify 
natural gas royalty calculation and reporting procedures. 
 
The department has been working with the oil and gas industry 
associations to determination if administration could be 
simplified in Saskatchewan by using average rather than actual 
prices received, to determine taxes on natural gas production. 
We expect a decision on this matter within the next few months. 
By introducing the enabling legislation at this time, we will be 
able to facilitate the introduction of a simplified administrative 
process as soon as possible. 
 
The Bill also introduces minor housekeeping changes which 
have no impact on the industry. In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to note that the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers 
and the Small Explorers and Producers Association of Canada 
have been consulted on the amendments and are in agreement 
with them. 
 
I want to both acknowledge and to thank the associations for 
their input and advice on the development of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having provided a brief overview of the amending 
legislation, I move second reading of The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a few 
comments in response to the minister's words as to the reasons 
why they must amend the freehold oil and gas production Act. I 
guess on the surface when the minister talked about collecting 
taxes, you immediately think, well here we go, another tax grab 
and just going after taxes. But as the minister was indicating, 
he's talking about . . . if I understand him correctly and as we 
get into the debate we will find out exactly what we're talking 
about as far as unpaid taxes. 
 
One would wonder why there may be an accumulation of 
unpaid taxes. But I guess if we look at society, society in 
general at times look at ways in which they can get around the 
tax system. And so the fact that we're going after . . . or the Bill 
is basically trying to facilitate or facilitating the process of 
endeavouring to collect the taxes that are owed, those I think  

are worthwhile endeavours. 
 
I also think the minister has a solid argument when he talks 
about average pricing, because it's something the industry has 
talked about for a number of years. And we can only 
compliment the minister and the government for at least 
reviewing that, looking at it and thinking seriously about it. 
 
There are certainly a number of areas that need to be discussed. 
An area that comes to my attention, and it's been brought to my 
attention on a number of occasions and I'm not sure if it's 
necessarily tied to this Bill, but one area of taxation that comes 
up, and that's where individuals have the oil rights on their 
property and if they pass that . . . in endeavouring to pass it on 
to their family, if it's just left in a will, a family can be put into a 
very difficult and tenuous position because of the taxes are 
basically required to be paid up front by the family. And it may 
be something that the minister and I could certainly enter into 
discussion with to clarify that, and I look forward to that. So 
without any further comments at this time, I look forward to the 
debate and I move to adjourn second reading at this time. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I'm pleased again to rise in the Assembly, and this time to move 
second reading of The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
The Crown Minerals Act provides the legislative framework for 
the granting and acquiring of all rights to interests in Crown 
minerals, along with the establishment of royalty rates and 
royalties. 
 
The amendments identified in this Bill are designed to 
introduce new powers to assist in the collection of unpaid 
royalties and rents, to provide an adequate base of authority for 
existing regulations made under the Act, to provide for the use 
of an average price in the determination of natural gas royalties 
to simplify administration, and to address certain key 
housekeeping issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the vast majority of oil and gas and mining 
companies operating in our province pay their required 
royalties, rents, and fees, within the prescribed time lines, on 
occasion problems can occur. Because of this, provisions are 
being added to improve the province's ability to collect unpaid 
amounts. 
 
The new provisions, Mr. Speaker, will allow the minister to use 
a certificate process which both simplifies and speeds up the 
process to obtain the equivalent of a court judgement for the 
recovery of a debt. A properly filed certificate can then be used 
to recover unpaid amounts from a third party such as the 
purchaser of the Crown mineral. Steps have been taken to 
ensure that adequate notice is given to the delinquent royalty  



February 24, 1995 

 
428 

payer before a third-party demand is served. 
 
I wish to point out, Mr. Speaker, that similar provisions for the 
collection of unpaid amounts exist within The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act, and as well within The Income Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several amendments are being made to the section 
of the Act dealing with the power to make regulations. As a 
housekeeping measure, we have separated the regulation-
making provisions into two parts. The first part outlines the 
regulation-making powers of a general nature, while the second 
part contains all regulation-making powers respecting royalties. 
 
While a number of new regulation-making provisions are being 
added to the Act, many are being added to simply provide an 
adequate base of authority for existing regulations. These 
changes will have no impact on industry. Although regulations 
were made in the past using rather broad and general 
regulation-making powers, the trend today is to provide more 
explicit authority for making regulations under particular 
legislation. 
 
The only significant new policy initiative being added to the 
regulations-making section, Mr. Speaker, deals with the use of 
an average price in calculating royalties for natural gas. As I 
indicated earlier, Alberta recently introduced the use of average 
prices to simplify natural gas royalty calculation and reporting 
procedures. 
 
The department has been working closely with the oil and gas 
industry and their associations to determine if administration 
could be simplified in Saskatchewan by using an average rather 
than actual prices received to determine natural gas royalties. A 
decision, as I've indicated earlier, on this matter will be made 
within the next few months. Enabling legislation is being 
introduced at this time to facilitate the introduction of a 
simplified administrative process as soon as possible. 
 
I wish to point out, Mr. Speaker, that like the current Act, the 
amended Act will allow certain regulations to be made 
retroactive up to one year. As in the past, the powers to make 
retroactive regulations will be restricted to those dealing with 
the determination of royalties. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to note that the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers, the Small Explorers and 
Producers Association of Canada, and the Saskatchewan 
Mining Association have all been consulted on the amendments 
noted, and are in agreement with the changes. 
 
And I want to personally thank the former minister, the member 
from Battlefords, for the input and the work that he has done on 
these Bills, this one and the previous one. And I also want to 
thank again the associations for their input and for their advice 
in the development of this Bill. 
 
With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 1995. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'll just 
keep my comments short. But most of what the minister had 
talked about he basically had raised even in the previous Bill, 
the amendment to The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 
Act, and I think a lot of the comments that I had referred to will 
basically overlap regarding The Crown Minerals Act as well. 
And so therefore at this time I'd move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Business 
Corporations Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Business Corporations 
Amendment Act, 1995. These amendments are being 
introduced with three purposes in mind. 
 
First, they will allow for the implementation of technological 
innovations such as electronic filing and facsimile transmission 
of documents. The director of corporations branch will be able 
to receive specified documents transmitted electronically by 
clients. In addition the director will be able to send information 
or provide notification electronically. Technological 
innovations will increase the efficiency of the corporations 
branch and increase the convenience for its clients. 
 
Secondly, these amendments will incorporate changes that were 
recently made to the Canada Business Corporations Act. For 
example, definitions of control and subsidiary are being 
amended to capture the chain of corporations under a parent 
company. By maintaining a degree of consistency between the 
federal and provincial Acts, we will ensure the Saskatchewan 
residents and companies have access to recent developments in 
corporate law. 
 
Finally, the changes will streamline the process for adopting a 
new corporate name following the amalgamation. When two 
wholly-owned subsidiary corporations amalgamate, they will be 
able to adopt a new name during the amalgamation process. 
Previously the parent corporation was required to call a special 
meeting to deal with the change of name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to Amend the 
Business Corporations Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Justice gave a fine speech, and the reason why it was so fine — 
it was brief. And I would just like to say that we're going to 
look forward to asking you some questions and definitions of 
what you mean by electronic documentation, what all will be 
involved, the definitions that have been changed in relation to 
the federal business in relation to the federal Business 
Corporations Act. We'll be asking a lot of those kinds of 
questions and dealing with it. 



February 24, 1995 

 
429 

In view of that, there's one observation you made about the 
opportunity to change names when corporations have 
amalgamation. And that's probably a very positive step for them 
to take because normally they probably all do that or would 
wish to do that. 
 
So the member who is a critic for Justice will take a look at all 
of the comments you made and will probably have a fairly long 
and lengthy dissertation on how he views the world of business 
corporations under the Department of Justice. And therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Co-operatives Act, 1989 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Co-operatives 
Amendment Act, 1995. These amendments will serve to 
streamline business operations of cooperatives. 
 
Directors will be given additional flexibility to change the 
location of a registered office of a cooperative. Presently 
directors can only change the location of a cooperative's 
registered office within a municipality. A change of address 
outside the municipality requires a membership vote to change 
the by-laws. These amendments will enable the directors to 
simply file a notice or indicate a new location in Saskatchewan 
in the cooperative's annual return. 
 
Another amendment will simplify the dissolution or winding up 
process in the Act for a cooperative that's inactive and whose 
membership cannot be located. If such a cooperative hold 
limited assets or liabilities, the current dissolution process is 
cumbersome. The Act currently has a simplified dissolution 
process for cooperatives with no assets or liabilities. These 
amendments will extend this streamlined dissolution process to 
cases where there are limited assets or liabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the Act will also limit the use 
of the term co-op to part of a business name for cooperative 
organizations. This is essentially the situation for cooperatives 
incorporated in Alberta, Manitoba, and under federal law. 
 
Other amendments clarify the intent of the legislation. For 
example, the Act will be clarified to make it clear that their 
directors cannot enact or amend by-laws. It was never intended 
that the Act be construed to permit members to delegate the 
powers to amend, repeal, or enact by-laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Co-operatives Act, 1989. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here too there are a 
number of changes that are probably going to streamline the  

responsibilities that The Co-operatives Act will have on the 
people of Saskatchewan. And so the items that the minister 
mentioned, for example, location of office, change of address, 
will be a positive. 
 
Winding up the cooperatives when they're no longer in business 
is likely going to take a little longer for us to discuss about 
where the assets and liabilities will accrue. And the third item 
that you raise, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I think has some 
positive significance. The directors need to go to their 
membership to see whether they want by-laws changed, 
whether they want the rules changed that the directors operate 
under. And I believe that that's a very significant point, and I'm 
glad you raise it. 
 
The member responsible for the Department of Justice and this 
Act will be expanding on these issues; therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — After two such brilliant orations, 
members no doubt anticipate more of the same, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased this time to rise to move second 
reading of The Securities Amendment Act. The Bill before you 
provides for many changes to The Securities Act, 1988. A 
number are quite important. Perhaps none is more important 
than the amendment to clearly state the purposes of the Act 
which are to provide protection to investors and foster fair, 
efficient capital markets and confidence in capital markets. 
 
As The Securities Act is interrelated on a national and 
international scale, it is important that it be regulated in a 
consistent and efficient manner. The changes before you will 
assist in providing that consistency and efficiency and balance it 
with investor protection in the following ways. 
 
The Securities Commission, when authorized by cabinet, will 
be able to make regulations. This will allow it to coordinate its 
regulating functions with other commissions in Canada which 
have or are obtaining similar powers. This has occurred after 
extensive review of the Securities Commission's rule-making 
authority by independent inquiries. 
 
Safeguards will exist to ensure that cabinet can predominate by 
passing a new regulation to amend or change one made by the 
commission. Public comment procedures will be provided by 
order in council instituting a notice requirement in advance of 
any regulation made by the commission. 
 
The commission will be enabled to set up registration 
requirements for those trading in futures and options, setting 
requirements similar to those in force elsewhere that allow a 
securities commission to obtain the same level of information 
from commodities and futures traders as now exists for the 
trading of securities. 



February 24, 1995 

 
430 

The interjurisdictional cooperation in regulation that exists will 
be further enhanced by changes allowing the commission to 
obtain evidence for other securities administrators, allow a 
person outside Saskatchewan to be examined concerning a 
matter investigated by the Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission. 
 
In addition to matters fostering uniformity and cooperation, 
investor protection will be encouraged by measures that will 
prohibit market manipulation. The commission will have the 
power, after a hearing, to: suspend those registered to sell 
securities; cease trading in a company's shares; reprimand a 
person or company; remove a director of an issuer; order 
payment of an administrative penalty up to $100,000 or the cost 
of producing public education material. 
 
Individual investors’ rights will be enhanced with expanded 
rights of action for misrepresentation in offering memoranda, 
rights of action for verbal misrepresentations made in 
connection with the sale of securities, or in advertising. 
 
Finally, there are changes of a technical nature that repair 
drafting errors and inconsistencies and encourage 
harmonization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — These matters are discovered during 
the daily work of the commission as it deals with applications 
for exemption from some of the statutory provisions. The 
commission is often requested to make adjustments required by 
extraordinary situations not contemplated when the provisions 
were made. These provisions should help the public in its 
interpretation of the statute and simplify their dealings with the 
commission. 
 
I do not propose to review all of these changes, although urged 
to do so by many members of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, job creation depends on the ingenuity and hard 
work of many people. It also depends on balanced regulation to 
ensure adequate markets are there to serve those in need of 
capital. This can only happen when investors are confident and 
willing to participate in the market. These changes will continue 
to ensure that Saskatchewan can meet those needs in 
cooperation with other regulators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Securities 
Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill is fairly 
lengthy and it has a lot of very technical things. It has a lot of 
very technical things. I noticed at the beginning of your 
remarks, Mr. Minister, that you were going to make it so that 
the people could feel more secure when they're meeting with 
people who are selling and providing opportunity for 
investment by the general public. And I think that that's a step  

forward. 
 
Because it is so very extensive and it's going to take time to 
analyse that, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to move for an 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Chair: — Before we proceed, I would ask the Minister of 
Economic Development to introduce the officials who have 
joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that 
introduction and the opportunity to introduce my staff. And also 
I would like introduce to the committee the Associate Minister 
of Economic Development who will be helping in the project 
today. But seated to my right is Pat Youzwa, the deputy 
minister of Economic Development. Directly behind me are Mr. 
Peter Phillips, the assistant deputy minister of policy and 
coordination; and Bob Perrin who is seated behind me and to 
my right, executive director, programs and internal operation; 
and Sharon Roulston who is sitting in the back, director of 
internal operations. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I guess 
it's good to be back in committee here, Committee of Finance, 
dealing with Economic Development. Welcome to the officials. 
I hope that we will have over the next course — however long 
this takes — some productive discussion. And like I always do 
say, the length of time which we will be spending in estimates 
on Economic Development is directly proportional to the 
quality of answers given by the minister. And once we have 
determined that he has been held accountable, then of course 
we will go on to some other form of business. 
 
I think it's noteworthy also that the first day of business 
following the budget speech, that we are actually in the 
Committee of Finance, in estimates. This is the first time, I 
believe, since I've been in the legislature, since 1986, where that 
has happened. 
 
Now before I get carried away and do too much . . . give my 
colleague too many accolades, I suspect that perhaps it is 
because there is not enough agenda as far as the legislative 
agenda is concerned. We are now up against it, and the only 
other alternative is to have some form of estimates or other. 
 
The other first, preliminary remark I want to make, Mr. 
Minister, is in regards to your colleague sitting beside you to 
your left there, and that's the member from Athabasca. And I 
want to publicly take this opportunity to congratulate him on 



February 24, 1995 

 
431 

 his appointment to cabinet. It's unfortunate that the 
circumstances are such that we need that many ministers. But 
on a personal level I say to you, sir, that I congratulate you, and 
I think that you've earned it. You've certainly earned your 
position here over the many years. And on that level I hold you 
in great respect, and I know that you will do your best and do 
fairly good at . . . or do well in your position. 
 
And maybe the minister would at the same time, since I've 
raised this issue of an associate minister and so did you, 
perhaps for the benefit of the viewing audience you could 
describe to the people of Saskatchewan why there is a Minister 
of Economic Development and an Associate Minister of 
Economic Development and what your diverse responsibilities 
are and what your cohabitant responsibilities are as well. 
 
And I know that there has been this type of associate 
ministership for many, many years. And perhaps we could 
begin, Mr. Minister, with a simple question like that, and then 
we'll get on into some of the more detailed questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I just want to say to the 
member from Rosthern, I appreciate very much the opportunity 
to be here to answer questions from the opposition and also to 
say that the relationship between the member from Rosthern 
and myself goes back many years. And I think we've always 
been able to carry out this role of opposition in government or 
government in opposition, depending on how far you go back, 
with a good deal of success. 
 
And so I look forward to the next few hours. And probably the 
estimates for Economic Development will take a good number 
of hours because there's a lot of material to cover, and jobs 
being probably the most important issue in the province of 
Saskatchewan today, especially as it would relate to youth 
employment. And the many projects that we're endeavouring to 
bring on certainly would indicate to the public that we see jobs 
and employment as being a significant issue that we have a role 
to help facilitate. 
 
(1145) 
 
As it would relate to the member for Athabasca, obviously we 
are very pleased that he has come on board to help us with this 
important department. The role of the Associate Minister of 
Economic Development will be of course to deal with 
economic development, job creation, and those areas of the 
department related to — in particular but not limited to — 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The difficult problem a minister of Economic Development has 
is simply getting to all the areas of the province often enough to 
deal with the many myriad of issues that there are in the 
department. And when that relates to northern Saskatchewan, 
the problem of being there is even more difficult. 
 
So to have an actual member of the legislature now in cabinet 
who will represent the interests of Economic Development in 
northern Saskatchewan I think will do wonders for the ability of  

our department to move in that area. 
 
The other fact, that the member chosen to be the Associate 
Minister of Economic Development is from the North, and 20 
years experience in the Assembly, I think will go a long way to 
giving us the kind of credibility that we need when dealing with 
northern issues and northern economic development. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The obvious thing 
here is that while he has specific duties in the North, I submit as 
well that the expectations of the people in the North have been 
raised a considerable amount. Because quite frankly, Mr. 
Minister, those expectations over the last couple of years had 
been severely dampened because of the situations as they were 
developing. 
 
And I know that the problems are very, very severe there when 
it comes to unemployment. I know what I'm talking. I used to 
be the minister of Social Services and whenever I headed up 
North, that was always the contentious issue and the underlying 
issue, the underlying current in the North — simply for jobs. As 
indeed, Mr. Minister, it is throughout the province, has been for 
the last number of years, and continues to be. 
 
To have a legitimate discussion on some of the issues that we're 
facing, obviously we need to know precisely where you stand as 
a government. And for such kind of information I was 
anticipating and was looking forward to getting the annual 
report for the Saskatchewan Economic Development, which I 
have not received. So my reports and my comments will be 
based to a large degree on the latest one that we as an 
opposition have, which is the '92-93 Economic Development 
report. 
 
Furthermore, on SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation), there's no annual report on that 
either. And yet we're going to be spending time in this 
legislature now discussing the achievements and the failures of 
these particular departments. And so that is something that I 
think should have been addressed. So perhaps you want to 
address that now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I tabled the document that you're 
looking for I think today and I will endeavour to get someone to 
get it for you so that you have it for . . . I know you'll need time 
to read it. But obviously we're not going to finish the estimates 
today. And this being the first set of estimates, I'll get a copy of 
it to you right away and you'll have time, before we bring the 
Economic Development estimates back, to have a look at the 
most recent annual report. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I might indicate to the minister that we do 
have I think by now the majority of the annual reports of all the 
agencies, corporations, and departments, and this one that we're 
starting with has not come out yet. And I understand that 
although you may have tabled it today, the Economic 
Development annual report, SEDCO apparently has not been 
tabled at all. So we'd certainly be looking forward to that one as 
well. 



February 24, 1995 

 
432 

Mr. Minister, to expedite matters in this legislature, for the last 
couple of years the opposition has instituted a procedure to help 
expedite and facilitate this discussion. And in order to do that, 
we have forwarded to you, perhaps a number of months ago 
already, a standard set of questions that we ask all the 
departments so that you know ahead of time what the questions 
are and then you will be able to answer them in writing ahead 
of time so we can use them as a basis as well. 
 
And certainly that speeds up the process. Instead of me standing 
here and asking all of those questions and putting them into the 
verbatims that way, this can be speeding up the procedure as 
well. So I want your commitment to that, that before these 
estimates are finished, we will have the answers to those 
questions and any subsequent supplementary questions that we 
may have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, I just made a note of that. You 
can be assured that that information is being compiled. That 
system seems to work much better than spending hours and 
hours of time in the legislature asking. So when we return I'll 
try to be sure that we have that information compiled for you. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I'm going to give you an opportunity, Mr. 
Minister, to give a state of the union address to us because I 
know you're going to have to get it off your chest somewhere 
along the line and we may as well get it over with and then we 
will know precisely where you stand in terms of your 
objectives, which objectives you feel that you have done 
particularly well in, and candidly perhaps even those that you 
have not achieved your objective, and so on. 
 
So give me a summarization over the past year, as the Minister 
of Economic Development for the province of Saskatchewan 
sees it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I appreciate the member's 
comments and his offering me to give a state of the economy 
report to the legislature. And I'll try to do that very briefly 
because I think there has been basically so much news about the 
economy in the last few weeks that much of it will be old news. 
 
But I also want to say to the member opposite that on January 4 
in The Village Press I appreciate also his comments and his 
MLA report where, I quote, he says: '94 was a very good year 
and saw the economy rebound after several years of recession 
and stagnant growth. And I really think that in the spirit of the 
new economy, I think there are occasions when there can be 
consensus on what is happening in Saskatchewan. And I think 
as it would relate to the economy, this is certainly one of them. 
 
I just received the annual report for '93-94, an extra copy, and 
I'll send that across to the member from Rosthern. But just 
briefly, to run over the strategy for economic development that 
the Government of Saskatchewan has had since 1992, you'll 
know that leading up to the announcement of Partnership for 
Renewal, which is the document by which we develop 
economic development in the province, we had a number of  

meetings with business people, with labour, with cooperatives, 
that told us very clearly that what was needed in the province of 
Saskatchewan was a design and a blueprint for economic 
development. And a development plan that would not be a one-
year or six-month or two-year plan, but one that would be long 
term and actually be renewed and regenerated on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
And to that end, in November of 1992 we released to the public 
a document known as Partnership for Renewal. And in this 
document were included 31 initiatives that we set out to 
accomplish — goals and objectives with deadlines and times 
attached to them. 
 
And at this point we are doing very, very well in achieving a 
vast majority of those goals, and including but not limited to 
such things as establishing a uranium policy that would allow 
for the expansion of uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan; 
the wind-down of SEDCO, which is very close to being 
completed; the development of a Tourism Authority, which is 
now up and operating. They're just in the process of bringing on 
a new executive director, and an announcement will be made on 
that in the very near future. 
 
As well, the work that is being done by Milt Fair and his 
committee on the development of a Trade Development 
Corporation, are all projects that are well under way and are at 
least in some ways assisting the business community of 
Saskatchewan, and particular medium and small businesses in a 
very, very big way. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it's clear to the public of Saskatchewan 
that there has been a very drastic change in the direction of the 
economy of Saskatchewan and as it would relate to the 
facilitation of government, a major refocusing away from large 
megaprojects and refocusing on what we believe Saskatchewan 
has always been about — that is the development of jobs by 
small and medium-sized companies. Not only small and 
medium-sized companies, but also diversifying some of our 
cooperatives, and literally thousands of jobs being created as a 
result of small and medium-sized companies picking up that 
challenge. 
 
And so to date, when you look at the economy of 
Saskatchewan, it is a very strong and vibrant economy after, as 
you say, a number of years of recession and problems of 
stagnation, low wheat prices, and a number of problems with 
resource-based companies, to today where we see exports up 
significantly, retail sales in 1994, an increase of about 9 per 
cent. You look at potash sales, uranium sales; oil and gas leases 
up significantly. 
 
And I like to compare it to an economy . . . the economy to an 
engine. And if you thought of it as an eight-cylinder engine that 
maybe was pounding away on four cylinders in 1991, it is 
probably now firing on seven and very close having the eighth 
cylinder kicking in. 
 
So you see in the area of jobs, about 16,000 new jobs since  



February 24, 1995 

 
433 

1992 in the non-agricultural sector. And this is a significant 
increase from a group of people, business people, who have 
invested in Saskatchewan, and we are now benefiting from the 
result of that, both in increased profits, increased sales, and 
increased jobs. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well thank you for that synopsis, Mr. 
Minister. It was actually relatively short; I thought that you 
would have more to talk about than the issues that you did raise. 
 
And yes, I do write every week in my local papers. I keep my 
constituents up to date as much as one can in a short weekly 
article and cover a variety of topics. And one thing that I've 
always set myself to do on a consistent basis is say things the 
way they are. And I say it the way I look at it. I may not always 
right; I'm not saying that, but that's my viewpoint of the world 
at least. 
 
And when I said in that paper that 1994 had been a very good 
year, it was a very good year. It was a good year because of 
such things as increase in wheat prices, particularly durum 
wheat. Barley prices went up, Mr. Minister, and as you admitted 
just now, the oil windfall that has come your way in terms of 
sales, lease sales . . . leases and sales and so on. What has 
happened with the world price of potash? What has happened 
to the world price of uranium? What has happened to the 
increase in the ag machinery sales and so on which are a direct 
relationship to the health and the wellness of the agricultural 
scene and timber? 
 
We could go on and on and on, and we could talk about the 
resource sector and how that came about and increased in its 
ability to add to the provincial coffers. And most of those 
actually were very little, if any, of a direct response to 
something that this government did or did not do. 
 
And as a matter of fact, I'm going to suggest now that had this 
government been a little bit less involved, had this government 
been a little bit less intrusive into the lives of individuals and 
business community in this province, we would in fact be in a 
better economic situation than we are right now because, quite 
frankly, Mr. Minister, without going into the budget aspects that 
my colleagues have debated in this legislature over the last 
while, a lot of this situation of defeating the deficit, if you want 
to put it that way, has come on the backs of these very same 
people in terms of the utility rate increases. 
 
And I could go through the litany of the utility rate increases 
that have occurred, and then a mild refund of a portion of the 
natural gas to alleviate some of the concerns of the people . . . 
or such things as the increase in the power rates or SaskTel 
rates or of course the breaking of your promise in the '91 
election where there would be the elimination of the PST 
(provincial sales tax), and now we find ourselves, instead of 
paying 7 per cent, we are paying 9 per cent. So these things 
certainly do not augur well. 
 
Now I guess one of the things, Mr. Minister, that we're going to  

be doing here over the next little while is discussing the merits 
and demerits of the various ratings given to the jobs situation in 
this province. And whether we use StatsCanada figures or we 
use some other form of figures, I don't know what the result of 
this is going to be. You just indicated now that there are 16,000 
jobs more than there were in '91. I don't care if there's 100,000 
jobs more than there were in '91. If there's 101,000 jobs lost at 
the same time, there's a net deficit of 1,000 jobs. 
 
(1200) 
 
And I think that is an inescapable figure. I think that's a figure 
that you're just going to have to live with, that in spite of what 
you say, in spite of how you manipulate numbers, there are 
fewer jobs in Saskatchewan now than there were in 1991 — 
and that, in spite of all of the windfall that you are having and 
that you were fortunate enough to receive. 
 
One other comment that you made that I will have to pick up on 
and take issuance with is your suggestion that your government 
somehow has changed the way that this province does business. 
And you indicated that you are going to hang your hat on the 
fact that you no longer do megaprojects. And the minister 
agrees with me, and he shakes his head and says, that's right. 
But he was saying, we don't do that any more. No megaprojects. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you and one of your new ministers right 
now has embarked on the biggest megaproject that this 
province has ever, ever undertaken, and that is your gambling 
— the biggest megaproject that this government or any 
government in Saskatchewan has ever undertaken. And there 
will be no doubt ample opportunity for us to pursue those kinds 
of things. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I know what the Premier said to the Premier 
of Alberta, Ralph Klein, somewhere in China. Now whether 
Mr. Klein should have divulged private conversations, that's a 
matter of contention I guess. And I know you and I would never 
do that because we've said a lot to ourselves, to each other, over 
the course of the last number of years. So we respect that. But 
when he tells us . . . the Premier of Alberta tells the world that 
your Premier and your leader of your party has said, well I'm 
over here simply because I don't really believe in what we are 
saying; I'm not an NDP, you know. But still he leads the NDP 
Party. 
 
Now you, sir, Mr. Minister, I have known for a long time . . . 
are not really an NDP. You don't think that way. You may be an 
opportunist or whatever happens to be that the grass was 
greener on that side, but I think that as time goes on you are 
showing more and more what your true colours are. And that 
I'm not saying is necessarily bad. 
 
The point I'm going to try to make now is by referring to the 
'92-93 Saskatchewan Economic Development annual report, 
and in that report I have highlighted a few of the things and so 
on that you have stated back in . . . must have been in '94 when 
this was written for the '92-93 year. And you state that  



February 24, 1995 

 
434 

Saskatchewan's economy cannot be viewed in isolation from 
international economic conditions. And I wholeheartedly 
support and agree with that because that's what we've always 
written in our reports, and that's the philosophy that I maintain. 
But I'm going to suggest that that's a philosophy perhaps that's a 
little bit foreign to the NDP. And you're coming on-stream; it's 
slowly, coming slowly. We're kicking you or dragging you into 
the 20th century, but we're getting there. 
 
I remember very distinctly you getting up and saying how 
terrible the NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) 
was, how terrible the bilateral agreement between the States and 
Canada was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. The 
FTA (Free Trade Agreement). 
 
Now the other area that you have mentioned here is, however, 
you even go further and say that failure to reach a successful 
conclusion in '92 to negotiations on the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade had a negative impact on Canadian 
agriculture. So all of a sudden we're a world community where 
it is recognized that we are a world community, that we are not 
an island unto ourselves, that we are not a province that can, as 
you said in the '91 election, be allowed to draw borders . . . or 
walls around its borders. And again, I agree. That's precisely 
our point. That's precisely our philosophy that we have always 
had and hopefully will continue to have. 
 
Your other comments on this report goes on to say: "Within the 
province, the poor harvest in 1992 had a significant negative 
impact on real growth." Now that's shades of the '80s, isn't it? 
When I read an article in the Leader-Post today that says that 
the Tories were responsible for a horrible mismanagement in 
the '80s, these folks also forget the fact that in '80s the 
economic conditions were different. In the '80s we did have, as 
you have just finished saying here, poor harvests. We all know 
that. 
 
In the '80s we did have poor prices, not only poor harvest, 
grasshoppers. You've heard that long litany; I'm not going to go 
into that. But these are the kinds of things that happen and 
precisely in the '80s, the reverse of what we're experiencing 
right now. And when I mentioned before that you have all these 
lists of goodies like high wheat prices, high oil prices, potash, 
uranium, ag machinery . . . they're high now, but in the '80s 
exactly the opposite. So you have to support, you have to 
support these communities while that is going on. 
 
But here is another interesting thing. Back in the '90s —'90,'91 
years — you and your colleagues over here used to really enjoy 
raking us over the coals for what you call a megaproject. And 
you don't do any megaprojects, right? You don't believe in 
megaprojects; you just said that. 
 
And yet, regardless of where I look, which paper I look at, it's 
your Finance minister in New York bragging about the good 
things going on in Saskatchewan. And what are the good things 
going on in Saskatchewan? Invariably it's Weyerhaeuser. 
Invariably it's Saferco. Invariably it's some of the megaprojects. 
 

Now he's shaking his head. But I'm going to say what you said 
in your '92-93 report, Mr. Minister. In '92 you're saying, boy we 
really didn't have a good year: 
 
 . . . poor harvest . . . Construction output also declined, 

as work wound down on the Lloydminster heavy oil 
upgrader and the Saskferco fertilizer plant. 

 
So how are you rationalizing the downturn? Oh, the 
megaprojects were not . . . you know, we ran out of 
megaproject work. The construction period, the boom in the 
number of construction jobs had levelled off. So it's kind of 
interesting, Mr. Minister, how one thing can revert so quickly, 
and your words catch up with you. You go on to say: 
 
 . . . Saskatchewan's 1992 real gross domestic product 

(the GDP) (is) 3.5 per cent lower than the 1991 level . . . 
 
What was the weakness due to? 
 
 . . . A 25 per cent drop in farm output due to wet and 

cold weather; 
 
 . . . employment (you say) fell by 8,000 (people) . . . 
 
Well that's precisely the point that I've been trying to make. 
Here's a positive note, Mr. Minister: 
 
 The unemployment rate, at an average of 8.2 per cent, 

represented Canada's lowest unemployment rate. 
 
That's good. I mean we want jobs, right? But has it not ever 
been thus — as far as my recent memory anyway — is that 
Saskatchewan has always been either at the lowest end of the 
unemployment rate or second lowest? That's traditionally been 
our situation and our position. 
 
You say: 
 
 . . . manufacturing output is expected to improve 

significantly in 1993-94 . . . 
 
Projects once more, these megaprojects . . . because what are 
you pinning your hope on in '93-94? The Lloydminster heavy 
oil upgrader, the Millar Western Pulp mill, Saskferco fertilizer 
plant, as they reach full capacity. Then you're expecting an 
upturn in the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Again, again you're piggybacking on something that the 
previous . . . former administration did for which we were 
roundly chastised at the time. But history has proven us correct, 
and the people of Saskatchewan are now reaping the benefits 
for that. And if you want to claim credit for it, that's fine. That's 
all right too because the important thing is that the people of 
Saskatchewan are benefiting. 
 
Now over the last eight or nine years I've been in politics, and 
I've been in this legislature, and now that I'm not going to be 
here any more the reporters keep on asking me, well what are  



February 24, 1995 

 
435 

some of the highlights that you saw over those years? Do you 
know what my stock answer is, Mr. Minister? I was very happy 
and glad to be part of a government that forever changed the 
direction of this province, the economic direction . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oops, oops, I'm getting your attention. 
 
Now just listen here; just listen now. The direction that the 
governments, future governments of this province, will have to 
take has been irrevocably charted and we were part of that. 
 
When I came into the legislature this morning — and most of 
you who are back-benchers will have seen the same thing 
because the cabinet ministers are allowed to come in in a 
special entrance so you won't have seen this — but there was a 
gentleman out on the front step with a big sign. I won't say 
completely what the sign was because it wasn't very nice, but it 
was a sign against the Wheat Pool. It was a sign against the 
Wheat Pool's new endeavour, which is of course to do what 
we've always been promoting, and that is have bond offerings, 
shares, the ability for the people of this province to participate 
in financial transactions. 
 
Mr. Minister, that's what I mean about the new course that has 
been charted in this province. People are now aware that they 
can be full-fledged partners in any economic activity at 
whatever level they are at. The big spenders have more money, 
can go at a different level, but everyone in this province now is 
aware of what a share is, what a bond offering, share offerings 
are and that they will be able to participate. 
 
And you folks will never turn that back. That's why I'm glad. 
You folks will never turn that back. People are aware of it. The 
Pool is aware of it and we support them a hundred per cent. 
And, Mr. Minister, when that Bill comes forward we're going to 
be behind it with you, to see to it that the Pool is actually given 
this opportunity to restructure their whole financial situation so 
that they can address their debt and continue to be a strong, 
good, motivating force in this province. 
 
That is my definition of where this province should have been 
going right along. We're on track. You folks are on track. 
You're picking up on all of our REDAs (regional economic 
development authority) and all these other economic expansion 
points that we've got out there, the community bonds issue. 
 
You see that's what it's all about — people having ownership 
and people grabbing a stake in their own future and being able 
to do something with that. And there are varying degrees of 
success around the province. We're still in the infantile stages 
and we have to be careful that this is gone about in a good, 
meaningful way so that we don't have any unpleasant 
experiences. 
 
But we're heading in the right direction. Mr. Minister, I want to 
congratulate you that you are of the same frame of mind, to a 
degree at least; that you're continuing to pick up on the 
direction that we have forged for this province. And if you do 
it, and if you do a good job, I think the people will support you, 
and certainly we're going to urge you to continue on in many of  

those initiatives that we have created. 
 
Now I know that the minister's anxious to get up and start 
talking about — oh what are some of those things that they used 
to talk about? — gigamess and so on and so forth. Small, 
isolated incidents, but they're very powerful media-wise, I 
know, very powerful media-wise because they attract attention 
and so on and so forth. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I've taken a fair amount of your time. I'm 
going to give you an opportunity to admit that we were right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I appreciate the member's 
optimism about hoping that I will admit the Tory administration 
between 1980 and 1991 were right, but I want to say that there 
were some things that you did do to change Saskatchewan and 
one of them was running debt. 
 
I remember early in the mandate of your administration, the 
premier at that time, the member from Estevan, going to New 
York and telling the bond rating agencies that the economy of 
Saskatchewan was so strong you could afford to mismanage it 
and still break even. He never broke even once in the next nine 
years that he was premier of the province. 
 
So you changed the direction of the province, there's no doubt. 
But happily you are wrong when you say that you changed it for 
ever and in fact the budget this year being balanced for the first 
time since you people took office in 1981-82 indicates that you 
are absolutely wrong, because that change was not for ever; we 
have now balanced the books again, with a great deal of help 
from the business people and working people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that you talk about the fact that the reason the 
economy is doing good is just good luck, that there is nothing 
that government has to do with the fact of whether the economy 
goes well or whether the books are balanced. But I want to say 
to you that many business people in particular in this province 
are beginning to get the sense, after looking back historically . . 
. and I think you should remember that those who don't 
remember those bad days are doomed to repeat them. 
 
(1215) 
 
But the fact is that many business people look back historically 
— and you can go back to 1929 when the Anderson 
government, the Conservative government, was elected in 
Saskatchewan, and the Bennett government, the Tory 
government, in Ottawa. And my father remembers when their 
family had to pull the engine out of their car and hook it up to 
horses. And they were called Bennett buggies. And there was a 
bit of bad luck that occurred when the Tories were in 
government during that period. 
 
And then miraculously Tommy Douglas got elected, and the 
province boomed in the 1950s and the early 1960s. And then 
again as if by magic, a right-winger, Ross Thatcher, was elected 
in the 1964 election, and things got bad again. Just luck, it was  



February 24, 1995 

 
436 

bad luck that Ross Thatcher got into all those problems. 
 
And then just by accident, Al Blakeney got elected in the 
1970s, and things got good again — just lucky. And then in the 
1980s we elected another right-wing government, and things 
unluckily got bad again. And then in 1991 we elected a NDP 
government, and they got lucky again. 
 
But you know what? Many business people say you can argue 
whether it's good luck or good management; they're not going to 
take a chance on having bad luck again. They're going to stick 
with the NDP. And they have decided, many of them, that for 
whatever reason the till rings more when New Democrats are in 
government than they do when the right-wingers are in 
government, feeding their big corporate friends. 
 
And when I say that megaprojects are no longer a major thrust 
of the government, I'm talking about major development using 
taxpayers' money as the basis for the development. If someone 
wants to come here and drill oil wells, they're welcome in. 
They're welcome in. If Sears wants to come here and do a call 
centre with 800 people, they're welcome to come. But the 
difference is large businesses can no longer expect tens or 
hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayers' money to buy them 
to come here. 
 
If we're going to spend money, we'll spend it on the small 
entrepreneurs, small companies, small businesses, and that's 
where you're going to get the lion's share of your jobs today and 
in the future. It's great to have Saskferco producing fertilizer in 
Saskatchewan, but the number of jobs at that plant, I think the 
member would have to admit, are not great. I mean there aren't 
thousands of jobs at the fertilizer plant. There were more jobs 
when it was being constructed, and the construction jobs were 
very much appreciated. But when you look at the hundreds of 
millions of dollars that your government put into those 
megaprojects . . . and you listed the good ones. You listed the 
good ones, and I'm not going to get into listing all the bad ones. 
 
But one only needs to grab the book, On the Take by Stevie 
Cameron, and look at the many deals that the federal 
Conservative government of Mulroney did while they were in 
government and a whole chapter dedicated to gigamess and the 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan. I'm not going to get 
into the details, but you listed out some of them that are still in 
existence. I'm not going to list out the long litany of failed 
projects where millions and millions of taxpayers' dollars 
simply went out the window to some of your friends. 
 
And when I say the direction has changed, it has changed. We 
have refocused away from megaprojects using millions and 
millions of dollars of taxpayers' money, to small and medium-
sized businesses and regional economic development 
authorities. I'm not saying that if a megaproject wants to come 
to Saskatchewan, for example in north-east Saskatchewan, and 
do something with the paper or pulp, that we wouldn't invite 
them with open arms. But you cannot expect the taxpayers of 
the province to run up billions of dollars in debt to get a few 
jobs. That simply is not the way economies work. 

Let the economy work. Let the cooperatives do their thing. And 
what you will find, as with Tommy Douglas in the 1950s and 
early '60s, the economy will flourish when that partnership of 
government, working people, cooperatives, and businesses, 
work together. It's when you pit them one against the other — 
that one philosophy works, and one philosophy doesn't work — 
that's when you get the disasters of the Anderson government, 
the Thatcher government, and the government that you 
represented in the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Minister, you quite eloquently 
made a major, major point that I was trying to make while I was 
on my feet before. And that simply is that when times are 
tough, people turn to Tory governments. Tough times are Tory 
times; you've heard that expression. Tough times are Tory times 
because that is when management is needed. 
 
Let's take a look, for example, Mr. Minister, in 1981. In 1981 
you had an imminent disaster occurring with people in this 
province. We had 22 per cent interest rates at that time. We had 
come off a downturn in the entire economy, whether it was with 
oil, whether it was with wheat, whether it was with potash. 
Everything was starting to crack up under your administration, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Why do you think that you got turfed out in one of the biggest 
election turnovers in all of Saskatchewan history in 1982? It 
was precisely of the mess that you had gotten ourselves in. And 
you know what period of time that you got ourselves into that 
mess? It was in the super '70s, the super '70s — the best times, I 
would suggest, that Canada has ever known, when everything 
was booming and there seemed to be no end to anything, when 
you walked into a bank and the bank manager was trying to 
press more money in your hands than you really wanted. That 
was the attitude. That was the spirit of optimism. It was the 
spirit of, there's nothing that mankind cannot do. 
 
And you guys fell for it. And what did you do? In spite of those 
super times, instead of building up a contingency fund for bad 
times, you went to New York and you borrowed more billions 
of dollars. You went ahead and you invested in your 
megaprojects, and you bought dry holes in the ground that were 
there already, and you set up your Crown corporations, your 
family of Crown corporations. That's where you spent the 
money of the good times, Mr. Minister. 
 
And did you pay off the teachers . . . the old pensions that we 
were talking about yesterday. That's where the teachers' pension 
funds were in the same time, the same thing as your pension, 
Mr. Minister. And there was — what was it? — 1.2 and I 
believe it's up to $2 billion now in unfunded liabilities on those 
pensions. 
 
Those were the things that you did during the good times. 
Those were the debts that you were creating during the good 
times — the super '70s. And when things started getting sour 
the people turfed you out. And quite frankly, I think we got 
elected because we happened to be there at the time with a 
vibrant premier and to whom the people of the province at that  



February 24, 1995 

 
437 

time said, we're going to let him go and become premier of this 
province, because they did not trust you any more during the 
good times. Anyone can be in government in the good times. 
And so that is the point, Mr. Minister. 
 
So having established that fact, I think beyond any reasonable 
doubt, we will continue on to some of the other questions that I 
could go on. And you, sir, wanted to talk about economic 
diversification. I've got a list here that would take us . . . well 
there's no point in me getting into where some of these so-
called megaprojects . . . Weyerhaeuser, we could talk about the 
$91,000 a day that your government was losing on simply 
having a pulp mill in Prince Albert with half the numbers of 
people working that there are now. 
 
But because, because there was this desire to improve the 
situation in the province, there was this desire to take this 
burden off the backs of the people, of losing $91,000 of 
taxpayers' money a day in Prince Albert pulp mill alone, what 
did we do? We made a deal with one of those evil multinational 
companies that you're starting to get into bed with now once 
more, which is another flip-flop — which is, by the way, 
something I commend you for again. I think that's a good idea. 
 
It's a little too late, I would suggest to you, much too late. You 
should have been doing this before, but then again that's not the 
philosophical bent of your party. It is a view, I know that, but 
not of your party, that dictates what you can and what you 
cannot do. 
 
But now we have Weyerhaeuser there, not only with a pulp mill 
but a paper mill. And the important thing there is not the 1,100 
jobs necessarily alone that was created in Prince Albert, 
sustainable jobs that were created in Prince Albert, but rather 
that ecologically . . . And the Minister of Environment has been 
doing a lot of chirping here lately, because I think I'm starting to 
get to him a little bit, as well. But he will recognize the 
ecological, the environmental, impact that that paper mill has 
had. 
 
Because no longer are the spruce trees being trampled 
underfoot because that's a hardwood and it's no good to 
anybody. That was in the past. Now we have constructive 
logging up there. And I still don't agree with the clear cut; that's 
something you and I can have a discussion with later. But now 
we can use those for class 1, class A, worldwide paper 
distribution system in the world of no. 1 class grade paper. And 
so there's no wastage of the trees. 
 
So one little example, Mr. Minister, of some of the other things. 
We could go into Millar Western Pulp company, Great Western 
breweries; we could go on to Saskferco and talk about that one 
at length. 
 
But I don't know if we would necessarily be doing the people of 
this province a particularly good service to each strut our stuff 
and say to the people, look at what we did, look at what you 
guys did; and you getting up and saying, well this is what we're 
doing and this is what you did. So we're getting into, I believe,  

quite frankly, we're getting into political discussions here that 
are not leading us particularly in any one discussion. 
 
And I'm willing to call a truce if you are, let's put it that way. 
Let's get on with some of the more significant questions, I 
would say, Mr. Minister. I don't know who's ahead right now, 
but philosophically we disagree, and we each feel the urge and 
the adrenalin to get up and address those issues. We've done 
that; I think we've had a fair exchange. 
 
I'm going to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . pardon me? I will 
give you one short comment because I know there's something 
that's still bugging you. Get it off your shoulder. But I'm going 
to leave you with this particular issue and I'm going off into a 
specific area now. And the area that I'm going into or want to 
go into, I think is an area that holds extremely large potential 
for this province, and that's the area of biotechnology. 
 
I know that we've done a lot of work with the SRC 
(Saskatchewan Research Council). And I know that we have a 
state-of-the-art operation at the University of Saskatchewan, the 
university in Saskatoon, that not only can take a leadership in 
this across the nation, I think it already is. I think it already is. 
 
And your government has been promoting this, Mr. Minister. 
And quite frankly, I would commend you for doing that because 
that's exactly what should be done. 
 
In October of last year, Mr. Minister, our Premier complained 
that biotechnology was over-regulated by the federal 
government and called on Ottawa to update and streamline the 
way that it administrates this biotechnology. 
 
And I thought it was kind of ironic for an NDP Premier to get 
up and complain about over-regulation. But anyway, could you 
comment on the impact of the provincial regulations on 
biotechnology? For example, to your knowledge are there any 
aspects of the industry that fall under provincial health or 
environmental regulations that could be addressed; and if so, to 
what degree has your government tried to streamline those 
regulations and then tried to coordinate them with the federal 
ones as they exist? 
 
In other words, I think what we have to do is have a house-
cleaning ourselves first before we start talking about over-
regulation with the feds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the member would allow me, I 
just want to correct a couple of misconceptions, just so if there 
happened to be anyone listening to this program that they 
wouldn't go away with the wrong impression. 
 
I want to say to you that the . . . going back to the good luck 
theory and Tory times are tough times. I mean I couldn't agree 
more because whether it was my father and his father who were 
trying to make a living in those tough times back in the '30s 
when we had a Bennett government in Ottawa and an Anderson 
government in Saskatchewan between 1929 and 1934, in fact 
Tory times are tough times. 



February 24, 1995 

 
438 

But people remember a long time about Tories. And it seems 
like once every 50 years, whether we need it or not in this 
province, we get a Tory government. Because it takes people 
that long to forget how tough those Tory times are. And then we 
have to come in and we clean up, and we don't mind doing it 
although some of us are getting a little long in the tooth, 
cleaning up behind Tories and Liberals. But it's fair to say that 
you're absolutely correct when you talk about Tory times being 
tough times. 
 
But you don't do it in isolation and it wasn't only here in 
Saskatchewan that the right-wing philosophy of take care of me 
and my kids and to heck with the rest of the community, was in 
vogue. And it really started in the United States. You tagged 
along and repeated all those wise words of David Stockman — 
I believe he was treasurer for Reagan — when he talked about 
the trickle-down theory and all the great things that would occur 
if only you gave more money to the multinationals. 
 
(1230) 
 
But I think what is even more irritating to the people of 
Saskatchewan than the huge deficit and the legacy that was left 
from the 1980s was that at the same time you were selling off 
the assets that the Blakeney government and the Douglas 
government had built up penny by penny, nickel by nickel, dime 
by dime, to build a set of corporations owned by the people of 
the province that worked with, not against, the private sector in 
a fine-tuned economy that worked well and, by your own 
admission, was flourishing during the 1970s. Balanced budgets 
every one of those 11 years that the Blakeney government was 
in power. 
 
But even more irritating than the debt was the sell-off of assets 
that took place during that period. And I sat I think in the bench 
that you're sitting in now, or the next one to your left, next to 
premier Blakeney, when there were only eight of us in the 
House between 1982 and 1986. 
 
And we watched you people take a surplus . . . And you say, 
why didn't you run surpluses? We left you a surplus, when we 
left government in 1982, of $139 million. Did it do any good? 
Would it have done any good if we had left you $10 billion in 
surplus? You spent and sold like drunken sailors. 
 
We had a power company that owned coalfields in this 
province, and you sold off the coalfields. And then looked 
around and said, we now own power plants; where the heck are 
we going to get the coal from? And you had to buy the coal 
back. And they took you to the cleaners. And we're still paying 
for that nonsense of selling off an asset, and in this case selling 
the coal and keeping the coal-fired generators. 
 
You then sold off the gas fields. We used to have a gas 
company, SaskEnergy, that had pipelines and gas. We now own 
a company that owns pipelines and no gas. And then when the 
price of gas goes up, you stand in the House sanctimoniously 
and say, why is the price of gas going up in this province, 
having sold off all the gas fields. Many of the public don't know  

that, but we don't own any gas in SaskEnergy. All we own is a 
pipeline. And we have to pay the price from the private sector 
every time the price of gas goes up. That's why gas prices went 
up, because you sold off the gas fields. 
 
And what the irony of that member standing here when the 
price of gas is going up and saying, why is the government so 
insensitive to the needs of the public that they would raise the 
price of gas, having made the decision when he was on this side 
of the House to see the gas fields, is nothing less that incredible. 
 
We sold off the Highway equipment. Remember that sale? 
Remember the sale of Highway equipment? — $40 million 
worth of Highway equipment for $5 million. And if I'm not 
mistaken, a former member of the Assembly here, Mr. Hodgins' 
— this is the irony of it — auction mart, was the auction 
company that went and sold off that $40 million worth of 
Highway equipment for around $5 million. 
 
You sold the potash mines, those worthless holes in the ground 
as you called them when the Blakeney government was buying 
them — you sold them and spent every last cent of the money. 
You didn't put any of it away. 
 
You sold off the pulp mill, and you made reference to that. That 
pulp mill was making huge amounts of money when we were in 
government for the vast number of years or the majority of 
years when we were in power. 
 
You sold off Saskoil. You sold off another revenue source for 
the Government of Saskatchewan. You sold off the coal-mining 
equipment. You sold off the park facilities. 
 
So don't tell me that you didn't have at your disposal huge 
amounts of cash and surpluses built up by NDP and CCF (Co-
operative Commonwealth Federation) governments. You had it; 
you squandered it; you have none of it left. Plus you have $15 
billion in debt. 
 
Now everyone knows about the $15 billion in debt, but what is 
missing out of the formula and I want to put on the record today 
is the billions of dollars in assets that we no longer have in this 
province that you also spent. 
 
And I say to you, sir, that when you stand in your place and say 
to the Minister of Finance today when she balances the budget 
and has some surpluses in certain areas of government, whether 
it's in CIC or the Liquor Board, it drives you people crazy to see 
surpluses anywhere. You can't stand it. You get up in the House 
and you say, what have you got these surpluses here for? Why 
the heck didn't you spend that money? 
 
What kind of operators of government and why would you 
expect anyone in their right mind to come back and vote for a 
party that hasn't learned a bit about balancing the books or 
saving for future generations? And so I say to you that you can 
talk about how great it was during the 1980s, but I'm sorry to 
say that there will be very few in this generation who will live 
long enough to vote and put that X on a ballot for a  



February 24, 1995 

 
439 

Conservative candidate in the years to come. 
 
On biotechnology, I want to say to you that we have been 
working hard with the federal government to get a set of 
regulations that will be streamlined in order for biotechnology 
to take place. And as it would relate to whose responsibility the 
regulation codes are, virtually all of them as it would apply to 
ag biotech or to biotechnology fall under the responsibility of 
the federal government. 
 
But I have sent letters to ministers at the federal level asking 
them to cooperate in streamlining the process and I know the 
Premier has made speeches here in Saskatchewan as well as in 
Toronto, urging the federal government to come to grips with 
streamlining the regulations as it would apply to ag biotech. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank you 
for that tirade, because that's basically and exactly what that 
was, sir. And I guess I gave you too much credit in my previous 
comments about you not really being a socialist. I still don't 
think you are, in spite of that tirade that you just went through. I 
think you're trying to cover your tracks within your own party, 
and I don't think that will work, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you talk about us selling off assets, as you 
call them, of this government, that's the thing that I'm proud of 
most, because that's what has changed the direction in this 
province. Because this is going to show the people what they 
can do for themselves instead of big government doing for them 
— and that's the family of Crown corporations that you are 
responsible for. 
 
And for you to have the audacity to get up in here and say that 
Mr. Blakeney left a balance to the positive, there could be 
nothing . . . a surplus . . . there could be nothing further from 
the truth, sir, because those dry holes that you bought were 
borrowed in New York, and we have a $2 billion deficit handed 
down on that one simple thing itself. It's probably more than 
that. 
 
And then when we start talking about the other deficits that 
were there in that so-called balanced budget, or surplus, then 
we begin to look at the $1.2 billion that were left in the 
unfunded liabilities of pensions in this province which, sir, is 
your own pension, because you are part of that problem when 
we take a look at your $1.4 million pension that you will get 
when you retire from this House. 
 
So don't get up there and spout and blame us for all of the 
problems in this province. You created on a . . . I won't say 
personal level. You created part of it as your party, and you're 
part of the problem and let's not forget that. And don't get up 
sanctimoniously and say about all the wonderful conditions that 
you left this province in when you were sunk. 
 
Why did the people kick you out? Was there no reason for it? 
Why was the biggest downfall of any party in this province your 
own? You were left with five people back here, or fewer than 
that. You weren't even part of it. You weren't even part of  

that process because you got booted out yourself. And then you 
had to come back here in Regina and get on a by-election so 
that you could be safe in the arms of Regina where you would 
run in a safe seat. So don't give me any of that, Mr. Minister. 
You have a legacy that you need not be proud of as well. 
 
And you left a legacy that was also part of the deficit that the 
people of this province now are trying to face and carrying on 
their backs. That's how you have dealt with this deficit that 
we've got here, Mr. Minister — on the backs of the people of 
this province; on the backs of the farmers of this province. You 
have that hundred and eighty-nine millions of dollars that 
belong to the farmers of this province and you used that to so-
called balance your budget and come up with a $119 million. 
 
You talk about the highways. You know very well that an 
independent assessor and appraiser assessed that $4.5 million, 
and you're saying 40 million. Mr. Minister, how are you going 
to have any credibility in the House when you play so loose 
with facts and figures, Mr. Minister? 
 
And that sold . . . At least you got one thing right. At least you 
got one thing right. It was $5 million that we got for it. And the 
province has done well, very well after that. 
 
Our problem is now, that when there are contracts being let for 
highways or whatever, water pipelines or whatever the case may 
happen to be, you feel that you owe the labour unions 
something, the union leaders. You're trying to appease them at 
this right time because you know that the Premier's going to be 
calling an election sooner than later. And I guess I could say 
also, in the words of a famous Canadian, the better the sooner. 
Okay, that goes over your heads, but that was Mr. Chrétien that 
made that comment. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, if you would not be on this bent right now of 
forcing more and more taxpayers to foot the bill, we would be 
better off as well. Your union-only contracting policy that has 
been adopted province-wide, government-wide, every 
department now is involved in union-only tendering. Is that 
how it is going to be best? Is that how you as Minister of 
Economic Development view the province? Is this how you 
view that the taxpayer is going to get the best bang for their 
buck? 
 
I don't think so. The people of this province don't think so. It 
should be open tendering. Lowest person who can do the job 
the way it's supposed to be done should be the one that would 
get that job. And you have now made it a government policy to 
have union only need apply. 
 
Department of Health, we brought that up the other day in 
question period. Now all of a sudden the Department of Health 
is involved saying, oh, by the way folks before you apply, let's 
have your union contract; let's have your union membership 
first of all. Otherwise the implication was there's no need to 
apply. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, there is a lot of material that we could  



February 24, 1995 

 
440 

cover there. And I thought that we were going to get away from 
this before, and we're back into it . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Why? Because we have to set each other straight, I say to 
the member from Swift Current. That's the problem here. And I 
guess politics will ever be thus that it's the perspective of one's 
own eyes that we view these things happen. 
 
Again I think that the public is entitled to be able to listen and 
to make their own assumptions and draw their own conclusions. 
And I'm sure that that's what they're doing, and that's the way it 
should be. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that the members of the Liberal Party want 
to get involved in this. He indicated to me that he would be 
asking some questions, so I would give him that opportunity at 
this stage. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought our 
Liberal colleagues were going to ask some questions, so since 
they don't seem to be prepared to stand on this issue today, I 
have some issues from my own constituency that perhaps the 
minister could respond to. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have been travelling around the world talking 
about trade. You've been to China, you've been through the 
southern Americas, you've been to the Caribbean, and Mexico. 
 
Well even in my own constituency they're interested in your 
economic development when it comes to trade. There is a group 
called the Central North American trade corridor association 
that is trying to work together from Mexico City to Point 
Barrow, Alaska, to develop a trade corridor which goes through 
south-eastern Saskatchewan. It's mainly a trucking route but 
they're also very interested in setting up service industries along 
this route, Mr. Minister. And it's very important that your 
department play a part in that, in facilitating the movement of 
trade goods north and south. 
 
Mr. Minister, how closely do you work, how closely does your 
department work, with the other departments of government to 
see to it that this type of trade — these types of opportunities — 
can be developed in Saskatchewan, can be developed in south-
eastern Saskatchewan in my constituency? Because we had a 
meeting down there last Saturday at Carievale and I know the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain is familiar with the 
area. 
 
(1245) 
 
And at Carievale, we had representatives there from North 
Dakota. We had representatives from Manitoba who were very 
interested in setting up this trade corridor, getting it working, 
eliminating the problems at the borders, eliminating the 
problems of our highways. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, how closely do you work with the other 
departments within government to ensure that this type of 
economic development can proceed smoothly? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member raises an important 
issue, and that is the issue of trade. And obviously 
Saskatchewan being a . . . probably the largest per capita trader 
of any jurisdiction in the world, and I include places like 
Germany and Japan in that, because virtually everything we 
produce, whether it's wheat, whether it's uranium, whether it's 
potash, leaves the province in vast quantities, and many of the 
products that we use are imported. 
 
And on a per capita basis Saskatchewan is in fact the largest 
trader of any jurisdiction that you could find on record, and that 
includes the great trading powers of the world. And so trade has 
always been very crucial to the development of our province 
and will continue to be. 
 
The major change that we are focusing on now is the non-
traditional trade areas, value added trade, much the same as you 
and your friends and neighbours are talking about down in that 
south-east corner of the province. 
 
And as it relates to trade, obviously having trade corridors and 
having trade relations and trade agreements are very important. 
But just having trade deals aren't necessarily always good. And 
this is why, when we get into the debate over the Free Trade 
Agreement, there are those who say, well whatever trade deal is 
in front of you, sign the darn thing and get it out of the way; it's 
got to be good. 
 
As you know, in signing agreements, deals are only good if in 
fact you can balance them out and at the end of the day believe 
you're making progress in the agreement. And so I think every 
trade agreement has to be reviewed, it has to be studied and 
analysed, and negotiated toughly so that you get the best 
possible deal that you can. 
 
As it would relate to the corridor — I didn't quite catch the 
name of which corridor it is — but I believe it's the same one 
that I spoke to their annual meeting in Melville last year. And 
we discussed at length at that meeting, ways and means that we 
could be involved in helping to facilitate easing of regulations 
as goods flow south and goods flow north. 
 
This would include upgrading of highways, making regulations 
at border crossings easier, making regulations between states 
easier. Because it's not only east-west barriers that have to be 
removed; there are many barriers as you go from state to state 
on licensing and other things for truckers that we have to 
improve. And so this is an important issue. 
 
We have also signed a partnership agreement with the state of 
Durango in Mexico which is due south of Saskatchewan, and 
the state of Coahuila is also looking at signing a letter of 
agreement for doing more trade. And to that end the trade 
between Saskatchewan and Mexico has increased dramatically 
in the past couple of years. I think the number in 1991 was $18 
million of trade exports that went to Mexico. Last year, in 1994, 
that had . . . or in 1993 had risen to $118 million. 
 
So the trade with Mexico is increasing quite phenomenally as  



February 24, 1995 

 
441 

we export more canola, grains, pork, that now are moving into 
the Mexican market. So having trade corridors and 
arrangements to ease the regulatory structures are important and 
we are indeed working on that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You've 
mentioned a couple of the areas that were brought up in 
Carievale last weekend, and I'm not sure which group you met 
with in Melville — the Central North American trade corridor 
which runs from Mexico City to Point Barrow, Alaska, mainly 
along 83 Highway as it comes north and then comes up in 
through Saskatchewan, through Alberta, and up into Alaska. 
 
That group had their annual meeting last year in Minot in 
March. So perhaps it was the same group you met with, but I'm 
not sure if it was their annual meeting. 
 
Mr. Minister, what was discussed at Carievale was the 
highways and the very low quality of the highways in that 
particular area. We reviewed the highways as they had come 
into that area in North Dakota. And the highway, No. 28 in 
North Dakota, that comes up to Sherwood, has the highest 
quality from West Hope to the North Dakota border. But when 
it hits the Saskatchewan border, there is virtually no quality in 
the highway at that point. The Highway No. 28 has four and a 
half inches of asphalt, where Highway No. 8, from Sherwood 
north, is an oil surface and very badly broken up, Mr. Minister. 
 
So that was one of the areas that they were very concerned 
about and were interested in having your department deal with 
the Department of Highways and try and improve that particular 
stretch of road because of the impact it's having of trade. 
There's a lot of traffic going back and forth across that. There's 
a lot of tourism coming back from North Dakota, going up to 
the Moose Mountain Provincial Park, which is of interest to the 
Minister of Environment and Natural Resources, because that 
generates a large amount of income for Saskatchewan and for 
that park. 
 
The other issue involved is the port, the customs, and the time 
factors involved in it. It's very important, because of the traffic 
going back and forth, both from the oil industry and from the 
agriculture industry, hauling grain south and coming back with 
goods, it's important that these ports be available for usage. It's 
a long stretch from 24-hour ports, Mr. Minister, across southern 
Saskatchewan. So we need some support from your department 
to encourage both the federal government on the customs, and 
the Department of Highways on highways, Mr. Minister. 
 
I had the opportunity to see how North Dakota handles some of 
their economic development. I attended a meeting in Sherwood, 
where a new business was looking at moving into Sherwood 
and just seeing what kind of services; what was the attitude of 
the North Dakota government and their respective agencies 
when it came to a new industry moving in. 
 
Go to the meeting and you have a representative there of their 
power source. They had a representative of their state 
telephone; from their Labour department. And their attitude  

was: we have a set of regulations in place and how can we help 
you move through those? 
 
In Saskatchewan the attitude seems to be: here's a set of 
regulations, now you comply with them. It's a very negative 
attitude here as compared to a positive attitude: how can we 
help you? 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, that we need to have a change of 
attitude within our government in Saskatchewan — within the 
bureaucracy — of rather than being an impediment to 
development, that we assist development. 
 
And what are you doing to try and encourage that? Are you 
prepared to work on the custom port hours, on the Highways 
department, and what are you doing to try and change the 
bureaucracy's negative attitude and to be more helpful and more 
positive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just on the road issue, my friend 
and colleague from the Rosemont constituency reminds me that 
he raised this issue four years ago with the then member from 
your constituency, Mr. Berntson. And so this is not a new 
problem, but one that has been around for some time. 
 
And in other areas of the province the problem is reversed. The 
21 Highway on the west side of the province is paved on the 
Saskatchewan side, just recently paved, and when you get to the 
American side it's then gravel for 15 miles — and terrible 
gravel. There isn't even a speck of pavement on it. So these are 
kinds of agreements and areas of work that indeed we do have 
to focus on. 
 
I think you're right as well that we should be, all of us, lobbying 
the federal government to have more customs port access in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And having worked for six years as 
a customs officer before I got involved in this profession, I 
know that trying to get money from the federal government for 
customs offices is very, very difficult. 
 
But when it comes to the whole area of trade between our two 
jurisdictions, I think there are other things that must happen. 
For example, the new announcement of open-skies policy by 
the federal government. We want to make sure that airlines are 
looking at our provinces and that north-south links will take 
place. 
 
We used to in the good old days — and I don't want to get back 
into the argument — in the 1970s have a link with Denver. 
Frontier Airlines used to fly on a daily basis, Saskatoon, 
Regina, Denver. That was cancelled in the mid-'80s when we 
were unlucky enough to have a poorer economy. And to this 
point we haven't been able to re-establish that. But we intend  
and are working hard with major airlines, and we've had 
meetings with several of them  to try to re-establish. And 
with any luck at all, sometime later this year we will have 
positive announcements on air links to the South again, similar 
to what we were able to arrange in the 1970s. 
 



February 24, 1995 

 
442 

But I want to say that when you talk about the role that we have 
in facilitating business moving to the province, I can bring you 
letters of commendation to the staff of Economic Development 
from companies like Limagrain — who have moved their 
canola research from France to Saskatoon — at the great work 
that was done in getting all the players in a room; power, 
telephone, gas, all the people that they needed to know the 
regulations and the excellent work that was done by the staff 
from the Department of Economic Development. 
 
In dealing with many companies that are expanding now . . . 
Mr. Gerry Bourgault, at his opening, openly commended the 
government about their role in facilitating. Not doing  giving 
big grants or anything  but just being there, helping him with 
regulations. And he publicly, and I believe it was reported in the 
local news media, congratulated the staff of government who I 
think far too often don't get the kind of credit they deserve for 
the excellent work they do when companies approach us. 
 
All you need to do is talk to Dave Radford from Sears, the now 
retired individual who headed up Sears when they moved and 
set up their 800-person call centre in Regina. He’s absolutely 
been impressed with the quality of civil service that we have 
here in the province of Saskatchewan when it came to 
facilitating the establishment of that call centre here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So where you're picking up that we set up walls or blocks, I do 
not hear that from business. In fact when I travel around the 
province, quite honestly I get a very, very different view. In fact 
as recently as three days ago when we did the expansion at 
Twinpak, the manager of the plant went out of his way to 
compliment the staff of the department and government on the 
role they played in the expansion. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


