













































February 6, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

February 6, 1995 

 

 

1 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that I have 

received a communication from the private secretary to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will 

open the fifth session of the twenty-second legislature at 2:30 

p.m. today, the 6th day of February, 1995. 

 

 2:33 p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is an honour to welcome you to the fifth session of the 

twenty-second legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

As my government took office in the fall of 1991, 

Saskatchewan faced one of its darkest hours. 

 

A decade of deficit budgets had brought us to the brink of 

bankruptcy. An economy too dependent on outside investment 

for growth was creating jobs at less than half the rate of the 

1970s. Farm families faced high debt loads and poor prospects. 

The training and long-term investments necessary to build a 

better future had been neglected, and too many young people 

had decided to seek hope and opportunity elsewhere. Our health 

care system was costing more and more, yet failing to deliver 

the services people really needed. 

 

My government’s inheritance was a province racked with doubt 

and division. 

 

Much has changed in three short years. 

 

Today, this Assembly is presented with a legislative agenda 

which speaks not of deficits, but of sustainable balanced 

budgets; not of failed megaprojects, but of an expanding local 

business sector and job growth; not of debt-ridden farms, but of 

farm families who are enjoying their highest level of optimism 

in years. This session will see new investments in training and 

infrastructure to secure our long-term prosperity and advances 

in our world-leading health care renewal. 

 

In just three years, Saskatchewan has progressed from one of its 

darkest hours to a new day of hope and opportunity. All 

Saskatchewan people are proud of their contribution to making 

this new day possible. 

 

Financial stability and public accountability 

 

In a few days, the Minister of Finance will submit the Estimates 

for the budget year beginning April 1, 1995. I am pleased to 

report that my government’s deficit reduction plan is well ahead  

of its targets and that the Assembly will be asked to approve a 

balanced budget — Saskatchewan’s first in more than a decade. 

 

But responsible financial management calls for much more than 

a balanced budget in any one year. During this session, 

members will be asked to approve legislation to set new 

standards in Canada for financial responsibility and 

accountability. The Balanced Budget Act will promote long-

term financial stability and integrity in the administration of the 

province’s finances. 

 

The public also expects increased accountability from their 

elected representatives. My government has appointed an 

independent committee to make recommendations on the salary 

and allowances members of this Assembly receive for the 

performance of their duties. The committee is also mandated to 

recommend procedures to ensure that members are more 

accountable for these allowances. My government looks 

forward to the committee’s report, and is confident that it will 

provide the basis for a simpler, more accountable system that 

provides fair and reasonable compensation to members. 

 

My government maintains that financial stability and public 

accountability contribute to growth and job creation through 

increased public confidence. This increased confidence has 

sparked a remarkable economic recovery in our province. 

 

Jobs and economic renewal 

 

Our population has increased steadily since 1992, and is now at 

its highest level in five years. In 1994 investments in 

Saskatchewan’s oil and gas sector exceeded $1 billion. Retail 

sales are up almost 10 per cent. Twelve thousand new jobs have 

been created in the last 12 months. Saskatchewan’s economy 

has made a remarkable comeback, but much more must be 

done. 

 

My government’s number one priority is job creation. Jobs 

sustain families. Jobs provide a future for our children. Jobs 

hold together the fabric of our communities and are the very 

building blocks of long-term prosperity and security. My 

government will show the same focus and determination with 

the job challenge as it has already applied to the deficit 

challenge. 

 

Through regional economic development authorities, 

Saskatchewan communities are finding local solutions to job 

creation and economic development. Nine authorities have 

already been created, and the early successes are exciting. In the 

Rosetown district, the new authority has helped to start 24 

businesses and create 77 jobs. In less than seven months the 

Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority has 

helped to create 650 jobs and encourage more than $40 million 

in investment. 

 

The Assembly will be asked to continue funding for the 

establishment of new regional economic development  



February 6, 1995 

 

2 

authorities and to encourage the authorities to expand the range 

of services they offer. 

 

In Northern Saskatchewan, expansions at the Cluff Lake and 

Rabbit Lake uranium mines, and the construction of new mine 

and mill facilities at McLean Lake and Contact Lake, represent 

significant levels of private sector investment and job creation. 

These projects will create 250 construction jobs this year and 

400 new, full-time jobs when construction is completed. 

Northern residents currently represent 45 per cent of the work 

force, but our target is 60 per cent northern employment in all 

mining jobs created by new and expanded operations in the 

North. 

 

In the strategic sector of tourism, my government looks forward 

to the first full year of operation for the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Authority. My government is confident that our tourism 

industry is well positioned to take advantage of many emerging 

opportunities such as the world-renowned T-Rex fossil 

discovery in the Frenchman River Valley. 

 

Our export-driven economy depends on a modern transportation 

system for continued growth and expansion. During this session 

members will be asked to pass The Transportation Partnerships 

Corporation Act to enable our province to enter into 

partnerships with communities, private business and other 

governments to modernize our transportation infrastructure. My 

government has committed $20 million for these new 

transportation partnerships. 

 

My government will introduce amendments to The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act to permit the 

establishment of a province-wide, industry-led collection 

system for used oil, containers and filters. In addition to 

protecting the environment, this initiative will provide new jobs 

in the collection system and new business opportunities in 

recycling and reuse. 

 

My government recognizes the unique contribution that co-ops 

make to our province’s economic and social well-being. During 

this session, my government will introduce amendments to The 

Co-operatives Act to simplify registration procedures for 

cooperatives. 

 

I am also pleased to report that my government has concluded 

negotiations with Federated Co-operatives Ltd. and the federal 

government to financially restructure the NewGrade heavy oil 

upgrader in Regina. This agreement places the NewGrade 

project on a sound financial footing and provides for a more 

equitable relationship between the parties. During this session, 

The NewGrade Energy Inc. Protection Repeal Act will be 

introduced to complete this arrangement. 

 

Sustainable resource development 

 

Saskatchewan is blessed with an abundance of rich natural 

resources. Our future economic prosperity and the high quality 

of life our people enjoy depend on the wise use of these 

resources. My government has taken a leadership role to ensure  

that we sustain our natural resources for future generations, 

while taking advantage of the many opportunities presented to 

us today. 

 

The Saskatchewan Energy Strategy: Security and Prosperity, 

will be presented to the Assembly. This strategy identifies ways 

to strengthen economic growth through the responsible 

development of production, processing, and transportation 

opportunities in our energy sector. 

 

Saskatchewan’s forests are a valuable resource providing 

products, jobs, and recreational opportunities second to none. 

This year Meadow Lake has been recognized by the Canadian 

Forestry Association as the National Forestry Capital of 

Canada. This award will heighten awareness of forestry’s role 

in both the local community and throughout the province. 

 

Current forestry legislation does not provide the sustainability 

and environmental protection desirable today. My government 

has been working towards a long-term, integrated management 

plan for Saskatchewan’s forests. During this session, my 

government will propose a new Forest Resource Management 

Act . This proposal will lead to the complete overhaul of 

existing legislation, and provide for the sustainable 

management of this important resource. 

 

Jobs and agricultural diversification 

 

Realized net farm income in Saskatchewan last year reached 

$925 million, the highest level since 1988. One of the reasons 

for this improved income picture is the willingness of 

Saskatchewan farmers to diversify. Our farmers have led 

Canada in diversifying their products and operations. 

 

Farmers want to devote even more resources to the 

diversification of their industry. The Agri-Food Innovation 

Fund Act will provide a framework for evaluating and funding 

diversification projects. The legislation will encourage 

producers, producer organizations, the private sector, and 

governments to develop partnerships in a variety of areas 

including biotechnology, food processing, and education and 

training related to agriculture. 

 

Recently, my government negotiated an improved farm safety 

net program for the 1995 crop year. The new program provides 

a meaningful, affordable level of risk protection for farm 

families, without acting as a barrier to diversification. Other 

governments are currently looking to the whole-farm 

stabilization approach as the basis for a new national support 

program. 

 

All Saskatchewan residents, farmers and non-farmers alike, 

support environmentally sustainable agriculture. During this 

session, my government will introduce The Agricultural 

Operations Act to help diversify our livestock sector and protect 

producers from unwarranted legal actions, while at the same 

time protecting our land and water resources. 

 

Despite the improvements in the farm economy, there are  



February 6, 1995 

 

3 

clouds of uncertainty on the horizon. The Crow benefit remains 

under intense pressure and indications from the federal 

government give cause for concern. The elimination of the 

Crow benefit would essentially wipe out the hard-earned gains 

that farmers have realized. This government will continue to 

work with Saskatchewan farmers to protect their income and 

keep their costs down. 

 

Investing for prosperity 

 

As we look to the 21st century, it is clear that our future 

prosperity will depend increasingly upon the growth of 

knowledge-based industries such as information technology, 

telecommunications, and biotechnology. My government has 

identified our natural strengths in each of these critical sectors 

and has targeted each for strong growth and job creation. 

 

The development of information technology holds great 

promise for Saskatchewan. With a strong local base including 

Co-operative Data Services Limited, ISM Information Systems 

Management Corporation, TRLabs, and a new Software 

Technology Centre, Saskatchewan will continue to be a 

prominent player in this field. 

 

In telecommunications, Saskatchewan people are leading the 

way. SaskTel has announced plans to make Internet, the 

computer network which represents the information-based 

infrastructure of tomorrow, universally accessible to 

Saskatchewan residents at an affordable cost. 

 

Just as electrification in the 1950s made new opportunities 

possible for people in rural and remote areas, universal access 

to the Information Highway will make the opportunities of the 

future available to all. 

 

Not only are we using our expertise to develop new products 

and services here at home, we export this expertise around the 

world. In Europe, in the Philippines, and in Africa, SaskTel 

International is designing and installing new communications 

systems and services. 

 

With 30 per cent of Canada’s agricultural biotechnology sector 

located in Saskatchewan, our province is recognized as this new 

industry’s centre for excellence and expansion. It is estimated 

that this sector will generate $200 million in annual sales by the 

year 2000, and provide hundreds of new, high technology jobs 

while providing new markets for our agricultural products. 

 

In biotechnology, telecommunications and information 

technology my government is investing today for greater 

prosperity and new jobs tomorrow. 

 

Bridges to independence 

 

In order for Saskatchewan people to take advantage of our 

growing economy and be better prepared for the future, they 

must have access to high quality education and training. My 

government believes that training and education are an 

important bridge to independence, opportunity, and prosperity. 

In November my government announced Future Skills, a $10-

million training program designed to help both workers and 

employers take advantage of immediate job opportunities. 

Individuals receive the training they need for lasting 

employment, while employers benefit by working with the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 

regional colleges, and communities to develop a skilled labour 

force. 

 

My government will also introduce a new Private Vocational 

Schools Regulation Act to improve consumer protection, 

emphasize program quality and enhance the shared 

responsibility of government and the private sector for 

regulation of the private vocational school system. 

 

In a few days my government will present this Assembly with 

the details of JobStart, a new initiative to help young people 

make the transition to the workplace. This new program will 

focus on young people who need training to get a first job or 

summer employment to finance their education. 

 

It will help young people on social assistance who need skills to 

prepare them for employment opportunities. It will also assist 

young people who face special barriers to training or finding 

jobs. JobStart will help ensure that our young people have the 

opportunity to live, work, and build their futures here at home. 

 

New technology holds great potential to help meet the diverse 

learning needs of Saskatchewan people. Distance education has 

a central role to play in providing equitable and affordable 

access to education throughout our province. During the 

coming year, my government will increase the number of its 

distance education training sites and continue to work with 

educators to expand the range of educational programs and 

training. 

 

While these new ideas and investments will create opportunities 

for most, they will not in and of themselves overcome the 

barriers which prevent too many in our society from sharing in 

our prosperity. My government is determined to break the 

poverty cycle and to build new bridges to independence for 

families in need. Investing in children and families will 

continue to be a high priority for my government as we work to 

enhance support and prevention services through Canada’s first 

child action plan. 

 

During this session my government will also proceed with 

several initiatives designed to improve the child care system. 

These will include an education campaign to help parents 

choose safe, quality child care, pilot projects in rural and 

northern Saskatchewan, and additional assistance for special 

needs children requiring higher levels of care. 

 

Ensuring sustainable health care 

 

A diversified, dynamic economy and a well-trained workforce 

are critical to the sustainability of our quality of life. Nowhere 

is sustainability more important than in our health system. 

Saskatchewan people are developing a new health system — a  



February 6, 1995 

 

4 

sustainable system — that focuses on maintaining good health 

and preventing injury, as well as treating illness. 

 

As a first step, we needed to integrate and coordinate all the 

health services available in the community. Two years ago, my 

government started this process by replacing over 400 different 

health boards with 30 health districts. In April my government 

will complete the structural transition with the transfer of 

approximately 1,400 Health department staff to the districts. 

This transfer will give health boards a full range of health 

services to meet the needs of people in their districts. 

 

To accommodate the transfer of employees, amendments to The 

Medical Profession Act will be introduced to extend special 

licences to psychiatrists and medical health officers employed 

by the district health boards. 

 

The benefits of our health renewal process are just starting to 

unfold. We are now in a position to invest in a broader range of 

community- and home-based services. Some will be new 

services designed to keep people healthier and independent 

longer, while others will be institutional replacement services. 

 

My government extends its deep appreciation to the people of 

Saskatchewan for the hard work and energy they have shown 

during the renewal process. During the coming year, 

Saskatchewan citizens, for the first time in history, will be 

called upon to elect their district health boards. This will mark 

the achievement of a primary objective for health renewal — 

community decision making and local control. 

 

My government awaits with interest the recommendations of 

the Select Committee on Driving Safety. The eight-member, all-

party committee has spent several months examining a variety 

of issues related to driving safety. The committee’s 

recommendations will make an important contribution to the 

wellness approach by preventing injuries and reducing the loss 

of life on Saskatchewan roads. 

 

Once again, Saskatchewan is leading the way in health renewal 

as we move closer to our goal of creating a sustainable system 

which offers everyone appropriate health services in or as close 

to their homes as possible. Saskatchewan people can now feel 

confident that their health system will meet both the needs of 

today and the emerging needs of tomorrow. 

 

Saskatchewan’s anniversary 

 

This year marks the 90th anniversary of Saskatchewan’s entry 

into Confederation. In our tradition, these celebrations will be 

modest, community based and volunteer driven. At a time when 

others are working to pull this country apart, Saskatchewan’s 

celebration of provincehood takes on a special significance. 

 

Perhaps the single biggest celebration will take place in 

November, when the Grey Cup comes to Saskatchewan. The 

1995 Grey Cup represents an important opportunity to promote 

our province to visitors from across North America, and is a  

tribute to the hard work, spirit, and commitment of 

Saskatchewan’s volunteers. 

 

In recognition of the 90th anniversary, and the true spirit of 

Saskatchewan people, my government will introduce 

amendments to The Provincial Honours and Emblems Act to 

create the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Conclusion 

 

The agenda my government presents today is evidence of just 

how remarkable a comeback Saskatchewan has made in three 

short years. 

 

Saskatchewan will be the first province in Canada to introduce 

a balanced budget and provide a long-term plan to maintain 

financial stability. Our economic growth rate is one of the 

strongest in the country. 

 

We are investing in industries which hold great promise for 

future growth. We are developing innovative training programs 

to ensure that our people can take full advantage of these 

opportunities. And, as the world watches, Saskatchewan has 

secured the future of medicare and is providing new services 

that will keep people healthy longer. 

 

Saskatchewan people are justifiably proud of how far we’ve 

come. 

 

Today, Saskatchewan people look to our Centennial in the year 

2005 with confidence — confidence in our financial stability, 

confidence in our economic recovery, confidence in our job 

potential, and confidence in the future of our health system. But 

perhaps most importantly, Saskatchewan people look to the 

future with renewed confidence in themselves, and in their 

ability to build a better future together. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the session, with full 

confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 

responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our 

province and guide this legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

God save the Queen. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:56 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 



February 6, 1995 

 

5 

Introduction of Clerk Assistant 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to introduce to the members of 

the Assembly, Ms. Margaret Woods, who is our new Clerk 

Assistant. I’m sure that she will be an asset to our Table and I 

ask members to join me in welcoming Margaret Woods to the 

legislative service. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the pages 

for this session will be: Rhonda Adams, Trevor Hande, Kristina 

Johnson, Leanne Notenboom, Lisa Panchyk.. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the Deputy Premier, the MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

be taken into consideration on Tuesday, February 7, 

1995. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I 

move, seconded by the House Leader, the member for Regina 

Elphinstone: 

 

 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, 

that he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no 

person but such as he shall appoint do presume to print 

the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 

 

 That by leave of the Assembly that notwithstanding rule 

3 this Assembly shall sit on Tuesday, February 7, 1995,  

from 10 a.m. until 1 p.m. and that routine proceedings shall 

commence at 10 a.m. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

House Leader, I guess it is, that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I put the question on the adjournment 

motion I have a few announcements to make. The music you 

have been listening to this afternoon is provided to us by 

Regina’s Royal Canadian Legion Band. Our thanks to the 

Legion Band for a fine performance. We will hear from them 

again later this afternoon. 

 

I would like to thank all the guests and members of the public, 

including the students from the Lakeview, St. Josaphat, and St. 

Angela Merici schools, who have joined us today. 

 

I want to welcome the choir from Greenall School in Balgonie. 

I will be calling on them to sing for us immediately following 

the adjournment. 

 

Following the choir selections, I would like to invite everyone 

to join their Honours, the Premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition, the Leader of the Third Party, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly at the Speaker's tea which will take place 

immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 

in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and in the 

Legislative Library in the east wing. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — I now welcome the students of Greenall 

School and invite them to perform under the direction of their 

teacher, Elaine Schaefer. The choir will sing three selections for 

us this afternoon  Ode to Joy, Kum Ba Ya, and The Road Less 

Travelled. 

 

(The choir sang.) 

 

The Speaker: —On behalf of all present, I would like to thank 

the choir very much. I’d like to thank their pianist, Mrs. Sharon 

Rilling, and their director, Ms. Schaefer, for just a fine, 

excellent performance. Thank you very kindly. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:05 p.m. 



February 6, 1995 

 

6 

Readers of Hansard will note the changes in the production of the verbatim that coincide with the new session of the 

legislature. 

 

Hansard is now being produced in an eight and a half by eleven format, consistent with common practice in most offices and 

with most legislative jurisdictions across Canada. The new size will both save on paper, and make the document easier to 

read. 

 

In addition, the front cover bears a new picture of the Legislative Building. This new picture is intended both to give a better 

view of our beautiful building and more appropriately fit the proportions of the larger sized document. 

 

Production methods in Hansard have also changed. Camera ready copy is no longer produced using a photo typesetter, but 

through desk-top publishing with Microsoft Word 6.0 and a Hewlett Packard LaserJet 400 SI printer. This new production 

technology, together with the size change, will prepare Hansard for future developments in electronic distribution. 

 
 

 


