






















































April 19, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 19, 1995 

 

 
1593 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
today to present from communities of Yorkton, Springside, 
Theodore, Vanguard, Hazenmore, Ponteix, Yellow Creek, 
Kinistino, and the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights), which will benefit all property 
owners in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms 
owners, in order to halt the federal Liberal government 
from infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 
petition today that I will read to you: 
 
 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 
 
 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 
 
 That a proposed Battle Creek dam would improve the 

ability of retaining water for licensed water users and 
for irrigation for forage crops; 

 
 That such a dam would improve ability for flexible and 

efficient water management and reduce susceptibility to 
drought impacts for irrigation. 

 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will support the proposed Battle Creek dam 
project and work with the federal government with an 
end means to proceeding with such a project. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
There's 163 petitioners, Mr. Speaker, and they're mostly from 
the Consul and Vidora area. 
 
I will read the prayer of this other petition. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure  

 program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these come from all over Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and I'm happy to table all of these today. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I as well 
have petitions regarding the Battle Creek dam project and the 
need for it. Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the Consul, 
Maple Creek areas, Golden Prairie, of the south-western part of 
the province. And I'm pleased to be able to present these 
petitions on their behalf this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I as well 
would like to present some petitions to the floor of the 
Assembly. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will support the proposed Battle Creek dam 
project and work with the federal government with an 
end means to proceeding with such a project. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Vidora, 
Consul, Maple Creek, Frontier, and Shaunavon areas of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition and I will read the prayer. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will support the proposed Battle Creek dam 
project and work with the federal government with an 
end means to proceeding with such a project. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these come from mostly in the Consul area, and I 
would like to table that at this time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
have some petitions I would like to lay on the Table this 
afternoon, and I will read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 That the petition of the undersigned citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth that 
individuals in the communities and surrounding areas of 
Hague, Hepburn, Rosthern, Waldheim, Laird, Duck 
Lake, and Beardy's First Nation are currently being 
discriminated against by SaskTel for choosing to live in 
rural Saskatchewan, and that these residents must pay 
for long-distance charges that other urban and rural 
residents do not; and further, that these long-distance 
charges are preventing residents in these areas access to  



April 19, 1995 

 
1594 

 everyday and emergency services such as hospital, 
ambulance, doctors, church, RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), and schools. 

 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge SaskTel to expand the 
Sask Valley long-distance boundary. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these residents have signed from the communities 
such as Hague, Hepburn, Rosthern, Waldheim, Duck Lake, 
Laird, and Beardy's First Nation as well. And it gives me 
pleasure to lay these on the Table at this time. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate funding to the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Earlier today, at Government House, tribute 
was paid to 16 Saskatchewan recipients of national and 
provincial honours. These 16 recipients and their guests are 
seated in the Speaker's gallery. We want to recognize them in 
the Legislative Chamber today. I want to call upon the Premier, 
then the member from Moosomin, on behalf of the Leader of 
the . . . I'm sorry. I'll call upon the Leader of the Opposition and 
then I'll call upon the Leader of the Third Party to make a few 
remarks. MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) will 
then have an opportunity to introduce their constituents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is indeed my pleasure, on behalf of the government side, to pay 
tribute to those distinguished guests whom you've identified in 
your gallery. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier made some 
presentations on behalf of myself — unfortunately I had to be 
in Saskatoon — and hosted a luncheon at Government House 
for the 16 people that we are honouring today. Present was the 
Lieutenant Governor and Mrs. Wiebe, yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Moosomin, representing the Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the Third Party, and other members 
of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are honouring in a very small way but I believe 
in a very meaningful way, some truly remarkable people  
individuals who have given generously of themselves  

to their country, their province, and their fellow citizens. 
 
There are the members of the Order of Canada who have made 
their mark nationally; members of the Saskatchewan Order of 
Merit who have been honoured by our very own province; 
members of the Order of Military Merit who have devoted their 
careers to the cause of peace; and recipients of bravery 
decorations who have placed their lives on the line for their 
fellow human beings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is humbling for all of us to be in the presence of 
such dedicated, selfless people. But it also makes us proud to 
realize that there are so many exemplary citizens in this 
province whose business we conduct in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members may recall the words of the new 
Governor General at his installation recently in Ottawa when he 
said to the media: let's give good news a chance. 
 
Let's give good news a chance. Mr. Speaker, that's what we 
have right here today: good news; something to be grateful for 
this Easter season; people of goodwill, of virtue, and of 
courage; people we admire and we look up to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago we honoured Saskatchewan 
peacekeepers. We are soon to recognize our volunteers through 
the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. In these small but heartfelt 
ways we are able to draw public attention to the positive in our 
society and to thank those individuals who make it all happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in warmly 
congratulating our honours recipients this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with the Premier and 
government members and all members of the Assembly to 
welcome these distinguished guests to the Assembly this 
afternoon. Their tremendous contribution to our province and to 
our country is indeed a tremendous accomplishment, and we 
certainly are appreciative of the opportunity to welcome them 
here to the Assembly. 
 
At a time in society when people all across Canada are looking 
for heroes, I think is to be said that these indeed are the true 
heroes all across Canada. And we certainly look up to the 
people in the Assembly today and welcome them here: six 
recipients of the Order of Canada, three recipients of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit, three recipients of the Order of 
Military Merit, and three recipients of bravery decorations. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we would join, as I said, with the 
Premier in welcoming them here this afternoon, and on their 
accomplishments and goodwill. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join 
with the Premier, the government members, and the opposition,  



April 19, 1995 

 
1595 

in welcoming to the legislature these exceptional citizens of our 
province. What is striking about these 16 men and women is 
that, while their individual achievements are markedly different, 
their characteristics as a group are readily identified. 
 
These people share common values about the importance of 
helping their fellow human beings, a common devotion to their 
professions, a shared loyalty to their country, their province, 
their communities, and their families. They are, Mr. Speaker, 
what we have come to know as representatives of the true 
Saskatchewan tradition. 
 
It has been said that the most extraordinary thing about 
extraordinary people is just how ordinary they are. I believe that 
the achievements and aspirations, the hopes and dreams of our 
special guests, mirror us as a people and as a province, 
underlying not just what we have been, but more importantly, 
what we want to become. 
 
To each of our guests and to your families, I extend my warmest 
appreciation and respect to you from the third party for your 
achievements made on behalf of us all. We thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to the 
Assembly, Dr. Louis Horlick, officer of the Order of Canada 
and member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
Accompanying Dr. Louis Horlick is his spouse and respected 
helpmate, Ruth. I would ask them both to stand, and I would 
ask members of the legislature to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Once again it is 
my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mrs. Peggy 
McKercher, member of the Order of Canada. Accompanying 
her is her spouse and law-abiding chauffeur, Bob. I would ask 
them both to stand to be welcomed to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's my 
privilege to introduce to you and members of the Assembly 
today, seated in your gallery, Mrs. Anna Ingham, who has 
dedicated her life to educating children and serves as 
outstanding role model as an educator across Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, Mrs. Anna Ingham, member of the Order of Canada, 
accompanied today by her daughter-in-law. I'd ask them to 
please stand and have all members of the Assembly join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my 
privilege today to introduce Mr. Robert Mossing, member of 
the Order of Canada. If you could stand, please, Mr. Mossing, 
and be recognized. There, thank you. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like the members of 
the Assembly to join me in recognizing Mrs. Theresa 
Stevenson, member of the Order of Canada. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Howard 
Stensrud, member of the Order of Canada, with his wife Rita, 
and commend Howie for his dedicated work over the years — if 
you'd stand, please — and ask all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, Chief Warrant Officer Gordon Cooper, member of 
the Order of Military Merit; accompanied by his spouse Iris 
who has been with him in his many travels and many years in 
different postings. I'd like to ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege for me 
to introduce to members of the Assembly, Petty Officer 2nd 
Class Angus Skinner, member of the Order of Military Merit, 
who is accompanied today by his wife Carol, and that we would 
please to acknowledge both of them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a privilege to introduce this afternoon Chief Warrant 
Officer Allan Wilson, member of the Order of Military Merit, 
and his wife who's accompanying him today. Please join with 
me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 
great privilege to introduce to you and through you to members 
of the Assembly, Dr. Robert Ferguson and his wife Norma. Dr. 
Ferguson is a member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit and 
a member of the Order of Canada. Please join me in welcoming 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. It's a privilege 
for me to introduce to you and members of the Assembly, Mrs. 
Willy Hodgson and her husband Bill. Willy Hodgson is a 
member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my  



April 19, 1995 

 
1596 

privilege today to introduce Dr. William Riddell, member of the 
Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and his daughter Cathy. 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
introduce two gentlemen who won their bravery decorations 
together in exactly the same incident. I'd like members of the 
Assembly to extend congratulations to Mr. Norman Hales, if 
you'd please stand, and also to Mr. Dave Hill, both recipients of 
the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my honour on behalf of the Hon. Minister of 
Finance to introduce Mr. Lyle Schweighardt, a recipient of the 
Medal of Bravery, with his wife Patti. If members would 
welcome them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 
to you and through you to members of the Assembly, two 
people who are here to represent the spirit of Lorelle 
Schoenfeld. They are Ms. Mary McCarron-Egner and Mr. Cec 
McCarron, who are parents of the late Lorelle Schoenfeld, who 
was the posthumous recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to take a moment on 
behalf of our caucus, as well, to acknowledge Mary and Cec 
and to recognize the diligent work that their daughter did in this 
Assembly, having been on the legislative review committee; let 
them know how much we appreciated her. And I believe we 
miss her as much as you do. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, we have the privilege of having visiting the building 
today a group of public servants who, as members will know, 
visit this building and find out what we do and where we do it 
and how we go about our business. The guests are in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, at the west end of your gallery, and they 
are employees of the Department of Justice, SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), the 
Legislative Library, and the departments of Finance, Labour, 
and Highways. 
 
I would like to introduce them to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to members of the House and welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly,  

five individuals from my neck of the woods. These are 
volunteer workers in the communities that I just had the 
privilege of presenting 2,268 names in a petition to SaskTel. 
And I would like to introduce Frances Wagner, Ralph and 
Valerie Schidlowsky, Karen Lehmann, and Angele Lanavaz. 
 
So I would ask all members please to help me introduce these 
individuals who are here for meetings and would certainly 
appreciate an impromptu meeting with the minister responsible 
for SaskTel. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd also like to join 
the member of Yorkton in welcoming Mrs. Anna Ingham here 
today from Yorkton. Mrs. Ingham was a very close friend of 
mine and a mentor of mine. I had the privilege of being in a 
number of her workshops and her being in my classroom 
several times. 
 
She taught me many valuable lessons as she's created a number 
of lifelong learners throughout the province; and of course one 
of those was that a mistake is an opportunity to learn. 
 
I'd like all the members here to help me welcome Mrs. Ingham 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Flexi-Coil Expansion 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
was pleased to take part in the ceremonies marking a significant 
plant expansion by Flexi-Coil Ltd. of Saskatoon. 
 
This expansion will create close to 200 new jobs each year over 
the next two to three years. As you know, Mr. Speaker, 
Flexi-Coil is a good Saskatchewan . . . Saskatoon corporate 
citizen. It is a private company established by the Summach 
family in 1954 and now has 1,400 employees. This makes it 
western Canada's largest farm machinery manufacturer. 
 
Flexi-Coil manufactures short-line agricultural equipment for 
markets in North America, Australia, Europe, and South 
America. We are all pleased at this announcement and I am 
happy that the tax relief measures announced in the budget will 
accelerate the growth of Flexi-Coil and other growing and 
innovative Saskatchewan companies. Reduction in the 
corporate income tax rate and the 9 per cent investment tax 
credit for capital purchases frees companies to invest in 
job-creating developments such as this. 
 
Technology-oriented, trade-centred, fast-growing companies 
like Flexi-Coil are a specific focus of the Partnership for 
Renewal strategy. A key part of the partnership is the role of 
local authorities. So in addition, I congratulate the city of 
Saskatoon and the Saskatoon Regional Economic Development  



April 19, 1995 

 
1597 

Authority for working with Flexi-Coil to facilitate this 
announcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the history of Flexi-Coil is one of continual 
growth and expansion. I congratulate the management and the 
staff for its success and wish them the best in the future. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expansion of St. Volodymyr Villa 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I pay tribute today to the 
board and residents of St. Volodymyr Villa, a non-profit 
organization in Saskatoon Eastview that provides housing to 
seniors. They are developing the second phase of the housing 
that features 50 additional independent living units in a 
three-storey structure which seniors can obtain through life 
lease purchases. This option will be available for seniors who 
want an independent lifestyle and are more mobile, yet desire 
the security and sense of community. 
 
St. Volodymyr began as a special millennium project for 
Ukrainian Catholics in Saskatchewan, which recognized the 
pioneer status of the many who came from the Ukraine who 
were seniors and who had housing needs. With support from 
the provincial government, the city of Saskatoon, and the 
Ukrainian community, St. Volodymyr Villa has proven to meet 
the goals of its founders. 
 
While the initiative was developed by the Ukrainian people, the 
project is open to people of all nationalities and many others are 
also able to enjoy the sense of belonging that exists at the villa. 
I've been at St. Volodymyr on many occasions, Mr. Speaker. 
The atmosphere and the people are very warm and I wish them 
well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Red Wings win Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League Championship 

 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again Weyburn 
is the home of hockey champions. The Weyburn Red Wings 
won the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Championship 
and the Hanbidge Cup, after defeating the North Battleford 
North Stars with a hard-fought 6-5 victory on Friday night in 
North Battleford. 
 
Weyburn earned the honour by winning the best of seven series 
in five games — no offence to the hon. member from The 
Battlefords. 
 
Weyburn is the first team since the '86-87 Humboldt Broncos to 
win the Hanbidge Cup in two consecutive years. Winning two 
years in a row demonstrates the success of the hockey program 
in Weyburn; and to capture the championship with a road 
victory says a lot about the character of this team. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of the players on 
the Weyburn Red Wings team, the coaches, and the trainers for 
their hard work and dedication. 
 
I would also like to wish them the best of luck as they now 
move on to the Anavet Cup against the Manitoba champion. 
The winner will advance to the Centennial Cup national final in 
Ontario. 
 
I know the Weyburn Red Wings will represent Saskatchewan 
well as the team gets ready for future competition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Youth Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud today to 
congratulate Jason Dubois for receiving the Youth Television 
network's national youth award. 
 
Jason is one of the young citizens of Rosetown that makes the 
Rosetown community very, very proud. Jason is a 
pre-administration student at the University of Regina. He is 
also president of the Saskatchewan chapter of SADD, Students 
Against Drunk Driving. 
 
As we know, representatives from SADD were key advocates in 
the recent hearings of the all-party committee on safe driving. 
For his efforts with SADD, Jason was recently chosen as one of 
only 16 youth across Canada to receive this achievement award 
given by the YTV, the Youth Television network. More than 
2,000 youth were nominated for the award, so Jason has been 
selected from a large and talented group, making this 
achievement even more notable. The award carries with it a 
cheque for $3,000 which I'm sure he'll spend responsibly. 
 
Jason and the other winners were able to attend a number of 
functions in Ottawa surrounding the awards ceremony. The 
awards ceremony took place on April 6 and was broadcast on 
YTV on April 8. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of Jason's contribution. He continues 
in the tradition of hard work, achievement, and community 
building of his parents and grandparents. Jason's community is 
proud of the fact that he is making such a positive contribution 
to Saskatchewan life, and I'm delighted that his contribution is 
receiving national recognition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carlton Trail Regional Science Fair 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
recently I had the pleasure of being one of 56 people to judge a 
group of young scientists from my riding who are proving that 
they have innovative ideas for the future. 
 
Two hundred eighty-six students displaying 183 projects from  



April 19, 1995 

 
1598 

11 schools recently participated in the Carlton Trail regional 
science fair at Viscount School. These schools included St. 
Augustine in Humboldt, Bruno, Strasbourg, Wynyard, 
Viscount, St. Brieux, Watson, St. Louis, Raymore, Leroy, and 
Lake Lenore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were dozens of winners, too numerous to 
mention in a member's statement, but I will mention a few. 
Carla Harris from Raymore School and Brett Suchan and 
Patrick Telfer from St. Augustine School were Canada-wide 
winners who will compete at the Canada-wide science fair at 
Whitehorse, Yukon at the end of May. 
 
Top honours in the winners' showcase went to Laura Huber and 
Lesley Prefontaine from Bruno; Wayne Gwillim and Jennifer 
Maxwell from Strasbourg; and Darren Stroeder and Evan 
Jenkins from St. Augustine School in Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Peter Pavelich received the distinguished 
service award by the Youth Science Foundation for his work 
with science fairs over the past 11 years — a very deserving 
award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of the winners, the 
participants, and the organizers of this science fair which has 
and will continue to play an important part in the education of 
our children. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I notice in the west gallery here, an 
individual whom the Minister of Justice admonished the other 
day to set his sights on the present member of Moosomin in the 
upcoming provincial elections. I think he's indicated that he was 
having some problems with this member, but he was an 
individual who won the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
nomination in the Moosomin constituency of Whitewood the 
other day and I'd like members to recognize a businessman from 
Whitewood, Mr. Glen Gatin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the minister of Gaming, 
gambling. Madam Minister, a University of Winnipeg 
economics professor has just completed a year-long study of the 
human costs of expanded gambling. He estimates that VLTs 
(video lottery terminal) and casinos in that province cause a 
social cost of about $135 million per year — $135 million per  

year, Madam Minister, in a province roughly about the same 
size as Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, do you believe that the social cost of the NDP 
gambling expansion in Saskatchewan to be similar in amount, 
and what studies have you done to measure that impact here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll thank the member for his question. 
Mr. Speaker, when we first embarked on dealing with some of 
these issues more recently, the figures that we have indicate that 
Saskatchewan has one of the very lowest addiction rates in 
Canada in the area of gaming. And one of the things that Suren 
also says in his report — which you neglected to mention — 
that if these revenues are going to be received then we must 
find ways to deal with the problems. 
 
Now I think this government has been very proactive on a 
number of fronts in dealing with the problems. We've had a 
policy of control and regulation. We've had a policy of limited 
access to gaming. We've had a policy of redistribution of 
revenues. We've had a policy of treatment, prevention. And, I 
think, in all ways we fulfil the kinds of things that the professor 
is asking for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, the 
study indicates that gambling in Manitoba results in $60 million 
in lost wages and other cost to pathological gamblers. It results 
in $10 million lost to the families of problem gamblers. It 
results in about $46 million in lost profits to small business as a 
result of the diversion of consumer spending. 
 
Madam Minister, Manitoba is a similar-size province to 
Saskatchewan. You have undertaken a similar gambling 
expansion program as they have in Manitoba as well. One 
would assume that the social costs should be somewhat similar 
to Manitoba's. 
 
Madam Minister, why won't you commission a study to look 
into this matter further? Isn't it because you know the problems 
you are causing are every bit as serious in Manitoba and in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will remind 
the member opposite that it was a Tory government there 
greatly expanded the gaming and in fact has created much of 
the problem for the Saskatchewan hospitality industry by 
creating a drain across the border. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What? No bingo for an excuse today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well we've had 15 years of the effects 
of expanded bingo without any responsibility for any of the  



April 19, 1995 

 
1599 

impacts. But if you guys want to take responsibility for that, I 
won't ease you away from that necessity. 
 
But I will have to say that, Mr. Speaker, neither alcoholism, 
drug addiction, nor gaming addiction, are excuses before the 
law for committing a crime. And although you may think that 
those are legitimate defences, we think there is a role for 
personal responsibility. 
 
We're very concerned about the impacts. We have limited more 
than any other place. In fact if we were doing what Mr. Klein 
was doing in Alberta, we would then have other Liberal 
members joining the call for them to follow Saskatchewan's 
responsible approach to developing gaming policy. 
 
I can only say that we're not happy that gaming has expanded to 
the degree it is, but in our society there a number of things that 
develop, and we do our best to control, regulate, and mitigate 
the impacts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, you 
say you're not happy with the way gambling has expanded here 
in Saskatchewan. Well it's you that allowed it — you and your 
government that allowed the expansion of gambling here in 
Saskatchewan. You had a choice, Madam Minister. You chose, 
as a government, to allow expanded government . . . expanded 
gaming. Professor Suren says that it does not take into account 
additional costs such as additional loan defaults, bankruptcies, 
the cost of treating gambling addicts and their families, and the 
loss due to increased crime. 
 
Madam Minister, this is another area that we're trying to get you 
to look into and to study. You won't even admit that there's a 
link between VLTs and increased crime, even though five 
Saskatchewan people have been charged and convicted with 
stealing from their churches, charities, and employers, in order 
to fund VLT addictions. 
 
Madam Minister, why won't you conduct a study to show the 
link between VLTs and crime? Why are you so afraid of finding 
out the truth about these issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm a little bit 
reluctant to make this next comment because the police chief in 
Regina has been asked not to be dragged into the debate in the 
House, but these are our people who are responsible for 
policing. They have said that they can derive no direct link 
between crime . . . For example, today I listened to a radio 
program talking about young people and car thefts. This has 
nothing to do with VLTs. It is a different type of social problem 
which — they were discussing — really led back to the strength 
of families and the role of families in keeping kids on the 
straight and narrow, so to speak. 
 
So it might be very convenient at this point to blame all of  

society's ills on VLTs; the fact is many of these conditions were 
existent and growing much before the introduction of this 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Underground Storage Tanks 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister for the Environment. Mr. Minister, it seems that 
every time the Premier puts you in charge of something, you 
end up facing a multimillion dollar lawsuit. 
 
First you broke GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
contracts and farmers are suing you; and now you've broken 
your commitment to the service station owners and they're 
considering suing you for $200 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, why have you failed to live up to your 
commitment to Saskatchewan service station owners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well I want to thank the member for his 
question. I want to say I think the member opposite is aware of 
this because at one point, and I may read his quote later on in 
the House, he congratulated us for having taken the position we 
did in solving the mess that the previous government left, the 
underground storage tank issue, in, and so I want to 
acknowledge that support from the member opposite. 
 
And I want also to say that I want to remind members that 
members of the Environmental Fairness Association 
participated in the review of that ill-begotten program that you 
started, and actually came up with a solution that was to 
everybody's agreement. 
 
The issue that was unresolved was the issue of contaminated 
site liability. The issue of contaminated site liability goes much 
more broadly into the economy than the underground storage 
tank issue of service station owners. 
 
It's been the subject of a national round-table review which has 
made recommendations about 12 principles that should be used 
in putting it forward. And we, last year, put out a discussion 
paper, which we should be receiving a report on in the next 
month or two, on the whole issue of a contaminated site 
liability. And I believe the Environmental Fairness Association 
is aware of that process as well. 
 
So I can assure you, the member opposite, that this issue is 
proceeding as you congratulated us for wanting it to proceed 
only a few months ago. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
did indeed congratulate you on some procedures when it looked 
like you were going to do something. But unfortunately that 
hasn't come to pass and now the service station owners are 
suing you. 
 
Your fuel tank regulations are going to drive hundreds of  



April 19, 1995 

 
1600 

service station owners out of business. Last September your 
department assured the environmental fairness agency that you 
were working towards a solution to this problem, that you 
would report back to the EFA (Environmental Fairness 
Association) in December, and they're still waiting, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you dragging your feet? Why do service 
station owners have to threaten to sue you just to try and get a 
meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I could assure you there is 
no need for any of that kind of action to get a meeting. You can 
check  I go to meetings daily without any of this sort of 
intervention. 
 
I want to repeat to the member opposite that the issue of 
underground storage tanks was one that was addressed 
successfully, as a result of the hazardous substance regulations 
advisory group report and regulations which was signed onto by 
the Environmental Fairness Association with the proviso that 
that did not include any consideration of the question of 
contaminated site liability. 
 
And the issue of contaminated site liability, as I just described, 
is not one where one rushes in and declares an answer. The 
issues around contaminated site liability begin with the 
principle that says the polluter should pay and ends with 
another 11 principles that describe who should be responsible 
in the event that it's difficult to identify the polluter. 
 
Those discussions have been going on with business and 
industry and environmental groups across Saskatchewan for the 
last six months. The fact that no consensus has emerged on that 
subject is the reason why there has been no final report tabled. 
They are looking for a consensus on some of the tricky issues 
surrounding that issue, and I would appreciate your positive 
support for resolving those issues, that industry has. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess when 
the minister says he isn't going to rush in, that means he is 
clearly not going to do anything until after an election. And, 
Mr. Minister, that's not good enough. 
 
You're threatening the livelihoods of hundreds — hundreds — 
of small-business owners and you refuse to give them an 
answer because you don't want to deal with it before an 
election. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you provide an answer today? You talk about 
the polluter pays; do you intend to pick up any part of the costs 
of these regulatory changes? After all, the government taxation 
represents almost 50 per cent of the price at the pumps. Or are 
you just going to run hundreds of small service stations out of 
business by forcing them to shoulder the entire costs? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know whether the 
member opposite has been out on the tractor without a muffler 
or whether he's intentionally ignoring my answers. But may I 
repeat, that the collection of representatives agreed to this report 
several months ago and that program has been implemented, 
and that is the program that deals with the upgrading of storage 
facilities. 
 
The issue of contaminated site liability is the question of what 
do you do with the spills that occur because some time in the 
past somebody didn't upgrade in time. And that is a very 
difficult question because it's like the question of: what do you 
do with tailings from mines, and what do you do with spills 
from refineries and other industries at a time before we were 
aware of all the concerns in this regard? That is a very broad 
question. 
 
But just on the central principle about which you ask, I want to 
say that even the Environmental Fairness Association in respect 
to another issue that was raised some time ago, last summer, the 
EFA, he explains, agrees that if there is a problem then it should 
be cleaned up and the person or company which is shown to be 
responsible with the problem should be held liable for the 
clean-up costs. 
 
So there isn't a lot of question about that first principle on the 
contaminated site liability question. The question is what do 
you do when you can't find the person or the body responsible. 
And that's a long discussion. 
 
As I invited you earlier, I would hope that you would be 
positively involved in the discussion to bring consensus to this 
very difficult issue where we need to blend society's interests 
with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 

SGEU Health Benefits 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Over 
the past few weeks we've been talking about the need for 
government to lead by example and to set a standard. But this 
government has set a double standard, Mr. Speaker — a double 
standard for labour with the new Crown tendering policy, a 
double standard for political staff with raises for ministerial 
assistants, and a double standard for pensions with the Premier 
and his colleagues. The government is setting a double 
standard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my question is to the Premier this afternoon. How do you 
explain, sir, the increasing number of privileges and rights to 
the chosen few in Saskatchewan that is creating one set of rules 
for one group and another set of rules for absolutely everyone 
else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am always pleased 
to respond to questions from the Leader of the Liberal Party  



April 19, 1995 

 
1601 

when she talks about leadership and setting examples because 
she is the best example of poor leadership when it comes to 
special privileges, because she is the only one in this Legislative 
Assembly who took a 37 per cent increase in her personal pay 
simply because she had an increase in one member of her 
caucus. 
 
Now as the member from Regina Elphinstone said here one day 
recently in the House, if that's how much extra money it takes to 
manage that member, new addition to the caucus, then I'll tell 
you, she'd better take a good second look at whether he should 
be welcome in that operation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I mean that's an example of leadership, Mr. 
Speaker, that this province doesn't need. This government has 
shown leadership and whenever there is a problem as . . . that 
needs to be addressed, this government has addressed it. And it 
will continue to address questions that like the likes of which 
the member from Greystone raises here today and other 
questions, because this government has set a good example and 
has provided leadership and will continue to do so in this term 
and the next. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, ordinary Saskatchewan 
people are questioning this government's choices. In spite of 
atrocious tax increases, less and less is being covered under the 
NDP wellness program — unless of course you happen to be 
part of the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' 
Union). 
 
The new Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union 
agreement signed on March 29 will offer every health care 
benefit under the sun to its members, Mr. Speaker, while the 
average people struggle to pay their own way. Effective 
September 30, 1996, SGEU members will have 100 per cent 
coverage for drugs; eye exams, glasses, contact lenses, are all 
part of the package. Diabetic supplies, ambulance services, 
private health rooms . . . hospital rooms, orthopedic shoes — 
and get this, Mr. Speaker — even hairpieces and massage 
therapy will be paid for by who? The taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now to the Premier: are you going to defend this excessive 
benefits package the same way that you defend your pension? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, it's just quite an incorrect 
categorization that the member gives to the package that was 
settled upon. The first thing to remember is that the SGEU took 
no wage increase over a three-year agreement. 
 
They took a very modest cost increase and we were very, very 
careful and very conservative about estimating these costs, 
which kept the package within very acceptable limits. There is 
nothing in the first year, a small amount in the second year, a 
small amount in the third year; but these benefits were very  

carefully costed and they are really a very small amount 
considering the increases in the cost of living, considering other 
factors that underlie claims for increases and improvements in 
the collective bargaining agreement. 
 
So we're not the least bit ashamed of that package. That 
package is a very, very favourable package as far as the 
governments are concerned and as far as the people of 
Saskatchewan are concerned. We're not attacking our public 
servants, rolling their wages back or asking them to take big 
wage decreases like other Liberal governments across this 
country. But we're not giving an increase in wages at the same 
time. But we are extending some small increase in benefits and 
the member categorizes them quite erroneously. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find 
it most interesting when they talk about leadership. If they want 
to give people a raise, have enough guts to give them a raise, 
but you shouldn't use health care as a perk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental error by an out-of-touch 
government. And while seniors in this province struggle to 
afford their prescription drugs, the Premier of this province 
defends his gold-plated pension plan and families that I can 
name have actually had to go out and get extra jobs to pay for 
insulin. And now this government plans to spend scarce health 
care resources to top up union salaries that already exceed what 
the average person earns. 
 
My question is: how can you justify this double standard? And, 
sir, you add up the amount that this could come to — in dental 
benefits and every other kind of benefit that is now on the table 
— and it adds up to thousands, potentially thousands of dollars 
per person. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Oh, that is just wild and nonsense, Mr. 
Speaker. There is absolutely no factual basis for the Leader of 
the Third Party making a statement like that. 
 
As I have said, the SGEU, on behalf of all of the people 
employed by executive government, took a zero wage increase, 
a zero wage increase. To some extent in the second year and to 
some slightly greater extent in the third year, we extended 
benefits to them, benefits that apply to all of the employees of 
executive government. The amount is not large. The amount 
could not amount to thousands of dollars per person as the 
member said. On average it will amount to only a few dollars 
per person. 
 
And it's really quite astonishing that the Leader of the Third 
Party should attack a settlement which has . . . in effect, three 
years of zero — three years of zero. When was the last time that 
a government has gone to the bargaining table and negotiated 
three years of a zero per cent wage increase? Mr. Speaker, it's 
quite appalling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 19, 1995 

 
1602 

Deficit Reduction Surtax 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week we 
would like to again present questions submitted to us by the 
people of the province. As you're aware, the Assembly was not 
sitting yesterday, which is our usual day for asking these 
questions. However we believe that the concerns expressed by 
the public are important for us not to skip a week. 
 
Mr. Premier, this question comes from Ruth Davis from 
Tuxford: I want to know why the deficit reduction surtax of 10 
per cent on Saskatchewan income tax is not being totally 
eliminated now that the budget has been balanced. If it is not 
removed, it appears that this is just another tax grab by the 
present government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much 
for that question, the hon. member and the person who wrote 
the hon. member. 
 
The first order of business was to eliminate the deficit for the 
obvious reason, that every year's shortfall adds to the debt, the 
main principal, the main mortgage. We have now done that 
successfully, we meaning the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, all of us, by I think some good goals and some 
good planning and some good luck and a lot of hard work and 
sacrifice by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But unfortunately that's only part of the problem. The other part 
of the problem is that we are still facing I think probably one of 
the largest, if not the largest, per capita debts of any province in 
Canada. And that debt generates, roughly speaking, an interest 
rate charge yearly on our taxes of $850 million, which money 
goes to New York, to Hong Kong, to Zürich, to London, to 
Paris, to Toronto, to Montreal. And if we're lucky enough to 
have Saskatchewan savings bonds, thank goodness some of it 
stays at home. So what we have to do now is make sure that the 
debt is tackled. 
 
Now what we've done as a reward to the people of 
Saskatchewan for their sacrifice is reduced the deficit surcharge 
effective July 1, 150 per taxpayer, 300 per two-income 
tax-paying family. And it will be applied toward the next task 
which is long-term debt reduction which, as you know, we 
anticipate will be reduced by 1.2 billion by the end of March 
31, 1999. I think it's responsible planning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Biodiversity Program 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
have a question for the Premier. And I'm glad to see that we 
were able to flush him out relatively easy today and that he will 
have the courage to answer this question as well. 
 
This question, Mr. Speaker, comes from Peter Jonker from  

Saskatoon: Mr. Premier, I want to know why your government 
chooses to pay only lip service to the need to set aside large 
areas of Saskatchewan wilderness from human development. 
We were committed to setting aside 12 per cent by 2000 A.D. 
To date we have set aside less than 3 per cent. Your record in 
this area is a joke, an insult to our natural heritage, and those 
who wish to protect it. 
 
Mr. Premier, would you please respond to Peter Jonker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for that 
question to the member opposite. The fact is that Saskatchewan 
has launched in the last few years an ambitious program of 
setting a process in place to identify areas in order to preserve 
biodiversity in Saskatchewan, consistent with the national 
biodiversity program. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, who is having 
trouble listening at the moment that the — who is trying to 
introduce other issues into this debate; that he doesn't want to 
hear the answer that he knows is going to be coming — that 
what has been identified as space that is set aside in 
Saskatchewan, there are 3.4 million acres from the wildlife 
habitat protection legislation that are not recognized in the 
numbers that Mr. Jonker has there. 
 
And I want to say to Mr. Jonker that we are strong believers and 
advocates in establishing the necessary protection for 
biodiversity in Saskatchewan. Yes, it is a major challenge. 
Saskatchewan, as I said in speeches before, with 50 million 
cultivated acres in the southern half of the province, is one of 
the most altered ecosystems anywhere. That's our history. 
 
Now we have to set in place a path to achieve protection of the 
areas where the . . . so the biodiversity of . . . that makes up the 
basis for life is protected. I'm telling you and Mr. Jonker that 
that process is in place. And I invite him to call me or sit down 
and meet with me and we'll discuss the full story in what 
Saskatchewan is doing in this regard, not the least of which is 
our new forest Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GRIP Changes 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
comes from Elizabeth Neustaeter of Swift Current, and she 
says: Mr. Premier, I want to know how come you are so 
concerned about the CN (Canadian National) strike and the 
Crow demise when you changed GRIP so that almost nobody 
would qualify for a pay-out. Why always blame the federal 
government for everything? What are you doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the aspects pertaining to 
the GRIP funds, I think, have been explained to this House 
many, many times before, and so I will not take the time of the 
member or the House to further elaborate on the defences and 
explanations made by my colleague, the Minister of 
Agriculture. 



April 19, 1995 

 
1603 

What we have here however is not a question of blame; what 
we have here is a very radical, major change in the Crow rate 
plan. And while I know the member from Morse will say . . . 
from Thunder Creek will say that it's not his question, it's the 
questioner's question, it was he himself as a member of this 
House who voted in favour of a motion that his party 
introduced  I think the word used was  condemning the 
change in the Crow rate. 
 
Because there's no doubt about it, this is a massive change. It 
involves delivery points. It's going to have a big impact on 
trading patterns, trucking costs, and matters of this nature, as is 
of course the strike. 
 
And I think it was this member as well who stood up and urged 
us day after day to take strong action in telling the Liberal 
government to do something about the strike and the Crow rate. 
 
So we're, as the lawyers say, we are at consensus ad idem. We 
have a meeting of minds on this. And this is not a matter of 
beating up on the federal government. That's not my objective. 
My objective is to work with them, to work fairly with them, to 
speak up for Saskatchewan first and foremost. And it was in the 
interest of Saskatchewan to speak up on the issue of the Crow, 
as we continue to do so and as we will do so from time to time 
when disputes like the strike enter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 
item no. 1, I would move that the motion be converted to 
motion for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 1, motion for return (debate). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of my remarks I will be moving second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act. 

Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation was 
established by The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act of 
1973, the role of the corporation was to provide affordable and 
adequate housing to persons of low income. The role of the 
corporation has expanded considerably since 1993 and The 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 1995 
primarily enlarges the objectives and powers of the corporation 
to ensure the objectives and powers are consistent with past and 
present operating practices and broad enough not to constrict 
future housing activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the expanded powers will enable the corporation 
to participate in a federal housing agency program which will 
reduce the interest paid by the province on existing loans for its 
non-profit housing portfolio and potentially reduce the interest 
paid on existing loans for other housing portfolios. 
 
(1430) 
 
Other amendments are of an administration or a housekeeping 
nature and include: updating the nature . . . the name of the 
federal housing agency from Central Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation to Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation; 
deleting the definition of general manager and changing the title 
of the chief executive officer of the corporation from general 
manager to president; deleting reference in the Act to 
employees and staff of the corporation as all employees were 
enrolled in the public services on July 1, 1993; and reducing the 
size of the corporation's board of directors to one person and 
consequential amendments as a result of the reduction. 
 
It will also delete references to obsolete housing programs. It 
will reword the section pertaining to the incorporation of public 
housing authorities to clarify the powers invested in the housing 
authorities and their accountability to the corporation, and to 
include provisions for the naming of a housing authority on 
incorporation. 
 
It will clarify what loans administered by the corporation are 
subject to the existing exemption from The Limitation of Civil 
Rights Act and The Land Contract (Actions) Act. It will correct 
the omissions of the Act from consequential amendments to 
The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991 by amending the annual 
report section of the Act to comply with the reporting 
requirements of The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, certainly 
we'd like to take some time to review this piece of legislation 
before we would allow the debate to proceed beyond second 
reading and into Committee of the Whole. 
 
In listening to some of the remarks the minister has made and 
the fact of tying in with federal funding, I would think that any 
time you have an opportunity to tie into a federal program is 
certainly something that is commendable. And of course when 
we look at housing across this province and the number of 
individuals who through the years have been assisted through  



April 19, 1995 

 
1604 

the Sask Housing program, it certainly has been a program that 
has helped people establish themselves and get started and 
aided in a number of ways. And we certainly don't want to take 
away from the program. 
 
However, it would be appropriate for us to, before we just 
proceed and allow this Bill to move right through the Assembly, 
it would be appropriate to take the time to really review it, and 
review it in depth so that any questions that may be there, any 
concerns that the public may have, would be addressed so that 
at the end of the day, we would feel, and the government could 
feel, quite confident that this is a piece of legislation that will 
continue to meet the needs of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And therefore at this time I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 54 — An Act 
to establish an Aboriginal Courtworkers Commission be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
make a few comments regarding Bill No. 54, An Act to 
establish an Aboriginal Courtworkers Commission. 
 
As I understand it, I believe what the Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is 
it establishes an independent commission to provide 
courtworker services to native alleged offenders and alleged 
young offenders. And it's something I believe our aboriginal 
community has certainly been seeking and looking forward to 
receiving . . . or looking forward to having a part in the court 
process in dealing with offenders from their background. 
 
And I also understand the Bill gives these courtworkers, or we 
understand these courtworkers will have, a broad mandate to 
help aboriginal people deal with the court system and obtain 
legal counsel to reduce cultural and linguistic barriers and to 
provide liaison services to the community. And certainly it 
would seem that this is a worthwhile goal to be pushing for. 
 
I also understand the commission also has the ability to make 
grants to individuals or groups presumably to pay for court 
costs. And this is something that we will have to raise with the 
minister when we get into the debate in the committee as to the 
reasoning for these grants to individuals or groups to ensure 
that the money will be indeed used wisely, or indeed to see 
whether or not this is money that will be well spent or needs to 
be spent at all. And there's some questions that will arise from 
that area of the Bill. 
 

Some of the concerns we have with the Bill, Mr. Speaker, as we 
have seen with sentencing circles, we are concerned this may 
create a two-tiered legal system. And that's something that we 
need to take a careful look at and certainly address and make 
sure that our system continues to treat people in this province 
fairly, regardless of race or religion or nationality or creed. 
 
Although we recognize and sympathize with legal problems 
often faced by natives, we are not convinced that it is good 
public policy to set one group aside for special treatment. It 
would seem, Mr. Speaker, that there are good arguments for the 
special treatment and that these arguments are compelling in the 
case of natives. It sets a dangerous precedent however for 
special services and special help to other groups. 
 
At some point I guess, Mr. Speaker, we must wonder if it is 
appropriate for the government to become involved in the legal 
system in this way. The Bill in many ways seems hastily put 
together and ill-defined with many important areas left to 
regulations. 
 
And here again, I think we need to be very careful in addressing 
some of these concerns and asking the minister responsible and 
the government what their intentions are regarding regulations. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we have seen in the past that when you 
leave something to regulations, as far as the actual workings of 
a piece of legislation, the fact that regulations are never brought 
before this Assembly — they're passed by an order in council 
— the public of this province really do not have any say as to 
the implementation of regulations prior to their passing. 
 
And so it would behove us to review this matter very carefully 
with the minister to find out what regulations will be left up to 
. . . or what areas will be left up to regulations to define. 
 
It is typical for legislation of this sort to define the number of 
board members to sit on a commission, yet this Bill does not do 
that. We are concerned that the grant-giving powers of the body 
are virtually unlimited, and they are not defined in terms of 
purpose or scope. And as I indicated earlier, that's an area that 
we must raise and have some very legitimate questions. 
 
I understand as well that there is no limit set on the number or 
types of grants it can make in a year, and one would have to 
question that, whether or not there should be a limit, whether 
. . . how many grants may be anticipated and be handed out. 
How many groups would qualify for those grants? And so a 
number of questions arise from that section of the Bill. 
 
It also limits . . . there's a limit on size of single grants before 
they are referred to the Lieutenant Governor . . . or before they 
are referred to the Lieutenant Governor and is, I understand, is 
set at a generous amount of $10,000. 
 
Further this limit is only on a single grant. There is no 
stipulation that the agency cannot make a series of grants to one 
individual or group that greatly exceeds this amount, and that's 
certainly of a major concern to us and an area that must be and 
will be reviewed as we discuss this in Committee of the Whole  



April 19, 1995 

 
1605 

at a later date. 
 
Once again, the issue of unequal treatment under the law arises. 
Here one group is provided by this funding unlimited access to 
legal counsel that is not allowed to ordinary citizens. This is not 
fair. Again while we are generally supportive of the principle of 
seeing aboriginal citizens receiving fairer treatment in the 
courts, we have some uneasiness that this Bill may well create 
unfairness for the other citizens of the province, as well as 
setting a precedent for special legal treatment of interest groups. 
 
But particular we feel that this Act may give the new 
commission a blank cheque to spend money and resources on 
this objective. This, Mr. Speaker, I believe is unfair, both to 
taxpayers and to other users of the court system who do not 
have access to these resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well we would want to have a number of 
detailed questions answered regarding the funding, the fiscal 
reporting, and the general operations of the commission. We 
will also want to be given a sense of how the regulations will 
restrict who qualifies for the service and how grants will be 
given out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the areas that we would like 
to explore. We are continuing to consult with affected groups. 
And therefore at this time to allow that process to continue and 
to make sure we've addressed all the concerns, I would move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 49 — An Act 
respecting Interior Designers be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well it looks like it's my turn, so I guess we'll 
try to make some sense out of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, for the 
folks that are interested. 
 
We had taken a look at this Bill some time back, of course, and 
have had little time to look it over. It's, I guess, the democratic 
process that we take a little bit of time when we bring in new 
Bills that, of course, are new laws that are going to change the 
way that people live and the way that they have to respond in 
our society. 
 
Now generally speaking, we in the official opposition have not 
opposed this piece of legislation which essentially establishes 
professional standards for individuals practising the profession 
of interior design. Now I have myself spoken to Ronald 
Christie, the president of the Interior Designers of 
Saskatchewan; IDS is the short-form, and I'll be using that as I 
go through the rest of my comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now about this Bill . . . We talked to him, and he was kind 
enough to provide us with some background information on the  

matter which was very good of him to do because, to be quite 
honest, I don't know a whole lot about the interior designer's 
profession, let alone how they are affected by provincial 
legislation or federal legislation or anybody's legislation for that 
matter. 
 
Now his association, he tells us, has been the driving force 
behind this Bill. I guess because it affects them more than 
anyone else, they are naturally the ones that would be trying to 
get legislation that would do something for their industry. 
 
The IDS believes that the professionals with appropriate levels 
of experience in the field must be clearly identified. Now 
apparently that seems to be the whole gist of the legislation, in 
his view, is to see to it that people who are in this profession are 
clearly identified as being the people that are doing this 
particular kind of work or should be doing that kind of work as 
per their credentials. And we'll go into a little more detail of 
what we understand their credentials to be as we go along. 
 
But by protecting the title of interior designer, the IDS feels that 
the public will know that when they hire an interior designer, 
they are engaging the services of an individual who has met and 
maintained competency standards established by the IDS. And 
these standards apparently are things that you take like any 
other profession where you have exams and you study and you 
upgrade yourself and you make yourself a professional at this 
profession. And of course once you've established that, then 
you need to have a name that clearly identifies you as a person 
who has taken certain kinds of courses. 
 
I suppose it would be just like saying a school teacher has to 
have certain credentials before they can get their Bachelor of 
Education. And of course everybody knows when you're called 
a school teacher, with a Bachelor of Education behind your 
name, that you are a professional who has studied certain 
courses and have acquired certain grades in those courses. And 
you are therefore qualified to have that name behind your name, 
or those letters behind your name and go by that profession. 
 
Now the public will also know that the interior designers they 
have hired are covered by professional liability insurance. And 
this, in our day and age, is quite important, Mr. Speaker, 
because if people are covered by liability insurance, then 
obviously somebody is saying that they are competent 
professionals who should be able to do a certain standard of 
work. Otherwise they wouldn't be able to qualify to get insured. 
No insurance company would cover you for your job and the 
standard of a certain level of proficiency in that job. 
 
Now currently anyone can take on the title of interior designer. 
And I have to admit that I was a little bit surprised that you 
could do that, and didn't really understand what all of the 
implications were. But as we got into it, I now realize that in 
fact anybody can take this title now, and probably there's a need 
to have a differentiation there. 
 
And clearly that's what the government is intending on doing 
with this piece of legislation as we are working our way  



April 19, 1995 

 
1606 

through it. The IDS has been around since 1967 and has been 
incorporated as a non-profit corporation since 1990. It is a 
self-regulated body with its own regulatory committees 
established to deal with complaints brought against its 
members, which of course is a good thing because if you have a 
body of your peers that folks can go to to complain if something 
hasn't gone right, then you're more apt to get a personal kind of 
reception to your complaints because they understand that 
profession. 
 
(1445) 
 
Those peers will know what should've been expected to have 
been accomplished on a certain job. And I guess it is sort of like 
the law society polices its lawyers and the doctors have an 
organization of doctors that police their group. Now this group 
of course has also got a group of peers among themselves 
where folks can go to discuss their displeasures with any 
particular individuals who happened to do some work that isn't 
perhaps thought to be up to total standards. 
 
So that, I guess, is probably a good idea in our society. It seems 
to be an accepted approach to solving problems. And whether 
it's the best or not, I guess it is an accepted approach and one 
that I guess we might just as well try to promote a little more 
and try to get to work for the best interests of society in general. 
 
The IDS currently has 30 registered members, 23 associate 
members, and 5 out-of-province members — not a really big, 
significantly large group in our province, but nevertheless they 
do some very important work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the IDS has been working towards this legislation 
since 1976 and has been actively working with the Provincial 
Secretary to this end since 1987, according the president. In fact 
it was the Provincial Secretary's suggestion that IDS be 
incorporated as a non-profit corporation in 1990. And of course 
that's I guess what they then did, was follow that advice and get 
themselves set up in this professional legal entity. 
 
Now I think it's important for the members to note that the IDS 
is a member of the Design Council of Saskatchewan, also a 
non-profit corporation interested in the physical and visual 
quality of our environment. And of course we heard today an 
awful lot of questions about our environment and discussion on 
how we should approach the issues in our environment on all 
fronts. I think that that is an important issue in today's society. It 
goes not only in Saskatchewan from fuel tanks, it goes all the 
way to our fish in the oceans and all kinds of concerns about 
pollutants and things like that in our environment. 
 
So I think that it's a very good idea that we take an interest in 
this area, through this piece of legislation and the people that it 
will affect as well. 
 
Now the council is comprised of members including, as I have 
been told, the Saskatchewan Association of Architects, the 
Association of Professional Community Planners of 
Saskatchewan, the Association of Consulting Engineers of  

Saskatchewan, the Interior Designers of Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan Graphic Arts Industries Association, the 
Saskatchewan society of illustrators and designers, and the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, itself a 
branch of government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The legislation before us will ensure that any individual 
representing himself or herself as an interior designer will 
perform to a level of proficiency and ethical conduct consistent 
with the standards set out by this Bill and the IDS. This seems 
to be a rather simplistic way of saying that people want to be 
accountable for the work that they do. 
 
And I understand that the IDS is concerned about establishing 
professional standards. And I think that's really what this is 
mostly about, is the establishment of those standards so that 
people can be assured that they will get a certain level of quality 
when they hire someone to do this kind of work. 
 
Now, however, we have also received now some calls from 
people who are practising interior design who are not members 
of the IDS. And I guess here, as I commented when I started my 
remarks here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we found that this is a 
real example of how the democratic process does work and 
should work — not to go too fast, to allow people time to think 
over what's going on. 
 
Everything that we've talked about, everything that we've heard, 
all of the points that were made to us about this Bill, were very 
positive in the first few weeks as we studied this legislation and 
more or less thought, well it's just a natural thing to do; 
everybody in the world must be pleased with it. 
 
But all of a sudden we find that because we've taken a little 
time with this, allowed the public some opportunities to study 
on it and think about it and even hear about it, now we are 
finding there are people in our province who are concerned 
about this Bill and who aren't exactly convinced that it's the best 
thing to do the way we're doing it, that we may have to suggest 
some amendments or some other considerations. 
 
So I guess that's proof right there that our system is a good 
system, that it actually can and does work for the betterment of 
society by giving people an opportunity to work on the theory 
of equal opposing forces, where we have an opportunity to let 
folks know what's going on so that they can present their side of 
the story. And then in the processes of debate in our democratic 
forum, we can bring out all of the points so that the government 
can make the best possible decision to have a fair and balanced 
legislation when the day is done. 
 
And I think that's important, Mr. Speaker. As I've said, we see 
more pros than cons in this piece of legislation, but we are 
starting just now to hear some of the negative side of it. Having 
heard that there is a negative side now, we had earlier thought 
that we would go on with this piece of legislation as quickly as 
possible and get it into committee and ask some questions and 
that sort of thing as the process goes. But now having found out 
that there is a negative side, I think it's incumbent upon us to  



April 19, 1995 

 
1607 

take a turn-about here and stop a little bit and take another look. 
 
I think perhaps it would be in the best interests of society to 
allow a few more days to go by so that this negative position 
can be further expounded and further explored so that we can 
study it and bring forward an argument to the government to 
perhaps make this legislation even better than it appeared to be 
at the start. 
 
And because we want to do this right, as we all, I think, 
genuinely want to do the best job we can as elected 
representatives, we're going to suggest to the government that 
we take yet a couple more days before we rush this one into 
Committee of the Whole and discuss it in detail there. And with 
that view, I'm going to move that we adjourn this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 56 — An 
Act to amend The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 
pleasure for me to rise today and respond to Bill 56, An Act to 
amend The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act. 
 
Saskatchewan is blessed in many ways, and one of the most 
significant is the many thousands of volunteers across this 
province. There are 6,000 registered charities in this province, 
most of them served by volunteers in one capacity or another. 
 
Any charity would tell you that it is impossible to function 
without the goodwill of volunteers who organize fund-raisers, 
canvass neighbourhoods for funds, volunteer their time and 
expertise in many different charity functions. There are 
hundreds of volunteers who give their time to coach baseball or 
hockey or football, soccer, ringette, curling, dancing, or many 
other sporting activities for Saskatchewan children. 
 
This is especially true in rural Saskatchewan where, without the 
help of volunteers, there would be no local skating rink. There'd 
be no community hall or fowl supper. There would be very little 
support for senior citizens. There are volunteers who deliver 
Meals on Wheels to seniors, who clean walks in winter, cut 
grass in the summer. There are hundreds of volunteers who, 
each year, comb our highways, parks, and roadways, picking up 
garbage and cleaning up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many individuals who volunteered their 
time and talents to help establish the MacKenzie Art Gallery 
and other such important facilities  those who take time out 
of their busy schedules to teach school children about art, 
culture, and many other topics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those who devote their time to helping 
feed the hungry and build homes for families who cannot afford  

a home of their own. Everywhere we look at, there are 
communities and volunteers helping their neighbours and their 
communities. As well, there are thousands of companies and 
corporations who greatly support Saskatchewan charities and 
organizations within this province. 
 
All of these volunteers deserve recognition, Mr. Speaker. But 
that's not why they give of themselves. People don't volunteer 
so that they can be recognized as a good person in their 
community. They give because of the goodness in their hearts, 
because of their unselfishness. The faces of excited children, 
the thanks from elderly, the finding of a cure for diseases — 
any one of these are all a person needs to experience to be 
motivated even further. Volunteers give to make life better for 
everyone, and indeed to touch each and every one of us. 
 
It's very true, Mr. Speaker, that the impersonal hand of 
government can never replace the helping hand of a neighbour. 
We are witnessing that at this very moment in Oklahoma City 
where a bomb exploded early this morning, destroying a 
downtown federal building. Six children have been killed 
because an explosion destroyed their day care. Details of others 
dead and wounded are sketchy. Yet, Mr. Speaker, already the 
Red Cross is having to turn away — having to turn away  
volunteers because so many individuals have come forward to 
give blood and offer their services to those in need. 
 
Throughout this senseless act of violence there is, at the same 
time, restoration in the spirit of mankind that although there are 
individuals who aim to destroy or hurt others, there are also 
many others willing to give their time, their money, anything to 
help their fellow man. 
 
It is especially encouraging, Mr. Speaker, to see so many 
individuals doing volunteer work at a time when life has 
become more demanding, more complicated. This is why I 
believe a Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal is a nice way to thank 
all of those unsung heroes for their generosity. They're a great 
role model for the children, and an inspiration to us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is at this time that I would move that we would 
adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting Agricultural Operations 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
Minister of Agriculture to please introduce the officials who 
have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have Dale 
Sigurdson, the assistant deputy minister; Peter Remple; and Al 
Syhlonyk here today. 
 
Clause 1 
 



April 19, 1995 

 
1608 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for those introductions and welcome to your officials 
today to consideration of Bill 53. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you 
could tell us currently how many situations are currently under 
discussion by your department, so we have an indication of 
what the initial duties of the new board and the provisions of 
the Act will resolve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — As an example, I think last year we 
issued 58 permits so that gives you some idea on lease and 
intensive livestock operation of . . . the number of new 
operations that go up. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, that's the number of permits. What, in 
your experience, have been the number that will be applicable 
to this Act? You must have some idea of past history, how 
many complaints are registered, and how many times you're 
going to have to implement the provisions of the Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Under this Act, everybody — all 
58 of those permits — would have to be issued by the 
department, and that issuing the permits falls under this Act. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — No, no, I understand that, Minister. What I'm 
asking is . . . there's no point in putting another piece of 
legislation on the books of Saskatchewan if you don't have a 
problem to solve. You've obviously gone to a great deal of 
difficulty to put together an Act to solve a problem. 
 
And other than the one with Jack Messer last year, you must 
have more than simply an Act just to address Jack Messer's 
problems with flies. So could you please tell us why we're 
instituting a new statute on the books of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We don't have an exact count of 
complaints that come into the office. Certainly, probably 
between 100 and 200 complaints a year on complaints over 
nuisance with regard to livestock, but complaints that come in 
on burning stubble and other things would not necessarily come 
into the same avenue in the department, so we don't have a 
record of the number of complaints coming in. 
 
But there certainly are complaints that come in. There are pretty 
hot issues that occur around some of the permits that we issue 
where there are public meetings and public protest and letters 
that we get, as well as complaints to the department. 
 
So while there's not a huge problem in the province, there is in 
our view a need for this type of legislation and we think there 
will be a growing problem as there are in other provinces. 
Almost every other province in the country has similar sorts of 
legislation because as agriculture grows and becomes more 
intense and as our cities and towns sprawl out into rural areas, 
agriculture comes more in contact with people and people are 
more worried about the environment and their health and 
lifestyles and so on; so we certainly see a need for action. It's 
not response to a huge problem; it's us preparing for the future  

that we think is coming and we want to help agriculture to 
continue to develop in this province and we think this is one of 
the tools that will help to do it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, we don't take issue with the 
fact that the legislation is probably a good idea. I think everyone 
in the House that's spoken on the matter has confirmed that it's 
a concern to rural people particularly. But I also see this piece 
of legislation as potentially being very expensive  and I look 
through the sections of the Bill  I mean it establishes the 
power to hire lawyers, consultants, technical advisers; the 
board's allowed to utilize supplies and services of any 
departmental employee; board may pay for services of 
mediation officers; then there's all of the fees that the board can 
set to handle these things. 
 
I mean the taxpayer also has a stake in this and that's why I 
asked you about some of the . . . perhaps what I should do then, 
is give me some of the more contentious circumstances that 
have arisen in the last few years and perhaps then we can, as 
people who set budgets in here, we can determine sort of what 
the cost mechanism would be with a particular action. 
 
You must have a list of two or three that have been very 
problematic for your department over the last number of years, 
and if so, they will have some idea of what the costs were to 
solve those problems. And you then can point out to the 
legislature that this mechanism will be more cost-effective or 
more expensive to handle the situations. That's what we do in 
committee here, is determine what the actual implementation 
costs are going to be. 
 
So you would know what those two or three would be and your 
officials will know how much it costs to resolve them. Can you 
inform the Assembly of how this legislation will better that 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We think there will be some 
incremental costs to this Act. Obviously there is some cost now. 
The department is dealing with complaints and trying to 
mediate, and we have costs. We think probably the total cost of 
administering this will be around $200,000. About 100,000 of 
that would be incremental because we're already spending about 
100,000. 
 
This we think is a small cost compared to the cost of having 
agriculture in this province held up . . . of issues — hog barns 
or feedlots not being built, or delayed for years while the 
process wends its way through court; agricultural operators 
without the confidence to build and expand their operations 
because they're uncertain as to whether or not they will have 
protection to operate if they operate in an acceptable fashion. 
 
The other part of the cost that we don't measure is the cost in 
courts because that is where some of these complaints end up. 
And one of the examples you're talking about was a feedlot at 
Swift Current which ended up being settled in court and ruled 
on by a court. And that's obviously a very expensive process as 
well, and I wouldn't have any real idea of what that costs. 



April 19, 1995 

 
1609 

But there will be some costs obviously to having a board 
functioning and to hearing these cases, but we think it'll be, 
relative to the return, not that great. And I think there will be 
savings as well on the court side because there will be fewer 
complaints ending up in court. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well those are ballpark numbers, Minister. 
Perhaps tell us what did it cost the province of Saskatchewan to 
settle the Jack Messer issue at Tisdale with the issue of flies 
bothering him from his neighbour. What were the actual costs 
that you have tallied up for settling that particular issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The cost of that was a $20,000 
settlement that went to the Dierkers from the government. We 
had some legal costs of which . . . because we were in court a 
number of times with the Department of Justice, there was 
probably some ongoing costs to the department. In fact the 
member opposite may have a better idea than that because I 
think that situation was with the Department of Agriculture for 
10 or 12 years. 
 
We don't have a tally of what it costs for an ag rep or somebody 
to make visits to the farm and try to mediate problems. But 
there are obviously some ongoing costs with that. 
 
But the settlement that the . . . the out-of-court settlement saw 
the Department of Agriculture pay the Dierkers $20,000. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So I gather from that, you know of $20,000, 
and there obviously were more costs involved. You told the 
committee a few minutes ago that your average yearly 
expenditures were around $100,000. Are we to assume then that 
this particular case probably was a third to a half of the budget 
in one particular year to settle? Would that be a normal 
circumstance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the $20,000 — and I don't 
remember what year it was paid out — would have been an 
expensive . . . an unusual expense of a given year. As I said, 
that case, the ongoing costs of mediating and handling this 
dispute, was something that happened over a long period of 
time and a large number of years. So there would have been a 
portion of our costs during those years that would have gone to 
that case. 
 
But again we don't have a breakdown as to how much time a 
particular ag rep spent at each individual farm, but certainly it 
wouldn't have been a very large portion of the budget over that 
period of years. It would have been just one more case that the 
department was dealing with. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I find your answer, Minister, a little bit 
patronizing. I mean this Bill is fairly thick. It has a lot of 
components in it which you're trying to cover off all 
possibilities. And yet you seem very reluctant to come to the 
House and talk about why this was necessary. 
 
Obviously you've been incurring a lot of costs. And yet you're 
very vague about what those costs were to bring a new piece of  

legislation to the Assembly and say the taxpayers should be 
prepared to buy into this whole thing, when I gave you a 
specific case that obviously must have had some drive within 
the bureaucracy to come up with an alternative. Because I think 
what you would like us to believe is that if this legislation had 
been in place, then the Government of Saskatchewan would not 
have been paying Mr. Messer all of that money. 
 
And you can answer that for me  if you think that this 
legislation would have negated that 20,000-plus pay-out to Mr. 
Messer. But you seem very reluctant to give us numbers and 
circumstance around situations which forced you to instruct 
your officials to come up with a piece of legislation to solve 
problems. And I would have thought that you would have had 
that very well documented, so you could prove to the taxpayers 
of this province that you've come up with the proper solution — 
not some vague, we think might work in certain circumstances 
. . . 
 
So are you saying that this legislation would have prevented 
Mr. Messer from getting that taxpayers' money? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Obviously that's a hypothetical 
question. This Bill would be designed to have a board where 
Mr. Messer could have gone and issued his complaint, and the 
board then could have talked to the Dierkers who were the 
farmers in the situation, and hopefully have ruled whether or 
not Mr. Dierker was farming in an acceptable manner. And in 
this particular case probably would have been cheaper, I think. 
Any time that the situation gets to court, this sort of procedure 
is cheaper than going to court. Whether I can put numbers on 
any particular cases, what they cost and what the saving will be, 
we didn't bring this Bill in . . . The main goal of bringing this 
Bill wasn't to save costs. 
 
In fact we think that this operation will cost incrementally more 
than the old method. We brought this Bill in because we think 
there's an impediment to the development of the agricultural 
industry in this province. And that that impediment is going to 
grow. And the true cost is not to have the livestock industry or 
the grain industry or some other industry progress and grow in 
this province. And so this is the aim of the Bill.  
 
Certainly it's cheaper than going to court, and I think anybody 
will realize that if you can have a board of your peers hearing 
cases and making settlements, that that's cheaper than going to 
court in most instances. But there will be a necessity of having 
a board and maintaining it, and so there will be some 
incremental costs. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Now, Minister, I appreciate what you're 
saying to the Assembly, is that we have to dispense with these 
nuisance lawsuits that are brought against people in agriculture 
so that they can carry on with their agricultural operations. 
 
Was, in your estimation, the lawsuit brought by Mr. Messer a 
nuisance lawsuit because it involved his neighbour's flies, and  



April 19, 1995 

 
1610 

if so, why didn't you carry through the process and take it to 
court and obviously have this nuisance lawsuit thrown out? And 
then you wouldn't have had to make the $20,000 payment. And 
would your board have forced this situation to go that far and 
prove that this was a nuisance lawsuit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We don't know what the outcome 
of the court case would have been under the existing legislation. 
Our advice from the Department of Justice was that it was 
cheaper to settle for $20,000 out of court than it was to continue 
through court, even if we were to win the case. 
 
And of course, as the member opposite knows, when you're in 
court there's certainly no certainty of winning the case. I myself 
appeared before the pretrial judge, and his opinion was that we 
probably wouldn't have won the case. So given those 
circumstances, $20,000 was a cheaper way out of that 
predicament and settle the dispute, and it was the cheapest way 
for us to settle. 
 
But this Bill was certainly not a result of one individual lawsuit. 
It's not a case of us responding to individual circumstances or 
individual law cases. This is a Bill that's trying to deal with the 
whole issue of farmers and other people coexisting, and farmers 
being able to carry on a farming business in an acceptable 
manner and with some comfort that their investment and their 
life's work is not going to be disrupted by some ruling by a 
judge which has no background in agriculture and has no . . . 
there's absolutely no certainty as to the outcome of the case. 
 
This gives farmers a board of their peers, and farmers are 
prepared to accept the responsibility for following guidelines 
and farming in acceptable practices and doing things in an 
acceptable way to not inconvenience their neighbours. But they 
also want the protection that knowing that when they are 
farming according to practice, and they've got their permits, and 
they've followed the guidelines, that they are immune from 
being shut down by nuisance lawsuits. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I agree with you, Minister, that it is a 
sad day in the province of Saskatchewan when your own 
officials decided that rather than have a judge rule on whether 
somebody's flies in your yard was a nuisance lawsuit or not is . . 
. indeed a sad day. And I can see why you'd want to bring in 
legislation to protect people because they made a complaint 
about flies. 
 
I've never seen a livestock operation in this province that didn't 
have, unfortunately, a few flies associated with it. They are 
drawn to the smell of ammonia which is usually a result of 
livestock operations. 
 
So the question I asked you earlier is that would your board, as 
you have structured the Bill, have any way in your estimation 
granted that type of a payment to an individual who brings a 
nuisance lawsuit against an agricultural operator in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The difference between this Bill  

and the old system  under the old system if somebody was 
bothered by flies and they went to court, the court would rule 
simply, is there a nuisance, yes or no; if there's a nuisance, then 
what's the damage. That's the system. 
 
Under this system the complainant would go to this board and 
the board would rule on whether or not the farmer was 
following acceptable farming practices. And if so, then it takes 
away the complainant's right to proceed against the farmer. If 
the board rules that the farmer is not following acceptable 
farming practices, they would instruct the farmer to change their 
practices. If the farmer fails to change their practice and does 
not farm in an acceptable practice, then at some point the 
complainant would have the recourse to courts as it would have 
had in the past. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So, in other words, what your telling the 
Assembly today is that there's no way that this board would 
allow an out-of-court settlement of $20,000 to take place with 
somebody like Mr. Messer who'd brought a nuisance lawsuit 
against his neighbour. Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, they would not rule that the 
government should pay. They might rule that Mr. Dierker was 
not farming an acceptable practice and order him to follow 
guidelines that will be laid out in the Bill. So it's difficult to 
predict what some future board might have ruled on some past 
situation, but obviously they would have ruled whether or not 
Mr. Dierker was farming with acceptable practices. And if he 
had his permits and was farming in what his peers considered to 
be an acceptable manner, then he would be immune from a 
lawsuit. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And if Mr. Dierker did not live up to the 
requirements of the Act, then the board would have the ability 
to recommend a fine of not more than $50,000, or not more 
than $1,000 each day during which the offence continues? Is 
that the way I read the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. Under the fines that apply to 
pollution part of the Act, if there's damage to groundwater or 
water supply somewhere and that's being caused by 
unacceptable farming practices, then the board would have the 
power to impose fines. 
 
In the case of a nuisance, if the farmer does not follow the 
directness of the board, that just puts them back in a position 
where they were in the beginning and would allow a 
complainant to go to court and seek remedy in court. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're going to have to do is take me 
through the steps then here, Minister. I want to really 
understand the powers that this board has. This board will be an 
order-in-council board, as I understand it; you will recommend 
to cabinet who will sit on the board. And unfortunately, history 
over the last four years has taught us that you have not been 
terribly circumspect at times in appointing non-partisan people 
to boards and commissions. In fact your record is rather lousy. 
 



April 19, 1995 

 
1611 

So knowing that we face a Bill here that has OC (order in 
council) appointments tagged to it, that we're going to give you 
permission to perhaps go appoint your friends to, we want to 
clearly understand what the powers of the board is and what the 
process is, which by your own admission can be more 
expensive than what the previous Act was, and what or what 
not the board can do. 
 
If they cannot recommend that Mr. Dierker, for instance, in the 
case we've been talking about, put out fly bait or lock his 
animals up or haul his manure or do all sorts of things that 
might be applicable in order so that Mr. Messer doesn't have 
flies around his house, then we need to know what the board 
can do and what they can't do. And you need to lead us through 
the process that would show what, in the case that you talk 
about, what Mr. Dierker would've had to do to have compliance 
with the board that you put in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I will take you through the 
process, remembering there are two parts to this Act, one of 
which is the old pollution part which hasn't changed a whole lot 
and which is enforced by government. So if somebody is 
polluting a waterway, we will have the same sort of control over 
him as we have now and the board wouldn't be involved in that. 
 
What we have is the board will deal with nuisance complaints. 
The process would be that somebody who has a problem with 
flies or odour or burning stubble, or whatever the farming 
practice is, brings a complaint forward to the board. The board's 
first act would be to try to mediate this dispute, try to set up a 
mediation where the parties could get together and work out 
something. 
 
If mediation fails, then there would be a board hearing to hear 
the facts. The board would then make a decision and the 
decision would be that they dismiss this complaint because the 
farmer is farming with acceptable farming practices and that's 
the guideline. If the farmer is doing things that normal farmers 
would be doing then they will dismiss the complaint against 
him. 
 
If the board feels that the farmer is not accepting acceptable 
farming practice and is not behaving in a manner that a normal 
farmer would, then they will make recommendations to the 
farmer to change the operation. At that point the operator 
complies with the recommendations. If the operator does not 
comply with the recommendations then you're back to square 
one where the complainant could then proceed to court and 
seek a remedy there. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — All right then, in the case of where the 
particular operation has some ties to the provincial government, 
as was with the case with Mr. Dierker I believe  he was 
involved with ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) as a tenant or as a renter or there are all sorts of 
applications around the province where an individual is 
involved with government in one way or another  does the 
board ruling absolve the provincial government from litigation  

and being ultimately responsible for a decision of the court? 
Does this then totally absolve the provincial government from 
any involvement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Not being a lawyer I'm a little 
hesitant to speculate on what the potential courts might rule at 
some point. Really I don't believe it changes our position. If 
ACS has a loan to a farmer and the farmer is not farming in an 
acceptable practice or if the farmer is . . . and it goes through 
the board, it doesn't comply with it and the complainant ends up 
taking the farmer to court, our position as lender or partner or 
whatever way we're involved with it, wouldn't change. So if in 
the past the complainant would sue the government, they 
probably would still be able to sue the government in this 
situation. 
 
Our hope is that very, very few of these cases will now go to 
court because, in the first place, the board will rule in many, 
many cases if the farmer is following acceptable farming 
practice and dismiss them, and they won't go any further. Or in 
the case where operators . . .where the board rules against 
operators, that operators will then comply with acceptable 
practices, and they won't end up in court. 
 
But in the event that, at the end of the process, it's ruled by the 
board that the farmer is not following acceptable practices, does 
not comply with the recommendations that the boards makes 
and then therefore the complainant ends up taking the farmer to 
court, our position would not change in that if there was a 
possibility before to be named in the lawsuit, we would 
probably still be named now. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I find this a little bit bizarre, Minister, 
because whether you like it or not, there's a lot of people look 
upon this case as one that is an example of the ludicrous in our 
province. And I mean I don't believe . . . If what you've told me 
is true then, I don't believe we would have solved this situation 
at all because Mr. Messer, as I understand it, was so determined 
that he bought the guy out just to get rid of him. 
 
And if you're telling me that after we go through all of this, that 
we pay the board and we pay whatever consultant comes along 
and we pay the lawyers, and then at end of the day you've got a 
guy that's so determined he's going to get rid of his neighbour as 
Mr. Messer was that he can still take you to court and you're not 
absolved of anything because you were in with ACS, then we've 
gone through all of this. We've spent the taxpayers' money, and 
the guy is still going to ding the province for 20 grand-plus. 
 
And I don't call that a great deal of protection because when 
you get somebody with the financial wherewithal of Mr. Messer 
and obvious political connections and he is determined to get 
rid of those flies and he's willing to buy his neighbour out to do 
it, then how in the world can anyone stand up to someone like 
that and have the taxpayer have to foot the entire bill if the 
board cannot say, go chase yourself; you will not, you will not,  



April 19, 1995 

 
1612 

I repeat, harass your neighbour, and you will not carry forward 
with a lawsuit against the Government of Saskatchewan, 
because we've deemed that Mr. Dierker was farming properly. 
 
I mean I find it a little bizarre that we would go to all the 
problems and expense of enacting a new statute and not be able 
to solve that problem that a lot of people simply find offensive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well obviously the board will have 
the . . . would have the power to dismiss the complaint if they 
ruled that that particular farmer was farming in an acceptable 
practice. That's the whole purpose of this board, and this whole 
process, is that those nuisance complaints and frivolous 
complaints get chucked out and go nowhere and don't disrupt 
the agricultural industry. 
 
On the other hand if there are legitimate complaints, farmers 
have said that they're prepared to take some responsibility for 
them, and there has to be some balance. And so if indeed 
somebody is spreading manure on somebody else's driveway, 
and that's not an acceptable practice, one would assume that the 
board would then say, quit doing that or we're not going to 
protect you anymore. 
 
And that's essentially what this board does. It hears the 
complaint and says, this is frivolous, and throws it out. Or says, 
you know, this is serious and you'd better change what you're 
doing or we no longer protect you. And that's . . . I think that's a 
fair situation. So that I think the mediation will be even more 
critical because in many cases this will be settled between the 
parties right at the beginning. 
 
But that's the whole purpose of this board, to be able to throw 
out frivolous complaints and still allow people who have a 
legitimate complaint a remedy through courts in due time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, maybe you've thought about this then. 
Because as I go through the discussion here, what it seems to 
come down to in many cases is the independent and the 
persuasive powers — because at the end of the day there are no 
legal powers — because you've told me that the individual can 
go ahead and sue anyway irregardless of what your board says. 
 
You must have some idea of the type of individual you would 
like to sit on this three-member board, for a term of four years 
at your pleasure. And maybe you could give the Assembly some 
indication of the type of person you might wish to be on this 
board who could have the ability to stand up to somebody like 
Jack Messer — who your own cabinet members can't seem to 
stand up to on many occasions — who would have the power to 
stand up to a person like Jack Messer who has the ear of the 
Premier on most days. 
 
What kind of a board and individual would you chose to have, 
in this situation, to take on an individual like that because he 
didn't like his neighbour's flies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This board will be made up of 
producers — at least mostly producers, and maybe one or two  

others on from some other area. What we would see is having 
people who are involved in the individual . . . the different 
branches of the industry involved. 
 
Hopefully we would have a hearing where you would have . . . 
any given hearing you would have a board member who was 
from the area and who would have some understanding of the 
area and the conditions in the area. You would have somebody 
who is involved in the particular industry that's at question. 
 
So in a situation where it's a dairy farmer, we would want some 
dairy farmer on that particular hearing, hearing those concerns, 
so that there's some expertise as to what is reasonable and 
acceptable to dairy farmers for example. So we think we can get 
reputable producers who will be fair to both farmers and to 
people who are bringing forth complaints. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, you're legislation says not 
less than three. What you've just told me is that you plan on 
having more than three. Are you having five? Are you having 
seven? What is the intention of yourself and your order in 
council appointments to come up with regional representation 
and industry representation on an adequate basis to once again, 
I say, stand up to an individual like Jack Messer who has the 
ability to push and shove on any given day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Our intention on the board is to 
have a fairly large number on the board. We envision this board 
working as the Lands Appeal Board does, where you might 
have a chairman or a vice-chairman in on each hearing. But you 
would have people from that particular area or that particular 
industry sitting in on individual complaints. 
 
That, I think, gives us the flexibility, without having a terribly 
expensive and huge board, to have competent people on 
individual hearings. 
 
There are obviously huge differences between, you know, the 
south-west of the province and the north-west of the province in 
what practices are acceptable and necessary on a farm. There 
are differences between how hog farmers operate and dairy 
farmers operate. 
 
And so if you try to have representatives from each of those 
geographic regions and each of those industries on one huge 
board, it becomes very cumbersome. So we would view this as 
working much like the Lands Appeal Board does where we 
would have three or four people on an individual hearing who 
would be from that region of the province and who would have 
some knowledge of that industry. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, you're going to have to 
explain this more then. What you're saying is that you'll only 
have a minimum number of board members but you will have 
then people who will be, what, seconded to the board? Or they 
won't be full board members, they'll be associate board 
members? 
 
Maybe while you're at it you can tell us what the per diem rate  



April 19, 1995 

 
1613 

will be for these individuals, or at least the per diem that you're 
planning to offer when you select individuals. And explain to 
me what the total parameters of the operation will be. How 
many people are we talking about here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — What we're looking at is having 
probably 15 or 20 members on the board, somewhere in that 
neighbourhood. But on an individual hearing, we would call 
three or four people to hear that hearing. That's the way the 
Lands Appeal Board works, and it works quite well. That 
allows us to have people with competence hearing the 
individual cases, somebody from the area, as I said, and 
somebody from that part of the industry. 
 
Per diems, we have some standards for per diems depending on 
how the board is ranked. This board probably falls in the 
category of $110-per-day per diem. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I'd like you to be a little more definitive on 
that, Minister. I'd hate to have you tell the Assembly it was 110 
and find out a few months later that it's 155 or it's 250 or 
something like that. I think it's important when we go through 
this type of legislation that the taxpayer understand clearly what 
kind of cost implications are associated with the Bill and its 
implementation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Per diems are not set in the Bill, as 
they are not for other boards and we could change per diems for 
any boards at any time. As I say, there's a process to categorize 
these boards. In this one, as I said, the board members would 
likely fall in the category of $110-per-day per diems. The 
chairman would more likely fall in the $155-per-day per diem. 
That decision has not . . . process has not been gone through 
yet. So I'm guessing that that will be where they will fall. 
 
And I think this is a relatively important board but it's not in the 
category of a SaskPower board or something of that nature. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, would you like to give a 
commitment to the House that that will be the recommendation 
that you take to cabinet, that that per diem rate be the one that 
you feel is the one most responsible to the taxpayer and that you 
recommend that those levels be held? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes. I will recommend that to my 
colleagues. I believe that's the category that this board falls in 
and I'm prepared to recommend to cabinet that that's what the 
levels be set at. Certainly they will be weighed against other 
boards, but I'm confident that this is the level of commitment 
and expertise that's commensurate with that type of salary. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So as I understand it then, this board will be 
struck, you will publicly name the individuals who will sit on it, 
and then you will rely upon the chairman or the vice-chairman 
of the board to constitute a meeting at any time there is a 
complaint filed with your department. And they then will select 
the two, three, or four people who will sit at that particular time, 
with expertise being the primary goal, to bring a matter to a 
conclusion. 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — You told the committee earlier that you were 
potentially looking at, in this province currently, about 200 
complaints a year. And you were having trouble costing before, 
so I'm doing a little quick arithmetic here. Two hundred 
complaints, probably not all of them going to board level — say 
half of them did — we're looking at about, with no technical 
staff, at about $350 per day. Because even if they only sit for an 
hour, the per diem rate is applicable for the entire day, as I 
understand it. A hundred complaints, if they were all done on 
an individual basis, we're looking at about $350,000. That's far 
more than what you told the Assembly a short while ago as 
being a cost implication. 
 
And it's one of the things I've been concerned about as I go 
through this Bill, because I see far more cost evolving. And if 
you got into a scrap with an individual like Jack Messer, who 
would obviously have the potential to drag this out over many 
days and increase the costs of the board, then your 350,000 
quickly becomes 400 or $450,000. And that's far different than 
what you just told us would be the annual operating cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — What other jurisdictions have 
found is that while you might get out of a hundred complaints, 
many of them would be settled just by an explanation from the 
board. Many of them may be with regards to the same operation 
and they may be settled without any action. A great many more 
are settled by the mediation process. The board would 
recommend mediation between the two parties and it may be 
settled that way. 
 
And maybe out of a hundred, only five or ten would actually get 
to the formal complaint hearing by the board. So if we had 100 
complaints or 200 complaints, we certainly wouldn't expect to 
have anywhere near that number of formal hearings of the 
board. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — But as I understand the process, Minister, 
even if there is a review of the matter, the chairman or the 
vice-chairman will call, and if the quorum is three they'll have 
to meet in order to discuss the application. If they meet, even if 
they only met for half an hour under the existing rates, they are 
eligible for a full day's per diem. And I would suspect that the 
idea was that instead of department people having to do this, 
the board would do it. 
 
And if you had 200 complaints, it's quite logical that 50 per cent 
of them might end up with the board having to discuss them, 
okay, and you start to run into some pretty serious money. And 
it only takes one or two individuals like Mr. Messer, who are 
prepared to walk a long way down the line, okay, who aren't 
going to give up simply because you say, back off. 
 
And there are people like that out there. Jack Messer isn't the 
only stubborn individual in this province, Mr. Minister. 



April 19, 1995 

 
1614 

That you move down that line and your board is involved with 
that individual for a number of instances, and I keep getting 
350, 350, 350. I mean this stuff starts ticking, and then you start 
adding in the lawyers and you add in the consultants and you go 
to the university and you find somebody else who obviously 
will get dragged into those situations — which your board has 
the power to hire — and all of a sudden the $200,000 figure 
that you gave the Assembly starts to look a little rough. 
 
And as I went through this Bill very carefully, I didn't see the 
sort of checks and balances that I maybe hoped to have seen. 
And that's why I asked you questions earlier about the board, 
for instance, having the ability to say no, you can't go to court 
 something that would define the process more so than what 
you've done here. Unfortunately, the board can be dragged 
infinitum through the weeds by a stubborn individual. 
 
And usually the people that pursue these type of nuisance 
lawsuits are individuals that have some kind of an axe to grind 
or something that's been eating at them for a long time. Or, I 
moved into the country and I thought I was moving into peace 
and quiet, and here you've got some guy down the road with a 
bunch of flies and I don't like it, and I've just invested a whole 
bunch in my acreage and my house and I'm not happy and I'm 
going to let you hear about it over and over and over again. 
 
Well legitimately the board is the vehicle — and we agree with 
that — to try and cut this nuisance stuff out. But I don't see 
anywhere in here where the board can contain its costs. They 
don't have the power to contain, and ultimately all they can do 
is back out of the road and say, go to court. 
 
And I would like you to somehow show me where this 
containment takes place so that we don't run up per diems and 
other fees infinitum. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well we do have containment built 
into the Act as best that we could. I mean that was the purpose 
of the Act — to squash the frivolous suits at the start. And the 
board certainly has the power to do that. 
 
The onus is on the complainant to prove that the farmer is not 
following acceptable farming practices, it's not on the farmer to 
defend himself. 
 
If the board rules against the complainant, they won't hear the 
same case over and over again. If you read 17(3) it says: 
 
 A court shall consider and shall give primary 

consideration to a decision of the board respecting an 
agricultural operation in any subsequent action in 
nuisance respecting that agricultural operation. 

 
That is a very strong language and as far as, jurisdictionally and 
legally, we felt we could go to say that if the board tosses out a 
complaint that that complainant will not have any success in a 
court of law. So the only time that the board stands back and 
lets it go to court is essentially when they rule against the 
farmer. 

And we certainly anticipate that, as far as the vast majority of 
farmers in this province are responsible operators, and that there 
will not be many cases where people are successful in their 
submission that the farmer's not operating with acceptable 
farming practices. But in those cases then it will go on to a 
court and the board won't be involved beyond that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Is it your opinion then, Minister, that the 
board will be able to arrive at that opinion after one sitting in 
most cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly we would anticipate in a 
majority of the cases that a one-day hearing . . . in fact the board 
well may well hear more than one hearing if they're in the same 
location at the same time. Some of these may be done by 
conference calls. 
 
There may be situations where the board may want to go out 
and have a look at the situation for themselves and that may 
involve a couple of days for occasional hearings but we don't 
anticipate long-drawn-out situations. We expect most of these 
to be fairly simple to deal with. Just going by the complaints 
that we receive we don't anticipate many that would go to a 
formal hearing or that would be complicated and difficult to 
solve. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well perhaps, Minister, and it's just a 
suggestion, you put a compliance or a section in that allows 45 
days after the referral for mediation services to step in. Does the 
board have the ability to recommend earlier on, that mediation 
be brought to the table almost immediately so that some of 
these matters . . . as I understand, mediation services do have 
some power that once they make a decision . . . because they're 
involved in family court situations, they're involved with Farm 
Land Security Board, they're involved with a number of 
situations which do have binding ability. 
 
Can the board refer mediation quicker than the 45 days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — What the Act says, that the 
mediation officer shall report back within 45 days of the time 
it's referred, but that's only a limitation and certainly a 
constraint on going any longer than that. It certainly would not 
indicate that it has to take 45 days. There's a 45-day waiting 
period. It was put in there to shorten the period as much as we 
thought was reasonable to put in legislation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, I understand the reporting process. 
What I specifically asked, the board can hire mediation 
services, either governmental or otherwise, as I understand it, 
private sector mediation services or government services. But 
can they refer the situation to mediation services almost 
immediately because of the power that mediation services have 
to bring about a conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we expect that to be standard 
practice, if there's a complaint that comes forward that the 
board would give out some information on the process and 
maybe talk to the individual and have him talk to his neighbour.  



April 19, 1995 

 
1615 

But almost immediately, or immediately mediation would be 
brought in. 
 
It's important to solve these disputes before they become family 
feuds and the feelings rise on both sides, so we would see the 
board ordering immediate mediation almost . . . in very many 
cases. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — If government mediation services are used, 
whose budget will that show up in? Will that be in yours, or 
will that be in the Department of Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That would come under the 
Department of Agriculture budget, if we pay for mediation 
services. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. I was told at the time 
that the Jack Messer affair was going on, by a professionally 
trained mediator, that they could've saved the government and 
the people of this province a lot of money if they'd been brought 
into the Act because there's no way that that kind of money 
would've ever been paid out with the kind of report that they 
would bring forward; that that was simply ludicrous that the 
government didn't go to, for instance, government mediation 
and say, you will decide the issue and settle it; that the 
out-of-court payment was simply ridiculous, given that 
government had other agencies available. 
 
And I highly recommend mediation. It has proved to be, in the 
farming industry, one of the best things that ever happened. 
Lord knows, I've got so many neighbours that have had to go 
through the process in the last 10 years of having restructuring 
happen in their farming operations. And without mediation, 
most of them would have been broke because they would've 
spent all their money on lawyers and probably at the end of the 
day not achieved anything. 
 
And I think most people in the banking industry and credit 
unions and others, understand the benefit of mediation these 
days, and you very seldom see anything get to the point now of 
having to go to court. They're all settled virtually without that 
process, and mediation obviously has saved the taxpayer of this 
province a great deal of money. 
 
And I'm glad to see that you're going to allow this board to 
immediately launch that initiative so that individuals can't get 
carried away with types of disputes that we are talking about 
here today. 
 
That's all the questions I have at the present moment, Mr. 
Chairman. Perhaps some other member wishes to get into the 
act. 
 
(1600) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Clause 13 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, of 
course I gave a couple of proposed amendments to you two or 
three weeks ago and we didn't get a chance to discuss them 
before this date. I hope that you've raised these with your 
officials, and perhaps you would consider these amendments 
today. 
 
In fact from clause 13 there was some consideration of what 
would be a reasonable amount of time before any inspection 
could occur, and I would like to hear your comments before I 
move the amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I'd like to thank the member 
opposite for the amendments that he brought forward and we 
discussed earlier. 
 
On the time lines, the amendment to section 13, we feel that it 
may be imperative in some cases, in fact many cases, for the 
inspection to occur rather rapidly. If somebody is burning 
stubble on Sunday afternoon and it's filtering into somebody's 
clothesline, one-week delay in inspecting the problem could be 
too much. So we certainly understand the reasons for bringing it 
forward. But on balance we feel that the section 13 as it's 
written is probably a necessary part of the Act. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, would this be a standard as 
far as not giving any notice, say, in the oilfield if they had to do 
inspections, or in other aspects of the industry where in fact 
inspectors had to look at someone's operation, that they would 
. . . that there's no period of time given? It just seems strange to 
me that we couldn't look at perhaps one week. If in your 
example somebody has been burning stubble and in fact there's 
a nuisance because of it, I mean obviously you're going to be 
able to go there a week later and see what the problem was and 
still take some action on it. 
 
I'm probably thinking more in the sense of some of these 
intensive livestock operations, where perhaps it would be quite 
a nuisance to the operator to have someone coming on site, and 
in fact in a very unprepared manner having to perhaps break up 
whatever operation they're doing for the day or, you know, 
perhaps some aspect of their operation, you know, get into 
some amount of trouble because they're not prepared to take 
some time off to show inspectors around or to accommodate 
any inspections. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — If we look at subsection (7), this is 
a situation where an application is made to the board pursuant 
to this section, and the board may . . . So in the initial stages, 
when somebody makes a complaint, there wouldn't be 
inspections or there wouldn't be . . . There's no authority here to 
do inspections. Presumably the farmer would be willing to have 
the mediator or somebody from the department or whoever, out 
to look at it. But there would not be anything in this Act that 
would give those powers. 
 
This is when there's a formal application is made to the board.  



April 19, 1995 

 
1616 

At that point, the board has the right to inspect the premises. 
And at that stage, we're likely into some fairly serious disputes, 
and time would be of the essence to try to get the hearing done, 
and the board may want to inspect. 
 
Certainly it would be done with the cooperation of the farmer. It 
would be in the farmer's best interests to allow the board or 
somebody to view the operation as it occurs in a normal 
situation. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, one of the concerns, though, 
may arise . . . and I think I saw it section 26, in fact, where if a 
person obstructs or hinders an inspector in the performance of 
his or her duties, he could have a penalty or a fine of up to 
$50,000. And that's a first-time offence, Mr. Minister, which 
may also in itself be a problem having that high of an amount 
for a first-time offender. 
 
But in fact then, if there isn't any notice given and inspectors 
are allowed to just go into someone's operation and in fact if for 
whatever reason . . . I can't think of any right offhand why 
perhaps it's not convenient to those in the operation to have that 
inspection occur on that given day, then they would be 
subjected to quite a stiff penalty. 
 
And I just thought that perhaps you would agree that one week 
would be probably in order because it's not as though I don't — 
unless I've missed your point, Mr. Minister — there's not a lot 
of spot inspections anyways. This is only after an application 
has been made. So I mean there's really notice given already, is 
there not? — just through the application. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Section 26 applies to part II of the 
Act which is the pollution part, not a nuisance complaint to the 
board. And the reason there is, where the public interest is at 
stake, if there's pollution to Regina's groundwater supply or 
some town's water supply, then we think it's in the public 
interest that this problem is dealt with quickly. And that's why 
the industry has told us that some of the fines that we had were 
not adequate to deter that sort of thing. 
 
And I think everybody agrees, where there is a serious concern 
about groundwater in particular, which is the most common 
pollution that occurs, that there needs to be strong measures to 
deal with those situations, and deal with them quickly. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess I sense that 
you're not going to agree with me that any amount of time is 
reasonable. I will, however, move the amendment: 
 
 That clause 13 of the printed Bill be amended by adding 

immediately after the words "conduct an inspection" 
where they occur in clause (7)(b) the words "any time 
after one week's notice". 

 
I so move, Mr. Chair. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 

Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 14 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, this 
was also one of the proposed amendments that I had passed on 
to you two or three weeks ago. And of course I didn't receive a 
reply on this one either as far as what your feelings are, your 
department's feelings are, as far as having a time line put in 
there so that at least there's some limit as far as how far back we 
can go on operators. And I'd like to hear your comments in 
regards to that proposed amendment now, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again we thank the member for 
the suggestions. If you look at section 31, there is the power to 
roll over the permits and we will roll them over. Permits will be 
grandfathered; they will be rolled over. They will still have to 
apply by the standards in the new Act. 
 
The concern there is if you grandfather permits where there is 
groundwater or surface water or pollution, that that would not 
be in the best interests of the public. So we want to be sure that 
there isn't any serious pollution control and just . . . 
 
The Act will roll these over. We won't go back and make people 
reapply for permits, but we will expect them to comply with the 
conditions of the new Act in its terms. So it shouldn't create any 
problem unless there are some serious groundwater or surface 
water pollution that's now occurring in an operation that has a 
permit. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, when you talk about the 
permits, are you referring to whether these existing operators 
have to submit waste storage plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I missed the last 
question. I'm sorry. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, all I was asking was if the 
existing operators then . . . when you were talking about rolling 
over permits, I think I heard you say, but does that mean that 
they'll have to submit a waste storage plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, if they now have a permit they 
won't have to provide a waste storage plan. 
 
Clause 19 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 20 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank my 
officials for the information this afternoon and thank the 
opposition members for their comments and suggestions. 



April 19, 1995 

 
1617 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We'd also 
like to take the opportunity to thank the officials, and the 
minister for his answers today. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting Agricultural Operations 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce the 
officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
introduce the associate deputy minister, Les Cooke; on my right 
and behind Les is Ross MacLellan, the assistant deputy minister 
in charge of operations. On my left is the assistant deputy 
minister, Bob Blackwell of management services, and behind 
Bob is Donna Kellsey, the director of finance and 
administration. Bob McEachern, the manager of commercial 
services has joined us at the back of the House, and I would like 
to welcome them, and thank you for the opportunity to 
introduce them. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to 
welcome you here today, Mr. Minister, and the officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you are probably aware, today was the day that 
the World Wildlife Fund released their report dealing with the 
endangered spaces in Saskatchewan. And while it's not a very 
large report, I think it has considerable to say, as it affects 
Saskatchewan. And I would like to read a little bit from that 
report which was released today at 10 a.m. 
 
The headline is: Saskatchewan gets D plus for natural areas 
protection. Now, Mr. Minister, D plus is a significant change 
from last year. And while I don't have anything particularly 
against D's — since both my first and last name start with D — 
when it comes to a grade, a grade average, D's are not noted for 
being one that one would aspire to. Now perhaps Alberta 
should aspire to a D, but the rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker, seems 
to aspire for something more than that. 
 
Last year Saskatchewan had a B minus. And now I realize that 
there has been somewhat of a change to the accounting method 
or the grading method for the endangered spaces, but even with 
that change in place, Saskatchewan dropped from what they  

were last year, dropped under your administration that has 
promoted the idea, has presented motions to the House stating 
that the goals of the World Wildlife Fund are very laudable, that 
we need to pursue the goal to reach 12 to 13 per cent 
representation from each of our ecosystems. And yet under your 
administration, Mr. Minister, we've gone backwards from that 
— backwards. 
 
(1630) 
 
I'd like to quote from the report where it says: however, 
progress will have to be much quicker than this, and the public 
still hasn't seen a plan for the fulfilment of the current 
government's commitment to protect the endangered spaces of 
Saskatchewan. Such a plan is urgently required if the province 
is going to save remaining natural areas before it's too late. 
 
And the next line, I think is the one that typifies the entire 
operation of the government, not just in your department, 
but across the board, Mr. Minister. And I quote again: so 
far we have seen enthusiastic concern from the public and 
from the floor of the legislature, but limited progress on the 
ground. 
 
All talk and no action — that's basically the hallmark of your 
administration, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you respond to 
the World Wildlife Fund's criticism of your inaction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, if the member from 
Souris-Cannington has a little bit of patience, I will help him 
understand the problem. If the member had continued reading 
 I don't have the page open in front of me  I think he would 
have said . . . I think the report continued to say that 
reorganization of the department unfortunately allowed 
progress not to be made. 
 
I want to challenge some of the contentions of the World 
Wildlife Fund paper, while first of all saying that their goals 
and ours are the same. We want to put forward a biodiversity 
strategy that ensures a solid base for life to continue that our 
children inherit as rich a living earth as we have inherited, and 
so the objective in that sense is the same. 
 
But in terms of the assessment of what we have been doing, it is 
very clear to me that it is because of the reorganization of the 
department that we actually are beginning to get a hold on 
putting the basis in place to move forward. And I want to say 
cooperatively that we have been one of the first Canadian 
provinces to adopt the Canadian biodiversity strategy, and we 
will be supporting it at the Canadian council Ministry of 
Environment meeting in Yukon in May. And it outlines the 
strategies by which we, as a society, meet our international 
obligations in order to make sure that the world is a healthfully 
living planet for the future. 
 
So I want to possibly allow you further comment, allow the 
member from Souris-Cannington some further comment, but I 
want to simply to state clearly at the outset that we are proud of 
the direction we are taking, and we are on target to achieve the  



April 19, 1995 

 
1618 

objectives by the year 2000. 
 
And we just recently sponsored a Saskatchewan biodiversity 
convention at which more than 200 people attended from every 
interest area and society. And there was very strong support for 
the approach Saskatchewan has taken, albeit not the identical 
approach that some of the critics would use. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, the biodiversity 
conference that you had is again another example of your action 
— all talk and nothing happens. The Minister of Justice is all 
talk, and nothing happens. You're all talk and nothing happens. 
 
Every time the Minister of Finance makes a change in your 
budget, you reorganize your budget. Under that type of criteria, 
Mr. Minister, nothing is ever going to happen to protect the 
endangered spaces in Saskatchewan. Because every time it 
looks like something might happen, you'll reorganize the 
department, and now you have an excuse. Well we didn't get it 
done because we were reorganizing the department. Well, Mr. 
Minister, that is not a good enough excuse. 
 
Last year you did bring forward a number of protected areas, 
and I quote again from the report: a number of protected areas 
have been established over the last 18 months, but their 
contribution towards natural area representation has been 
minimal, in part because of the small size of most of these 
areas. Major efforts are needed now if we're going to meet the 
goal of maintaining Saskatchewan's natural heritage. 
 
Mr. Minister, simply reorganizing your department is a pretty 
pitiful excuse for not moving on these issues. You've already 
agreed with the proposals. Why don't you do something 
concrete about it? You had the opportunity with the Bronson 
forest, and what did you do? You sold it. Mr. Minister, those 
are the kinds of things that get you a D or that will drop you 
below that if you don't finally get off the pot and do something. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, are you going to do something with this 
budget that you're asking the province of Saskatchewan to allow 
you to spend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say to the 
member opposite that the only person that would give us a 
downgrade for the responsible work going on in the Bronson 
forest is the member opposite and one or two of his colleagues. 
 
That is necessary work that follows on agreements that are 
central to the nature of Saskatchewan and our relationship to 
first nations people and the resources that we are fortunate to 
jointly have an interest in in this province. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that we have a sound 
program in place to reach the objectives by the year 2000. I 
want to not dwell on the World Wildlife Fund's processes 
because, as you have acknowledged, they are in the process of 
changing them. 
 
Just so possibly you can understand the context in which we are  

moving forward as a society to protect our living systems, when 
the original objective was set out by the World Wildlife Fund 
that 12 per cent of the world's spaces should be set aside, one 
has to acknowledge that they would have to concede that the 
other 88 per cent of the earth's surface would have been put to 
some other use. 
 
So part of preserving ecosystems and living systems on earth is 
to do what we can with the 88 per cent to make it the most 
soundly managed environmental commodity or ecological 
commodity we have. And I want to say that farmers in 
Saskatchewan have been one of the prime movers in moving 
responsibly in that direction; 23 per cent of Saskatchewan 
farmers have moved to direct seeding in order to provide better 
protection for the soil and more friendly habitat for wildlife and 
the various biota that live on farm land. 
 
And I want to say that we have recently come up with a policy 
on wetlands. And I want to say that we have recently tabled a 
new forest Act. And I want to say that we have recently put out 
the state of the environment report, analysing the boreal plain in 
Saskatchewan, identifying what we yet need to do. I want to say 
that we have initiated a gap analysis, which is the analysis of 
what our objectives are relative to what we have already done to 
see where we need to do more. That is all in process. And the 
process by which we will proceed is a process of strong public 
involvement. 
 
The member opposite speaks negatively about taking time to do 
things. Well he spoke earlier today about the underground 
storage tank issue in Saskatchewan. I can tell you the way not to 
handle it is the way the previous government handled it. The 
way not to handle it is to say, we think this is a good solution; 
live with it. Well we inherited that mess from the members 
opposite, and we've had to make adjustments to the program 
because it makes more sense to do things differently. 
 
And I'm telling you that as we set out these policies and 
programs, as we identify areas that need to be representative 
areas, as we identify new approaches to wetlands management 
or farm management or whatever it is in the economy, we are 
going to do it with broad consultation because good 
environmental management — and that is the basis for 
ecosystem health — sound environmental management is based 
on a public understanding for what is necessary and good and 
the individual and corporate commitment to doing that. I can 
tell you that we are soundly based on achieving that goal. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well indeed 
environmental management does take planning, but it also takes 
action. When you talk about sound programs, I think that goes 
back to my original comments: sound, words — no action. And 
that's where you're still at. With all your fancy programs that 
you just put out propaganda about, are you protecting a single 
acre, a single acre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I don't understand the exact focus of the 
question. The way in which we have approached the challenge 
of biodiversity maintenance and maintaining the health of the  



April 19, 1995 

 
1619 

ecosystem is to approach it on a number of fronts, and some of 
that is working specifically with endangered species — to make 
sure that the burrowing owl and the swift fox and the whooping 
crane and other birds and wildlife and species that are at risk are 
helped back, hopefully, by changing our practices to become 
normal in the population again. 
 
I can tell you last year, we set up the Quill Lakes Western 
Hemispheric Shorebird Reserve — not acknowledged in the 
report, by the way — in order to provide a nesting and feeding 
ground for migratory birds. 
 
I can say that we need to work on, as I said earlier, the 
environmental management. We need to work on the 
identification of special areas within which the living systems 
are contained, so we have to identify the land forms and the 
various climatic and microclimatic areas in the province, each 
of which has an unique living system. 
 
Clearly, we have many, many, many, many acres of areas in the 
province that are protected. And we have significant amount of 
work already in place, but we have lots of work yet to do. 
 
So the question of whether we have protected 1 acre — we have 
protected hundreds of thousands of acres. We've protected 
millions of acres, and we, on top of that, have commitments 
from individuals, commitments from people who believe that 
it's their personal duty to do something about it, to protect their 
own spaces — all unidentified yet and all not part of the counts 
of those who would do that sort of counting. 
 
So I can say yes, proudly; we have done very good work in that 
area. We need to identify where specifically yet we have to do 
more. And in setting out on that path, we published, as you're 
aware, earlier, in the last few months, a map of Saskatchewan, 
an ecoregions map, which identifies the various ecoregions in 
the province. 
 
As you will be aware — if I can find the report — the third 
State of the Environment Report identifies those broad areas 
and specifically deals with the Boreal Plain as an area for study 
now and for examination, identifying the strengths and 
weaknesses of the management programs in that area till now. 
 
And that will continue, but we will also look more deeply into 
each area  to identify what specific, living system habitat has 
to be protected in order to make sure that the basis of the life 
that we're a part of continues. 
 
So yes, we've done many, many acres of protection, but the 
basis for our process is a process of identifying ecosystems that 
need protection, and they will sometimes be identified in acres 
and sometimes will be identified in practices. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the World Wildlife 
Fund didn't give you a downgrade because you were making 
plans; they gave you a downgrade because you were not making 
plans and that you were not protecting any additional 
endangered spaces. That's why they gave you a downgrade. 

Mr. Minister, when you're going through your environmental 
audit study that you just held up, surely within there you 
identified some areas. You presented three or four statements to 
the House in the last session that you were protecting new 
areas, the Steepbanks area. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while you're busy talking with your colleague 
across there, what are you doing to protect additional spaces? 
When you're talking about species, species can be designated as 
endangered and protected, but if they don't have a habitat in 
which to reside, that endangerment will continue until they 
become extinct. 
 
So it's just not the species, Mr. Minister, that needs to be 
protected, but the habitat in which they live. And that's why it's 
so important that the endangered spaces be protected — to 
provide that habitat for those species such as the Baird's 
sparrow, I believe is one of those, that can be provided a space, 
a habitat for themselves to recover from that endangered species 
list because the habitat in which they reside is being used up, is 
no longer available to them to reside in. 
 
And that's why the World Wildlife Fund is critical of you, why 
they have downgraded Saskatchewan in relationship to the rest 
. . . to their grading system. 
 
When you look at this, Mr. . . . their national report, we're at the 
lower end of the scale, Mr. Minister. There's only one province 
that has something below a D and that's Alberta. And I'm sure 
that your government does not wish in any way, shape, or form 
to emulate Alberta's example. Even Manitoba's higher than we 
are. They have a C minus; British Columbia, your colleagues 
there of the same political persuasion, just got an increase again 
today. They're now an A minus. But yet you're going 
backwards, Mr. Minister. 
 
So when are you going to do something to protect some more 
endangered spaces? What's your plan? When is it going to 
happen? What are the time frames? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, it 
may be useful to note that the vast majority of assessments in 
this plan are D's, and not to get into rating systems but as I 
already identified to you, the World Wildlife Fund has decided 
it is going to shift the way it evaluates. We were one of the ones 
who encouraged them to shift the way they evaluate because we 
believe that our approach is the right approach and we will 
continue to proceed in that approach, and that is to proceed in a 
logical way of policy development that leads to an opportunity 
for our society to move forward together with one commitment 
to achieve these goals. 
 
I want to put out a challenge to the member opposite. Now that 
we've adopted the Canadian biodiversity strategy — and we'll 
be supporting the national biodiversity strategy at our Canadian 
conference of ministers of the Environment — I would 
encourage the member opposite to consider putting his blessing  



April 19, 1995 

 
1620 

to that approach. 
 
I would ask the member opposite to acknowledge that only two 
years ago we set aside 3.4 million acres in The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act, which is not acknowledged by the World 
Wildlife Fund because of the way they are doing ratings. I can 
tell you that those lands are substantially protected in terms of 
the ecosystem functioning. 
 
The member opposite could, if he's very interested in this, take 
up Saskatchewan's cause with his brothers in the World 
Wildlife Fund and encourage them to understand that 
Saskatchewan has done much, rather than making up political 
speeches about the inadequacy of what's being done when he 
knows it's not true. 
 
I want to say that only recently we adopted a new wetland 
strategy for Saskatchewan. I would encourage the member 
opposite to take his public stance with others in adopting the 
wetland policy as an appropriate policy that helps us re-examine 
the way we use wetlands in Saskatchewan. I want to encourage 
the member opposite — and he will get a chance as we work 
through out new forest Act which is tabled as a White Paper in 
this legislature in this session — to take a stand in favour of the 
significant measures in the new forest Act. 
 
The member opposite wants me to go on and list the real 
measures we're taking as government. I could keep you here till 
10 o'clock tonight, but I list these only so that the member 
opposite understands that there are things that are being done 
that are significant. And the member opposite ought to commit 
himself to the significant measures that are taking place so that 
the empty words he speaks on the other side actually have some 
substance to them, because the meat is here, I can assure the 
member. And I'll list some more if he cares to get up and 
continue the debate on that front. The meat is here, and we're 
going to continue to implement according to a very sound plan 
on a very sound basis. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, the 3.2 million acres 
that you talk about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three point four. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Three point four, excuse me. Habitat is 
environment that is under cultivation in a lot of cases. It's areas 
that farmers have set aside and said, we will not burn. We will 
not do brush clearing. We will leave the land as it is. And that's 
the kind of environment you're talking about. It's not natural, 
pristine ecosystem that was in place as it was before your and 
my ancestors arrived on this continent. It's as it is today after 
we've changed it. And that's the kind of an environment you're 
talking about. 
 
The World Wildlife Fund is looking for spaces that can be 
protected in their natural state, not in some altered state. And 
that's what they're asking for: 12 to 13 per cent of the varieties 
of our ecosystems to be protected in their natural state, Mr. 
Minister. And that's not what you have been doing. 

They're looking for new lands to come into that protection 
system and you're not providing that. When we do have areas 
that have been set aside as recreational areas or protected areas, 
you're diminishing the number of acres in those areas, not 
increasing it, Mr. Minister. And that's why you're getting the 
downgrade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well I ask the member opposite to please 
go home and do a little bit of research before he speaks more 
ineloquently on the subject on which he seriously misspoke 
himself a minute ago. 
 
I can tell the member that the condition for protection of the 
lands under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is that it has 
not been cultivated. It has not had the treatment the member 
opposite identifies. This is protected land. 
 
And as I asked the member a minute ago, I would ask the 
member to stop trying to make Saskatchewan look negative 
when we're doing very, very positive work. I asked the member 
to work with us in identifying for these people who reside 
outside of Saskatchewan, that what is going on in 
Saskatchewan is sound. Because I can tell the member that at 
the biodiversity conference here in Saskatchewan, all of the 
provincial conservation organizations were represented and the 
World Wildlife Fund was not. 
 
I say, I continue to say, that we share their goals. But we would 
also ask them to make a commitment to Saskatchewan. I can 
say to the member opposite that we engaged in a five-year 
agreement with the World Wildlife Fund some time ago. After 
two years they withdrew their funding. And we've continued 
that work and the endangered species program on our own 
without their funding. 
 
So I simply say that Saskatchewan has acted with discipline and 
with commitment and in support of the initiatives that we have 
launched. And I would challenge the assessments that say that 
that work has not gone on here. And I would invite the member 
opposite to be more positive about the very sound work that 
we're doing here and to, as I said earlier, give his public support 
to the significant initiatives that we have launched because it's 
important that we all work on this together. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:54 p.m. 
 
 
 


