






















































May 2, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 2, 1995 

 

 
1913 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from the Shaunavon, 
Webb, Gull Lake area of south-west Saskatchewan. I'll read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Wawota, Kenosee, Maryfield, 
Prince Albert, Crystal Springs, Spruce Home areas of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, and even one from Cranbrook, B.C. 
(British Columbia). I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
to present a petition on behalf of residents of the province who 
are gravely concerned about the potential implications of 
proposed federal gun control legislation. The prayer of the 
petition reads, and I quote: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing  

 rovinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough people think that all of those 
who are opposed to this are from rural Saskatchewan, but the 
signatures here, the majority are from Regina. 
 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

adequate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
Deputy Clerk: — Mr. Kowalsky, Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Estimates, presents the fourth report of the said 
committee, which reflects estimates for the Provincial Auditor, 
estimates for the Legislative Assembly. The report is hereby 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Moosomin: 
 
 That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Estimates be now concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — I give notice that I shall on day 64 ask the 
government the following question: 
 
 Regarding SaskTel: (1) what was the cost of sending of 

Clay Gegner, Trisha Shearer, Edward Splett, and Patti 
Kindred to the effective executive program at Waskesiu 
in 1992; (2) what was the cost of sending Hank Pulles 
and Rick Tabin to the effective executive program at 
Waskesiu in 1993; (3) what are the names of all SaskTel 
employees who participated in the effective executive 
program at Waskesiu in 1994; (4) what are all costs 
associated with these employees attending this seminar; 
(5) what are the names of all employees who have 
enrolled in this seminar for the current year? 



May 2, 1995 

 
1914 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today seated in your 
gallery is 35 grade 8 students from St. Henry's. They're down on 
a tour of the legislature today. They're accompanied with their 
teacher, Garth Gleisinger, and bus driver Al Schatz. 
 
I'll be meeting with this group later on this afternoon for drinks 
and questions, and I'd like all members of the Assembly to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to the 
House a person who is visiting here — his name is Brian 
Aubichon — in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Aubichon worked with me in northern teacher 
education program. He was also in the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan 
urban native teacher education program) program in Saskatoon 
as a coordinator, and he's been working now in the Yukon for a 
few years in teacher education. 
 
So I'd like to have the members give him a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with my colleague in welcoming Brian back. 
Brian was a constituent of mine when I first got elected, and I 
haven't seen him since he left. So it's good to see you back here. 
And I know that members will again give you a nice, warm 
welcome, Brian. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Contact Lake Gold Mine Job Program 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is more 
evidence that the Saskatchewan government's employment 
strategies for the North are having a significant impact. 
 
Recently the member for Cumberland signed an agreement with 
Cameco Corporation for the Contact Lake gold mine, which 
outlines a training program that will help put Northerners in 
available jobs. This agreement will help develop a fully skilled 
and competitive workforce in the North. This program will be 
implemented through the multi-party training plan to train mill 
operators, underground miners, and electrical and mechanical 
apprentices. 
 
The multi-party training plan is a five-year agreement signed 
last fall by Cameco, COGEMA Resources, the Cigar Lake 
Mining Corporation, Prince Albert Grand Council, and the 
three levels of government. Its purpose is to train Northerners in 
new jobs in northern mines. 
 

When the mine at Contact Lake was officially opened in 
February, 66 of the 100 production workers were Northerners. 
In the next six years, Cameco expects to pay more than $20 
million in salaries to the northern workers and contractors. 
 
With the help of these companies and a commitment by 
government, more and more Northerners are receiving training 
and meaningful jobs in the North — Saskatchewan's North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grant for Weyburn Alternative Education Program 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my pleasure to 
present a cheque for $12,000 to the Weyburn School Division 
as part of the community partnership for alternative education 
program. This funding is a prevention and support grant from 
Saskatchewan's action plan for children. 
 
The $12,000 will be used to support the establishment of an 
alternate education program for youth in Weyburn and area. 
Under the prevention and support grants for '94-95, $1.4 
million was available to community organizations for projects 
that enhance or support the well-being of children and families. 
 
The community partnership for alternative education is one of 
10 projects being funded by Education, Training and 
Employment. The organization is a partnership involving 
government agencies at three levels: volunteer organizations, 
industries, and local businesses who are committed to serving 
the needs of the community. 
 
These projects provide alternative education programs, in a 
setting other than a school, for adolescents under the age of 18 
who require more support services than the traditional school 
system can provide. These students are at risk for drop-out, 
poor attendance, low achievement, and problem behaviour. 
 
Congratulations to the Weyburn School Division and all of the 
other local groups and organizations who are involved in this 
worthwhile project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Child Care Facilities 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week there was 
discussion in the Assembly on farm safety. Too many farm 
workers are killed or injured on the job each year and one 
accident is one too many. What we didn't mention is the safety 
of farm children, and we should not forget that tragically they 
are also victims of farm accidents. 
 
Because of this sad fact and because of this government's 
general concern for the well-being of all children, I'm happy to 
recognize an innovative new program designed to enhance rural 
child care, information, and skills. 
 
Last week it was announced that child care resource facilities  



May 2, 1995 

 
1915 

will be established in 35 rural service centres around the 
province. The first one will be in Fort Qu'Appelle, with the 
others to follow by late fall, including one in Indian Head, in 
my riding. 
 
The departments of Agriculture and Social Services will 
combine to make information on child care available. This 
initiative has come about after extensive consultation with rural 
groups and with the National Coalition for Rural Child Care. 
 
The 35 locations will be equipped with brochures, fact sheets, 
videos, and information on child care and child safety. As well, 
the service centres will be able to provide special classes and 
training where requested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a forward-looking program designed 
to protect and enhance the lives of rural children. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Adult Education 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I'd like to 
talk about adult education. I've been talking this over with 
several people in my constituency and this is what some of 
them have to say. 
 
Adult education and salvation are a waste of time. This is from 
Lorraine Hatfield: 
 
 For myself, adult education is a salvation, only there are 

some days I just don't seem to be with it. My brain 
wanders. On those days it seems like a waste of time, 
but deep down I know that it isn't. 

 
 I guess for some people adult education is or has saved 

their lives. It has saved them from having to go to the 
food bank or collecting that welfare cheque in order to 
just survive. Adult education has given them the 
courage to at least look for work and hopefully find 
work so they're not having to return to the degrading 
ways of survival. 

 
 For some adults it is a waste of time. They just don't 

have the incentive to work hard and better themselves or 
their families. Most of them have been glued into the 
welfare system for generations and have no desire to 
achieve any real goal. These are people who wait 
impatiently for that hard-working postal employee to 
deliver their welfare cheque every month. 

 
 My daughter's friends and family are all proud of me, as 

I am, for having the courage, incentive, and motivation 
to return to school. I know the end result will mean 
better employment. School ultimately is my family's 
salvation. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wynyard Mayor Wins YWCA Women of Distinction 
Award 

 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Thursday the member from Regina Wascana Plains announced 
the winners of the Regina YWCA Women of Distinction 
Awards. And she said, quite correctly, that in 90 seconds she 
could not do justice to their accomplishments but only give 
their names. 
 
I want to take a moment to comment briefly on one of the 
winners. Each deserve special praise, but Her Worship Sharon 
Armstrong of Wynyard is of particular interest to me and my 
constituency. 
 
She is currently serving her fourth term as mayor. That means 
that four times she has asked the opinion of the voters of 
Wynyard and four times they have given their approval. I envy 
that success rate. 
 
She has maintained her respect in the community by leading by 
example, by facilitating and guiding rather than by ordering. 
She urges her citizens to take responsibility for the town's 
betterment and she asks that they bring forward solutions as 
well as complaints. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the senior, the student, and the big-time 
business person, will tell you that she treats everyone with the 
same consideration and the same respect. She learned her 
people skills and her love for her town and her province and 
country in the 30 years she spent in a classroom before 
becoming mayor. 
 
I think the YWCA was wise in selecting the category of 
contribution to a rural community, and its first honouree in this 
category was most deserving. Congratulations to Her Worship, 
Mayor Sharon Armstrong of Wynyard. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Adult Basic Education Program 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd just 
like to take a moment this afternoon to recognize the efforts of 
a very worthwhile program. And it's not only a program that's 
available in our area but it's available across the province, and 
I'm talking about the adult basic education program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of attending an adult basic 
education graduation on Friday evening in the community of 
Moosomin. And certainly when you see the effort that has been 
put forward and you observe the students as they seem to be so 
full of . . . and feeling so proud of their achievement, I think it's 
certainly worthwhile when people are looking at avenues with 
which they can better their lives. And the fact that the adult  



May 2, 1995 

 
1916 

basic education program is available I think is something that 
certainly needs to be commended. And I want to extend a hearty 
thank you to the Southeast Regional College network for the 
work and their efforts in continuing this program as well as to 
the board and to the leadership of Mr. Bill Haussecker from 
Maryfield. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Talk Mail 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I had the 
opportunity of standing in for the minister responsible for 
SaskTel, the Deputy Premier. At Michael A. Riffel High School 
there was a news conference where we kicked off SaskTel's 
new Talk Mail. This technological advance pushes 
Saskatchewan further into the front lines of technology. Talk 
Mail, Mr. Speaker, will be available to literally every 
Saskatchewan telephone user by the end of 1995 when the 
digitization of SaskTel is complete. Used in sending and in 
receiving, Talk Mail is controlled specifically by each 
individual. 
 
As I participated in the news conference this morning, the 
excitement of the announcement kept growing stronger and 
stronger. Schools have an immediate, cost-effective way of 
communicating to their target group of households. 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was also a part in the pilot project, 
and the Pool has very high praise for this technological 
advance. Community groups will be natural users of this new 
product. 
 
Incidentally the SaskTel team leader is none other than a David 
Claypool, a former classmate of mine and also a product of the 
village of Beechy. It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, some do the 
work, and some take the credit. And I thank David and his team 
for that. 
 
I'm delighted Saskatchewan people and businesses can 
participate in using Talk Mail. Congratulations to the 
announcement participants: from SaskTel, Louise Robitaille; 
from Michael A. Riffel, vice-president, Ben Grebinski; from 
Sask Pool, David Anderson; and from Octel, Sheila Flynn. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Taxes 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again we are pleased to bring forward some questions on behalf 
of the people of the province of Saskatchewan under the "Mr. 
Premier, I want to know" initiative. 
 
This question comes from Enoch Aorrestad from Debden, 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, we are very happy that our deficit 
has been eliminated but we hope that you would also reduce our 
tax burden. As a small business owner and operator, I find it 
very tempting to set up shop in Alberta. The 9 per cent E & H 
(education and health) tax is very high. In Alberta, it is zero.  

There's a big difference in the bottom line. How do you propose 
to continue to cut costs and taxes? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I thank you very much for that question. Actually this 
morning I did a little bit of adding, and what I have figured out 
is that since we became government in 1991 we have provided 
the people of this province with $220 million in tax cuts. 
 
First of all, we eliminated the PST (provincial sales tax) on 
children's clothing, books, and other things that the Tories had 
put the education and health tax on. Then we provided a 
number of targeted tax cuts to business to ensure that jobs were 
created. 
 
And in our most recent budget, we provided $150 income tax 
cut to individuals, $300 per family, and we have committed that 
as our finances improve, there will be further tax reductions. 
 
But what the member has to know is that, thus far, we have 
reduced taxes to the tune of $220 million each and every year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Damage Deposits 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, comes from B.M. 
Boardman from Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, this question is 
representative of questions that we are receiving, literally 
dozens of questions, along this same line from concerned 
landlords across the province. And certainly my Martensville 
office has had its fair share. 
 
Mr. Boardman wants to know, Mr. Premier, and he says: I want 
to know why your government will not increase damage 
deposits for landlords and demand responsibility from those 
few bad tenants that are making renting such a chore for the 
many good ones. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Minister 
of Social Services, and I had a meeting with the landlords' 
association last fall in which we went into this issue very 
extensively. And at the end of that meeting, we agreed on a 
process whereby we would involve the landlords and the tenant 
groups and the Department of Justice and Social Services in a 
study of the situation to try and agree upon the factual 
background against which a decision had been made. 
 
We're still waiting for that report. We understand it's in the final 
stages and we should get it any time, but we haven't yet got it. 
When we get it, we've got to sit down with it and very quickly 
make a decision about this question of a damage deposit 
because it certainly is of interest to a lot of people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 2, 1995 

 
1917 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question 
comes from Debbie Demitor from Frobisher. Debbie writes: 
Mr. Premier, I want to know, once our budget is balanced, are 
you going to reduce our sales tax? We keep waiting for things 
to improve but every budget more of our pay cheques are eaten 
up. It's at the point where a person is afraid of a raise because 
they might move you into a higher tax bracket. Are you going to 
reduce the sales tax, the gasoline tax, and push for the GST 
(goods and services tax) to be lowered? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I thank him for that question. 
 
As I've stated, I have added up the tax reductions that this 
government has already made since 1991 — $220 million in tax 
cuts. In this budget we chose to reduce the income tax for one 
simple — rather than the sales tax — for one simple reason: 
there is a greater benefit to the pocketbook of the average 
family by that tax cut. 
 
Now what I'm saying to the members opposite is this 
government is committed to reducing taxes as the tax cuts 
become affordable. We're not committed to lavish promises the 
way they are to reduce this tax, this tax, this tax; the deficit goes 
up, as when they were in power, and taxes go up. 
 
We have committed to reduce taxes. We've delivered on that 
commitment. We've said as our finances improve there will be 
further tax cuts. We will deliver on that commitment as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question comes from Dan Kitiak from Calder and it's addressed 
to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I want to know what T.C. Douglas 
would tell you about all the gambling machines you have placed 
in Saskatchewan, plus casinos coming. Do you have to legally 
rob the people to govern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 
the gaming program of the Government of Saskatchewan and 
the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan, you well know 
that there has been a great deal of debate in the Assembly when 
it comes to the announcement of the Regina casino for example. 
There is a great deal of support in the business community and 
the community at large for the casino in Regina. 
 
And that certainly is indicated by the fact that the members in 
opposition have not raised any questions about the Regina 
casino in the last 50 days. And that would . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three hours in Finance. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, in question period. In question 
period. 
 
And the fact that Dan would write in and ask the question at 
least shows some leadership, that he's not playing politics like 
the rest of you. Because if it is such a big issue, why have you 
not been asking questions here in question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question comes from David E. Kelbert from Chitek Lake: Mr. 
Premier, I want to know if your party is prepared to fight the 
new federal gun law proposal on the basis that it is an 
infringement on our civil rights to own property, which is a 
provincial, not federal, jurisdiction? If not, what property do 
you own, Mr. Premier, that you are willing to have banned and 
confiscated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well I think that the member from 
Maple Creek will help us answer this question when he writes 
to the gentleman from Chitek Lake and tells him that this 
government, in cooperation with both opposition parties, have 
been fighting this gun law, fighting it with everything at our 
disposal, and really taking a national leadership role with 
respect to the question of fighting it. 
 
I've also said publicly and say again that when this law is 
passed, our lawyers will be taking a long, careful look at it to 
see whether it does infringe, whether it departs from the 
criminal law and the federal government's exclusive powers 
with respect to law and actually infringes on the civil rights of 
people and therefore becomes a matter within provincial 
jurisdiction. 
 
We don't know what the answer to that is now, Mr. Speaker, but 
we intend to research it, as does the Government of Alberta, I 
believe, when we know what it is that parliament finally passes 
if, heaven forbid, they pass anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 
afternoon is to the Premier or his designate. 
 
Mr. Premier, if there's one word I hear time and time again 
when people talk about your government it's that it's unfair. It's 
unfair that you got elected by promising lower taxes and then 
you raise taxes; it's unfair that you attack health care and close 
52 rural hospitals; it's unfair that you tore up 60,000 GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) contracts with the farmers 
who are counting on that money. And it's especially unfair that 
after all the hardship you've inflicted on every Saskatchewan 
family that you and a handful of the front bench NDP (New 
Democratic Party) cronies are standing in line to collect a  



May 2, 1995 

 
1918 

million dollar pension when you retire. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you think your MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) pension is fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
question. The member raises three important issues. One, the 
policy as it would relate to taxes, and I'm pleased to say that 
following nine years of devastation and a $15 billion deficit, 
even at that, we were able to balance the books and lower the 
taxes, as my colleague the Minister of Finance has indicated, by 
$200 million. 
 
As it would relate to health care, quite honestly, if you believe 
that the public of Saskatchewan would trust the Conservatives 
again with medicare, you've got another thought coming. Or if 
you would trust the Liberals, given what happened under Ross 
Thatcher in this province and under Chrétien at the present 
time; health care, I want to say, is much better protected under a 
New Democratic government than any other of the opposition 
parties. 
 
As it would relate to pensions, I want to say we have already 
said that this deal, dealing with the old pensions/new pensions, 
will be dealt with by the Assembly, by the Board of Internal 
Economy before the election. And we've said that clearly. 
 
Now I just want to make one final comment. I noticed today in 
the Leader-Post an ad where that member, the Leader of the 
Conservative Party, has a wonderful picture and is out on the 
campaign trail. But I want to say that we should read the fine 
print because at the bottom of the ad you'll find in very, very 
small print, "Progressive Conservative Party . . ." And I want to 
say to the public: be sure you read the fine print before you vote 
for those boys over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan have 
read the fine print with regard to your pension. They've read the 
fine print with regard to your pension, and they've found the 
Premier's pension will be in the magnitude of $122,000 if he's 
elected for one more term. They've read the fine print about you 
on the front bench who have that kind of pension waiting in 
line for them, Mr. Minister. 
 
That's why later today, Mr. Minister, I'll be introducing 
legislation to make it fair to the people of Saskatchewan by 
capping it at 50 per cent of the highest salary you have earned 
while in office. That'll still be $44,000 a year for the Premier of 
this province. That's more than most people are making working 
in this province, Mr. Premier, but it's considerably less than the 
$120,000 he'd be getting under the pension scheme that he 
operates under today. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you agree to cap your pension, at the very  

least . . . of 50 per cent of your current salary, 50 per cent of 
your current salary which, I think, the people of Saskatchewan 
would feel is fair. Or do you still believe it is fair to expect 
taxpayers to provide the Premier of this province with $120,000 
pension after his career is over? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say again to the members 
opposite, who continue to dwell in their imagination of 
pensions worth $120,000 . . . and I know the Liberal leader the 
other day was using that number, $123,000. It's interesting, as 
we said in the past, that her pension . . . the Leader of the 
Liberal Party, if she were in the position of Leader of the 
Opposition for the next 25 years, as the Leader of the NDP has 
been working for the people of the province for 25 or 30 years, 
her pension will be in excess of a million dollars. That's a fact. 
 
But when the members opposite now try to make an issue of 
pensions, I ask the Conservatives legitimately, where were you 
for nine years when this pension plan was in place, as Eric 
Berntson took the old pension plan and went on to the Senate. 
Where do you get off today when you're at 5 or 10 per cent in 
the polls now, on the Road to Damascus, desperate, now try to 
say, if only, if only we had to do it over again we would have 
dealt with this and that and the other thing. 
 
Look, you're not legitimate on this. You're not telling the truth 
when you say the Premier has $123,000 pension, any more than 
the Leader of the Liberal Party was honest when she said the 
123,000. 
 
I ask the member from Greystone, come clean, tell us what your 
pension would be if in fact you had spent the same amount of 
time. It would be in excess of a million dollars, and you know 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, most 
people in Saskatchewan don't belong to any kind of a pension 
plan. Most people have to buy RRSPs (registered retirement 
savings plan) if they plan to save for their retirement. 
 
Why should MLAs, Mr. Minister, get special treatment 
compared to the people we represent? I think the MLA pension 
plan should be eliminated entirely following the next election. 
And that's exactly what the legislation we'll be presenting this 
afternoon will do. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you show that you people are willing to make 
sacrifices, starting at the top? Will you support the legislation 
we'll be introducing this afternoon, capping your million dollar 
pensions, and cancelling MLA pensions entirely after the next 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to say to the member  



May 2, 1995 

 
1919 

opposite that it's very clear that desperate politicians make 
desperate promises, and really that's what we're seeing from the 
member opposite. 
 
But I want to say the reality is something quite different when it 
comes to members of the opposition. Earlier this session we 
brought in a Bill that dealt with part-time workers in this 
province that allows for pensions for a group of people who up 
to this point have not had pensions. And what did every one of 
you do, Liberal and Conservative? You voted against giving 
part-time workers pensions. That's what the member for 
Greystone voted against. That's what you, sir, voted against. 
 
And I say to you, that even Gary Broker, who I believe is a 
candidate for the Liberal Party, at the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation) annual meeting, said that teachers under 
the old plan, or people under the old pension plan, including 
MLAs, should be allowed to carry on in those pension plans, if 
that was the deal. That's the Liberal Party. 
 
Now which side is the Liberal Party on? Does Gary Broker 
speak for the Liberal Party, or does the member from 
Greystone? Let's get it straight. Let's have some honesty in 
politics, not this old-style Liberal politics from the 1960s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Board Costs 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday we learned that the health board deficits in 1993-94 
were $15 million and that this government apparently continues 
to condone and indeed approve health board deficits. The 
minister attributes these deficits to start-up costs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, last month in Yorkton, start-up costs and a 
million dollar deficit required closing 28 beds and laying off 10 
more support staff. In Regina, start-up costs and a $6.5 million 
deficit required 137 bed closures and 109 more people without 
jobs. 
 
The minister talks about start-up problems, but the bold fact is 
ongoing bed closures and lay-offs. Yet somehow the province 
has managed to spend more on health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Health. How 
many more bed closures will there be, and how many more 
health care workers will have to lose their jobs, before your 
government realizes that this is a situation out of control? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when I am called upon to 
respond to the Leader of the Third Party in this House, I need to 
spend some of the time correcting the things that she will say in 
a preamble to a question. 
 
She says in the preamble to the question, we're spending more 
on health care today than we were in 1991. If she would just  

care to consult the budget books and compare, she will find in 
fact we are spending less today than we were spending in 1991. 
And she knows full well that had we not made change in health 
care spending across Saskatchewan, the budget today would not 
be $1.5 billion; it would be 1.9 to $2 billion, or $400 million 
more. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, from the political leader in this House 
who goes around the province saying you've got to cut the size 
of government; you've got to cut the size of spending. 
 
Now she asks about the future of quality of care in our 
province. We have, Mr. Speaker, through the process of 
renewal and reform, restructured, so that we're confident we can 
deliver quality health care to all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
If she wants to be of some assistance in this, she may want to 
talk to her federal cousins in Ottawa who are planning to cut 
federal funding to health care across Canada by significant 
amounts, thereby threatening the very foundation of medicare in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One major 
problem with the health system is administrative costs. Money 
is going to administration rather than health programs and 
front-line workers. Health boards used to be volunteer boards, 
Mr. Speaker. Now board members receive as much as $300 and 
chairpersons as much as $525 just for attending meetings. 
 
Now assuming that boards meet an average of once per week, 
that means the taxpayers pay some $3.3 million a year in board 
meeting per diems alone, and that doesn't include the millions 
that must go for board member travel; $3.3 million would pay 
for 125 licensed practical nurses each year. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister: governing is about choices. What 
kind of a choice is it where volunteer boards are replaced by 
multimillion dollar boards instead of using that money to take 
care of the sick in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again for the benefit of 
members and those who may follow the proceedings of the 
legislature, the Liberal leader misleads the people of the 
province in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she talks about the question of boards under the 
previous structure, as if there were no costs attached to these 
boards. She talks as if they were volunteer boards without costs. 
Mr. Speaker, we've had a number of districts do very careful 
analysis of board costs prior and board costs since the 
restructuring and change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can report today to the House that the Prairie 
West District, for instance, prior to the restructuring and change 
to the district model, were spending $95,000 on an annual basis  



May 2, 1995 

 
1920 

in board per diems and expenses. Today that cost is $62,000. 
Mr. Speaker, the South Central District Board were spending 
$97,000 prior to the change. Now under the district board, their 
costs are $72,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, she talks about choices, and I do find it 
interesting, I do find it interesting that when we see the 
advertisements from the Tories, they're trying to hide the fact 
that they're Progressive Conservative, trying to hide the fact. I 
think this Liberal is trying to hide the fact that she's a Liberal 
now. Does she stand in the tradition of the Liberals of 
Saskatchewan, in the tradition of kicking down the doors of the 
legislature to stop medicare? Is that the tradition she stands in, 
Mr. Speaker? Perhaps she could answer that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
problem, Mr. Speaker, with this NDP government is they don't 
realize that more administration doesn't mean better health care. 
Other provinces have undergone health care reform as well, and 
they too have set up district health boards, Mr. Speaker. 
Somehow this government thinks that the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan can afford to pay more for their board members 
than the taxpayers in neighbouring provinces. 
 
To the Health minister: why is it that Saskatchewan health 
board per diems are set at a higher rate than elsewhere, Mr. 
Minister, and why do you continually set these rates at levels 
that the taxpayers of our province can't afford? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have shared with the 
member today, from two districts, a comparison of actual costs 
in terms of board expenses. She will persist in making her claim 
that there . . . that expenses are growing, but the people of 
Saskatchewan will judge on the basis, I think, Mr. Speaker, of 
credibility. 
 
Now the people of Manitoba recently judged on the issue of 
credibility. Here's something from the Winnipeg Free Press, 
Mr. Speaker, a headline which reads, "Grit policies . . . (Grit 
meaning Liberal) Grit policies medicare's death knell." 
 
Now that's the kind of interpretation that's being given to the 
policies of the Liberal Party by a Liberal newspaper. And we 
notice, we do notice, Mr. Speaker, on the question of 
credibility, when it came to choosing in Manitoba, the Liberals 
came dead last. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have yet to 
see an announcement from this government where 
administration positions will be cut in order to maintain 
front-line health services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister: what makes you think that the  

people of this province would rather have high-priced 
administration instead of hospital beds and nurses? 
 
I've been from one end of Saskatchewan to the other, Mr. 
Minister, and this is precisely what the people of Saskatchewan 
are talking about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Third 
Party would take some counsel from other than her own 
political staff, she would know that across Saskatchewan 
administrative costs and the delivery of health care have been 
coming down and coming down dramatically, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is indeed an accomplishment of the integration of 
services and the reforming of our health care delivery system. 
 
Now the question that's being asked. She talked earlier today 
about choices, and indeed the people of Saskatchewan do have 
choices in the leadership for their government. And they recall, 
they recall the position of the Liberal Party when we fought the 
battle for medicare in Saskatchewan. They recall that position. 
They recall the party that fought medicare; now they're back in 
charge in Ottawa and we see the outcome. Do we want them in 
charge in Saskatchewan? I think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
wondering if the Finance minister's had the opportunity to clear 
her calendar yet, because the 40 towns and villages and groups 
of people all down the west side of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
are growing more frustrated by the day. 
 
And I can see why they're frustrated when they talk to this NDP 
government, who have consistently raised the PST, even though 
communities all up and down the west side have said it simply 
hurts their development, it hurts their population, it hurts their 
ability to do business and make a living. 
 
And all the minister could say to them yesterday is, well I've got 
a busy schedule and I'm booked and I don't go where I'm not 
invited. Well, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister: Madam 
Minister, you're the Finance minister that has imposed the taxes; 
you're the minister that has consistently said that those people 
on the west side of the province should be treated unfairly. 
 
Madam Minister, have you cleared your calendar to go and 
meet with the representatives of most of the communities on the 
west side of this province, or, Madam Minister, are you simply 
afraid because you won't like what you hear? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. As I said yesterday, I was not invited. After question 
period, I was faxed a request from the group to have 
representation. And I have already responded within hours,  



May 2, 1995 

 
1921 

saying there will be some — I regret that I can't go because I 
have other commitments — there will be government 
representation there. 
 
What I'd also like to point out to the members opposite is, I 
have met with these groups. I have been in St. Walburg talking 
about this issue; I have been in Meadow Lake talking about this 
issue; I've been in Swift Current several times, including the last 
couple of weeks, to talk about this issue. So the government 
will be represented there. 
 
And I'm sure one of the things that will be pointed out at that 
meeting, is this government has already delivered $221 million 
in tax cuts and we're promising, as our finances improve, there 
will be more as they become affordable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend and repeal The Members of 

the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
An Act to amend and repeal The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that 
questions 68 and 69 be converted to motions for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 68, 69, motions for return debate. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Job Creation Efforts 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand in my place 
and support the job creation efforts of business and 
cooperatives in this province. And at the end of my remarks I'll 
move a motion that states: 
 
 That this Assembly endorse the job creation efforts of 

businesses and cooperatives in Saskatchewan which 
have served to increase confidence in the provincial 
economy, demonstrate that Partnership for Renewal is 
working, and prove that Saskatchewan is a good place 
to do business. 

 
(1415) 
 

Saskatchewan business people have largely approved of the 
1995-96 provincial budget with its tax breaks and balanced 
revenue and spending, according to prominent business leaders.  
 
The business tax breaks in the 1995-96 budget have encouraged 
business to invest in Saskatchewan. I list these breaks for the 
Assembly. Reduced income tax rate on capital purchases used 
in manufacturing and processing . . . non-refundable tax credits 
can be earned at a rate of 9 per cent on qualifying capital 
purchases effective immediately. Reduced aviation fuel tax, that 
this tax was reduced to 3.5 cents per litre from 7 cents per litre. 
 
Previous tax breaks — and these were introduced in other 
budgets, Mr. Speaker  reduce small-business income tax rate. 
On January 1, 1995, the rate dropped to 8 per cent. This 
represents a 20 per cent reduction in the rate over the past four 
years. Elimination of provincial sales tax on direct agents for 
manufacturing and processing  this was introduced in the 
1994 budget, elimination of provincial sales tax on toll-free 
phone service, which greatly assisted many people using this 
service. 
 
As Robert Hawkins from the Del-Air Systems Ltd., a Humboldt 
farm equipment company, said, and I quote: 
 
 If you create wealth, jobs follow. With this budget and 

its tax incentives, the government is creating the climate 
for these things to happen. 

 
The new budget plan shows balanced accounts  surpluses in 
fact  for the current fiscal year and for the next three years. 
Hawkins said that this makes the Saskatchewan balanced 
budget program, the first in Canada, much stronger than that in 
Alberta, where a deficit is planned to reoccur as soon as next 
year. And I might say here, Mr. Speaker, that whatever any 
government does in this line, they must sustain it. It is all fine 
and good to make promises, but you must be able to plan in a 
way that your economic climate can be sustained. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development said, and I quote: 
 
 This psychological benefit creates an environment that 

is conducive to investment. That has been one of the 
three pillars of our Partnership for Renewal strategy, 
and it has resulted in snowball investment and business 
expansions recently. 

 
One of the things that I noticed when I listened to a speech 
made by the president of Elan oil, he said, I have something to 
say to governments across western Canada. What we would like 
you to do are only two things. We would like you to create a 
climate that is sustainable for business, a very stable financial 
climate. And he said, I have to say Saskatchewan has done that. 
And the other thing that I want to say to Saskatchewan and 
Alberta governments — because he was speaking in the border 
city at that time — is that he said we want decent regulations. 
 
So if you listen to business, small business or big business, they 
tell you two things: you must create a stable economic and  



May 2, 1995 

 
1922 

financial climate, and the other thing is decent regulations. And 
he says, I say thank you to the Saskatchewan government. And 
he said to the Alberta counterparts, why don't you follow? This 
was said six months ago. I listened very carefully because I 
realized at that time — it was before budget time — that for 
business to flourish, you have to have a stable economic 
atmosphere. 
 
This new business growth that we've had in Saskatchewan 
reflects the incentives for private sector job creation. In a 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business survey . . . and 
you notice I'm using quotes from non-Saskatchewan 
government sources: 
 
 Saskatchewan businesses reported that government tax 

policy stability and deficit eliminations are two of the 
most important conditions. (Here again, much like the 
president of Elan oil) They were considering hiring 
more employees in 1995 because this stability exists. 

 
In fact with the introduction of these latest business tax 
incentives, Saskatchewan has become one of the most 
competitive manufacturing and processing locations in the 
country, according to a Department of Finance model that uses 
StatsCanada data to measure effective tax rates after tax net 
income. 
 
The NDP has kept its promises to balance the budget in its first 
term in office. It's safe to say that we can count on the NDP to 
keep its promises on creating jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
One thing I notice that . . . a concern of mine has been since I've 
been elected is youth employment. And I'm happy to announce 
to the legislature that steadily, slowly and steadily, youth 
employment has increased by 1,000 jobs in 1994, 1,000 jobs in 
1995, and 1,000 jobs in 1996. 
 
It's safe to say that we can count on the NDP to keep its promise 
on creating jobs for Saskatchewan people. Our government is 
already off to a very good start. In the first 44 days of the spring 
'95 legislative session, 33 new economic development projects 
were announced by MLAs and cabinet ministers. Mr. Speaker, 
here are a few examples of these projects. An additional 20 
million in funding this year for health care will create 460 jobs, 
primarily for nurses, home care aids, therapists, and councillors. 
Yes, this creates jobs, helps the economy to keep growing, and 
this creates an atmosphere for business to expand. 
 
The Partnership '95 summer employment program and the 
Public Service Commission will provide up to 24,000 summer 
employment opportunities for students this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Again it gets youth working, and it is a 
partnership with business. Now the hon. member from Regina 
North West says, how does this help? My heavens, I thought at 
least she knew something about figures in business. 
 
My whole family was in small business. When you have people 
working, they're paying taxes. This creates a stable economy for 
people. That's how it helps, and that's how it all links together. 

If you'd like to sit down after I finish my speech, I'll got through 
it for you. 
 
Saskatchewan Energy, 128 million expenditure on the new gas 
reserve development will create 400 new jobs. And 118 million 
government expenditure in the education system for capital 
projects will generate about 374 full-time jobs over the next 
two years. I think what the member doesn't realize is that all of 
these are partnered with the private sector. That is why this is so 
important. 
 
That's why Partnership for Renewal is working. It's where you 
have government facilitating business and the expansions of 
jobs in the private sector. This is not congratulating the 
government; it's . . . well it's congratulating the government for 
having the good sense to build partnerships for renewal which 
work very well. 
 
A 9 million investment in a multi-tenant biofermentation plant 
lab and office facility at Innovation Place in Saskatoon  
again, a partnership with private business will create 100 
full-time jobs during the planning and construction phases and 
an additional 75 long-termed jobs once the project is 
completed. 
 
Here's another one, private business  the new Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce call centre which will open in 
Regina in 1996 will create 500 new jobs. Congratulations to 
CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) for recognizing 
that Saskatchewan is a good place to do business. The 
establishment of the Canadian Cancer Society's new call centre 
in Regina will create another 20 full-time jobs. Congratulations 
to the Canadian Cancer Society for realizing that Saskatchewan 
is a good place to do business. 
 
A new 53.6 million canola crushing plant to be built east of 
Saskatoon  congratulations to Cargill for recognizing that 
Saskatchewan is a good place to do business. It will create 50 
full-time jobs at the plant and another hundred jobs for truckers 
who haul canola to the site. 
 
A 10.5 million multi-party training agreement signed by the 
provincial government, the federal government, aboriginal 
people and mining industry will create 500 new mining related 
jobs for Northerners by 1998  again, a partnership. It's not 
only congratulating the Saskatchewan government; this is a 
partnership including the Saskatchewan government, the federal 
government, private industry and the aboriginal community — 
500 new mining jobs. Thank you to all these people for 
recognizing that Saskatchewan is a good place to do business. 
 
And Saskatchewan 1995 highway construction program will 
provide an estimated 1,500 seasonal jobs. And of course with 
the expansion of business, our infrastructure will need some 
work, and highways is one of the things that I'm interested in. 
 



May 2, 1995 

 
1923 

An Hon. Member: — Get some federal money. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — And yes, we will need partnerships with our 
federal government. And that's only logical because the federal 
government has a commitment to Confederation to provide 
some of those linkages across this country. That is why this 
country has been different because federal and provincial 
governments have been committed to treating people the same 
from coast to coast. We hope, only hope, this present federal 
government continues that, Madam from Regina North West. 
 
In my own constituency, royalty revamping has created many 
jobs because oil companies are drilling,. Service companies are 
busy, and oil land sales are up. The restructuring of two projects 
in the north-west that were in jeopardy, the Bi-Provincial 
upgrader and the Millar Western pulp mill project, have 
produced stability and jobs in the north-west. In fact Millar 
Western and CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) have just announced an expansion, and this will 
mean jobs and a better economy in Meadow Lake and 
surrounding area. 
 
In my constituency, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the 
Alberta Wheat Pool have partnered in the first such partnership 
interprovincially ever with wheat pools. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
have built a huge, high throughput elevator, and it will service 
people in Saskatchewan and Alberta. They have also just 
recently opened a livestock division outside of Lloydminster, 
and this will service us well too. 
 
I think that what I have found in speaking to constituents, 
especially this spring, it is that we had to have an atmosphere of 
confidence and stability in our society. People will not spend 
money, people will not invest money, if they don't have this 
confidence. 
 
I have to congratulate not only businesses — small businesses, 
large businesses, and the cooperators — to congratulate the 
Minister of Finance because we have had the first upgrading in 
Saskatchewan of our credit rating of any province in five years. 
This again gives confidence to people that are investing money 
in our economy. 
 
I'm very proud at this time to move this motion, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would like people in the Assembly to support it because I 
believe it. And here is the motion: 
 
 That this Assembly endorse the job creation efforts of 

businesses and cooperatives in Saskatchewan which 
have served to increase confidence in the provincial 
economy, demonstrate the Partnership for Renewal is 
working, and prove that Saskatchewan is a good place 
to do business. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
The Speaker: — Did the member indicate a seconder to her  

motion? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Sorry, it's seconded by the MLA from 
Kinistino. 
 
Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure to enter into this debate on this motion, and I want to 
say at the outset that I strongly support the motion put forward 
by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. And I must say 
she did an admirable job in expressing the strong sense of 
confidence and growth there is in the province of Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I come from a riding and a constituency that has a 
number of strong industries that have not only expanded, but 
have been there for a number of years. And certainly we're 
seeing a level of economic activity and confidence and growth 
in the economy that we have not seen for some time or enjoyed 
for some time in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I think we want to do here today in this motion is try 
to illustrate exactly why there is that sense of confidence in our 
economy today. As the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
outlined, one of the first tasks we set out after forming 
government was of course to put in place a plan, an economic 
development plan for not only our first mandate, first four 
years, but for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course what we entered into, Mr. Speaker, was a 
consultation period and discussion with the stakeholders in the 
economy, that being, namely, the private and public sector, as 
well as the cooperative sector, and all of the other stakeholders 
that have an active interest in the economy. And we entered into 
this broad, consultative process because we wanted to get their 
input, their insights, and their future suggestions and direction 
on an economic development strategy for the province and for 
the 21st century. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these partners in the economy responded, 
and they responded by telling us exactly what they felt we 
should put in this economic development blueprint. And we 
took their suggestions very seriously, and we of course 
incorporated all of that in our Partnership for Renewal strategy 
paper. 
 
And I believe that what you're seeing today, what the people are 
feeling and experiencing out in the economy, is directly related 
to the confidence that has flowed from this strategy paper. 
Business people in Saskatchewan now for the first time in a 
long time have their own particular business Bible which they 
point to, and that is the Partnership for Renewal. 
 
They say, it's ours. Yes, there might be sometimes some glitches 
in it, but they of course take ownership of it. And they work 
with government and with their partners in the economy to 
solve some of the problems. 
 
But they have taken ownership of it, and irrespective of which 
government is in place, they're saying this has to be the strategy  



May 2, 1995 

 
1924 

for the future and it's going to continue to guide the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
That's good news for Saskatchewan business people, that's good 
news for the province of Saskatchewan, and it demonstrates 
that this policy is working for Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
One of the first guiding principles of course of our new 
economic strategy was to get all of our partners working 
together. And of course, because we had went through this 
consultative process, they knew what were the strengths and the 
weaknesses in the provincial economy. And of course, that has 
been embodied in the strategy paper. 
 
One of the most important principles and one of the most 
important factors that drives the economy is, of course, the 
whole question of the provincial finances and the level of 
taxation. And our partners of course said right at the outset that 
this provincial government had to have the courage and the 
foresight to be able to tackle the massive debt load in this 
province that had been left by our predecessors, and also to 
address the taxation issue in this province in a responsible, 
reasonable, sustainable fashion. 
 
And of course this government set on that course. And what we 
are seeing now after three and a half years, this government has 
balanced the budget, has a surplus budget, and now is starting 
to address the issues of taxation, as we heard earlier. 
 
We have seen a reduction of taxation in this province of 
something like $200-and-some million. That's good news for 
Saskatchewan businesses because they see tangible proof that 
this government is doing something about fighting deficits, 
eliminating deficits, and eventually over a short to medium 
term, addressing the taxation issue. 
 
So I honestly believe that part of the . . . that the major catalyst 
behind the economic activity and the confidence in our 
economy, number one, has been the Partnership for Renewal 
document that we have put together, Mr. Speaker. It has 
outlined clearly the direction, the future direction, for the 
provincial economy. And I think businesses have subscribed to 
it. And that's good for the economy because it gives them 
direction. 
 
Secondly, this government has addressed the problem of the 
finances. And that has given the impetus for businesses not only 
to expand, but it also has started attracting outside businesses to 
look to this province as one of the most favourable places to 
invest. And not surprising, Mr. Speaker, not surprising that 
we're seeing announcements like the Cargills, announcements 
like Hitachis, announcements like Flexi-coil. 
 
And I might add that the president of Flexi-coil himself said, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the main reasons that Flexi-coil is 
expanding, is staying in Saskatchewan and is expanding, is 
because of the direction this government has taken on economic  

development policy; but more importantly, because they have 
had the courage to tackle the deficit and debt situation and also 
set a plan — a plan, Mr. Speaker, for the finances. 
 
And that is good news for Saskatchewan, that's good news for 
businesses in Saskatchewan, and ultimately will lead to more 
economic activity for Saskatchewan and will obviously expand 
the economy and create more wealth and more jobs in 
Saskatchewan. And here, that is because of this government's 
courage and their vision for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about the partnerships. And of course one 
of the important thing in the document is building on 
partnerships. And we talk a lot about cooperation and 
partnerships, and that is an important element of Saskatchewan; 
it has been. 
 
If you look at, historically in this province, how have we come 
to the point where we are as a province, how have we been able 
to create this unique partnership in the province where the 
private and the public and the cooperative sectors all working in 
harmony together, how have we done that? Well that is because 
we have created the kind of partnerships that have been 
necessary to foster growth and wealth and jobs. And now we're 
doing that in 1995. We're doing it in the Partnership for 
Renewal and we're doing it in our communities and in the 
economy. 
 
On that, I want to talk a bit about some of the partnerships, and 
certainly one of those elements within the Partnership for 
Renewal is the whole concept of regional economic 
development authorities . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I'd like to introduce a 
guest that is seated in our gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the Assembly, Chief Wallace Fox from the 
Onion Lake Indian Reserve. And he is here in Regina attending 
meetings, and I'd like all of you to welcome him to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Job Creation Efforts 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
welcome our guest here today, and I'm sure he's encouraged by 
all the good news in the economy. 
 



May 2, 1995 

 
1925 

Mr. Speaker, I was talking about regional economic 
development authorities. And I just want to briefly touch on the 
REDAs (regional economic development authority) because 
they are a very important element of the Partnership for 
Renewal and I think they're going to play an integral role in the 
future development of our provincial economy and future 
development of regions in this province. 
 
And the concept of regional development and moving towards a 
more regional form of governance is something that I think is 
taking hold, not only as far as economic development, but other 
aspects of governance as well. But on the economic 
development side, Mr. Speaker, I think this is an important, 
important element of Partnership for Renewal and building the 
provincial economy for the future and the 21st century. 
 
One of the things we've seen in the last number of years, and in 
particular with the former government, was that there wasn't an 
overall strategy. And in particular you would see sometimes a 
lot of communities competing against one another, firms 
competing against one another, to attract businesses from one 
part of the province to the other. There was various initiatives, 
various tools used to try to form competitiveness amongst the 
different regions. 
 
In our particular strategy, we focus more on a regional basis. 
We've allowed these particular regions to identify themselves, 
to identify the strengths, to identify the links that certainly 
comprise a region. And once they have done that, Mr. Speaker, 
once they have went through that process, they went through an 
evaluation process where they looked at themselves and said, 
what are the strengths of any particular regions, what are the 
weaknesses. And of course it allowed them then at that point to 
say, okay, we have to focus in on the strengths and work from 
these strengths, try to enhance the positive aspects of our 
region. 
 
And I just firmly believe that this is going to be one of the 
guiding, guiding principles as we head into the 21st century. 
Because the days, the days of interprovincial competition for 
projects, and we're seeing it happening now, the days of 
interregional competitiveness for particular economic 
development projects — those days are gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have to focus in now is, we have to look at regions 
and we have to form the partnerships; we have to form the 
alliances; we have to look at the strengths and we have to build 
on those strengths; and we have to tailor economic development 
that suits a particular region. There's no point trying to attract a 
business, trying to attract a venture, that is not compatible to a 
particular province or to a particular region. 
 
We are doing ourselves, as a provincial government, or as 
taxpayers, we're doing ourselves a disservice if we would have 
continued on that particular path. And that's why I firmly 
believe in the regional economic development concept because 
it does put the onus on the regions, it does put the onus on the 
particular economic stakeholders, to look at themselves and 
work in a more cooperative fashion. And that is something that  

will be very, very important as we head into the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was commenting briefly about how far we have 
come as a province — a province with certainly a sparse 
population, a province that is far from its markets. We've 
always had to transport all of our commodities a long way, and 
as well, when we bring in the products that we use to produce 
and manufacture, certainly this has always contributed . . . and 
been a major hurdle for Saskatchewan. 
 
But Saskatchewan people have always learned and adapted and 
certainly subscribed to some important values and some 
important principles. And some of those were certainly 
cooperation. And as I talked about, it's going to be even more 
important, as we head into the 21st century, that we hang on to 
those values and principles that have made Saskatchewan and 
the Saskatchewan economy what it is today. 
 
I want to talk briefly about some of the good news that is 
happening in the provincial economy, and I cited a few 
examples of some of the major economic development projects 
that have been announced in recent weeks. And again, all 
because, I believe, of the healthy economic climate that this 
government has created in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it is in large part because of the favourable tax 
environment that these businesses have cited in Saskatchewan, 
because of the plan that this government has had, and because 
of the future direction that this government is taking. These 
businesses are looking at Saskatchewan and they're expanding 
and relocating here. 
 
(1445) 
 
And in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, we have many, many of 
these particular businesses and enterprises that are flourishing, 
that are growing, and that have a positive, positive outlook for 
the future, not only of their businesses but of the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
And I talked a bit . . . and recently Robert Hawkins, the 
president of Del-Air Systems in Humboldt. Mr. Hawkins has 
cited in his statements that part of the reason for the good 
growth they have had in their particular industry  a large part 
 has been because of the favourable climate, the tax climate, 
that this government has created. 
 
He goes on to say that he is a firm believer in the regional 
economic development authorities. He believes that that is the 
best direction to go for their particular region and the province. 
And I think Mr. Hawkins and Del-Air Systems are again an 
example of the Saskatchewan spirit of ingenuity, hard work, 
determination, and all of these elements coming together to 
create a very successful enterprise. 
 
In my riding as well, of course we have another industry that is 
world recognized now, Bourgault Industries of St. Brieux, and 
I've talked numerous times about this particular industry. But 
the reason I keep bringing them up, Mr. Speaker, because I'm  



May 2, 1995 

 
1926 

so proud of these kind of firms and the kind of opportunities 
that they have created, not only for their company but for the 
people of St. Brieux and for their employees. 
 
And in speaking with the president and the administration of 
Bourgault Industries, I asked them what exactly they felt was 
the contributing factor and the catalyst behind their good 
economic growth and the growth in their firm, but as well their 
positive outlook for the future and their future expansion plans. 
And they were very straightforward and very happy to illustrate 
some of the reasons for their strong growth and some of the 
success that the company has enjoyed in the last number of 
years. 
 
And again one of the main reasons, one of the main 
contributing reasons of course, is the Saskatchewan ingenuity, 
the Saskatchewan ingenuity that Saskatchewan business people 
and people like the Bourgaults have had for years. 
 
The second major factor and reason for their continued growth 
was certainly the positive economic climate, and in particular 
the financial management. They cited the financial management 
of this government as being one of the best they have seen in a 
long time. 
 
And they like the kind of plan that this government has set out, 
not only on the economic development side — and I might add 
that Bourgault Industries and Gerry Bourgault, the president of 
Bourgault, were active players in the development of our 
Partnership for Renewal. So they know full well what the 
direction and the plan is, not only for the next number of years 
but for the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Bourgault said that he likes the plan, the financial plan of 
this government in particular, because it fosters stability, it 
fosters the ingenuity and the willingness to invest, to expand. 
And he believes that that is directly related to the finances and 
the financial management that this government has put into 
place. 
 
And it's incredible, when you think about Bourgault Industries 
and the potential that this particular firm and this particular 
technology has . . . The members might be interested to note, 
and certainly I was very surprised, that Mr. Bourgault indicated 
to me that their technology, as well as Flexi-coil and some of 
the other air seeder technology in Saskatchewan, is some of the 
most advanced technology worldwide. In fact they believe, 
Bourgault Industries believe, that they are anywhere from seven 
to ten years ahead of any of their competitors worldwide — 
seven to ten years ahead, Mr. Speaker, of any of their 
competitors. 
 
And at present day, there's only about 7 to 10 per cent of the air 
seeder market that's been tapped by any of their competitors. So 
imagine the tremendous potential that Bourgault Industries, that 
Flexi-coil Industries and other air seeder technology companies, 
are sitting on. They have the world markets in front of them. 
They have access to most of these markets. They're working on 
some better distribution and marketing, and we're working with  

them. Saskatchewan government is working with marketing and 
promotion to try to expand and develop these markets. 
 
But imagine the opportunities; 7 to 10 per cent of air seeders 
have only been tapped for awhile, air seeder markets. And here 
in Saskatchewan, in little Saskatchewan, we have been able to 
create some of the finest technology anywhere in the world. 
 
And now because of the plan, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
Saskatchewan government's plan, the Saskatchewan NDP 
government's plan, about an economic development strategy, 
Partnership for Renewal . . . but more importantly on the fiscal 
side, because of that financial plan, these particular companies, 
these particular enterprises, are going to be able to grow and 
prosper and create wealth and jobs, not only today and 
tomorrow, but for the 21st century. 
 
And that's good news for Saskatchewan, and that's good news 
for the economy. And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that the 
future looks very bright in this particular industry. And I'm 
proud to see this kind of success story coming out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've also looked . . . I want to talk briefly about 
some of the successes in northern Saskatchewan. And of 
course, when we talk about northern Saskatchewan, we talk 
about, in large part, communities that have had in the past a 
very difficult time having adequate employment, and certainly 
we see the ramifications and the extensions of that. And this 
government has always applied itself right from the very outset 
to try to address some of the difficult situations that Northerners 
face when it comes to employment and to creating a better 
standard of living for themselves. 
 
This government has committed itself, and in Partnership for 
Renewal we are committing ourselves, to trying to address and 
trying to correct some of the disparities in the distribution of 
wealth. And we are proud of some of the initiatives. And I want 
to talk briefly about some of the strategies that we have put in 
place to try to address that. 
 
Most everybody knows that northern Saskatchewan of course is 
renowned for its beauty and its touristic attractions. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are continuing on that route to try to expand this 
very important industry for Saskatchewan. We established a 
Tourism Authority that is going to . . . again, building on the 
principles and the values of cooperation and partnership, the 
Tourism Authority is going to look at the province, is going to 
look at regions, and is going to try to coordinate and better 
direct the future tourism initiatives and the direction for these 
particular regions. 
 
And already we are seeing the benefits of that, Mr. Speaker — a 
more coordinated approach to tourism. We're seeing inquiries to 
the department on tourism. The numbers are phenomenal, and 
they're continuing to come in. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we're seeing as well in other parts of the 
province, not only in northern Saskatchewan, but in the  



May 2, 1995 

 
1927 

southern part of the province with the latest find of the 
Tyrannosaurus rex . . . Again, looking at it from a regional 
basis, looking at the strength of that region, and using that to 
certainly assist all of these communities. 
 
But in northern Saskatchewan we've certainly done what I feel 
is a great job in trying to attract more tourists to the North. The 
Tourism Authority of course is going to do more to . . . do a 
better job of coordinating. But we're seeing . . . We put into the 
North a charter a number of years ago to try to address the 
problem of some of our tourists who come from out of country. 
 
And certainly the charter, the Denver charter which charters 
tourists from the United States into northern Saskatchewan, has 
been a major boon for the northern region. And the outfitters, 
the tourist camps who certainly are in the northern part of the 
province, have thoroughly been pleased with the results that 
they have had. It gives them, the tourists, an opportunity for a 
better link from the United States, central United States, other 
parts, gives them a direct link into northern Saskatchewan. And 
this certainly is an important initiative for Northerners and for 
the tourism industries. 
 
As well, the North of course is renowned for its mineral wealth. 
And we are continuing in that vein, Mr. Speaker, to develop, to 
enhance the North as far as the minerals and the development of 
the northern mines. And lately of course, we had the 
announcement by COGEMA Resources of the McClean Lake 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important development for the North, 
again building on the strengths of the North, but very 
importantly we addressed in that particular project, we ensured 
— as I said before, as I said at the outset of my comments — 
we ensured that Northerners would be involved in these 
particular projects. And I'm proud to say that this project 
demonstrates that commitment — the commitment of northern 
involvement in future economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see in this particular project that there is going to be an 
employment equity program for Northerners. And that is good 
news for northern Saskatchewan. It's good news for Northerners 
who have problems accessing and acquiring suitable 
employment. 
 
It also, Mr. Speaker . . . we have been able to come together as 
partners in northern Saskatchewan, get northern communities 
involved in the future development and the direction of the 
North, not only as it pertains to mines and minerals, but as far 
as tourism and the fishing. Mr. Speaker, we're involving 
Northerners and they feel good about this, they feel included, 
and they feel that they are a part of the direction of the North, as 
they well should be. 
 
And they should benefit from the rewards of any future wealth 
creation in the North, and this government is making sure that 
that is happening. And I'm proud to say that I'm part of a 
government that is doing that for Northerners. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak as well about the 
forestry industry, which is a very important component of our 
provincial economy. It certainly contributes significantly to the 
provincial economy, creates thousands and thousands of jobs, 
contributes mightily to the development of our communities. 
 
And recently we had a major announcement and again, again 
testimony to the fact that the Partnership for Renewal 
document and strategy and the direction this government . . . 
testimony that it is working, positive proof that this strategy is 
the right strategy and that it's working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm of course talking about the recent 
announcement of the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation, which includes MacMillan Bloedel and the 
Saskatchewan government entering into a joint venture to 
expand the opportunities on the north-east part of the province 
using one of Saskatchewan's very important natural resources, 
the forestry industry. 
 
And what is really nice to see about this particular arrangement, 
this joint venture, is that we have brought in a large . . . one of 
the largest forestry companies in the world, MacMillan Bloedel, 
and the Government of Saskatchewan in a partnership, and 
again proves that cooperation, cooperation between the private 
and the public sector, is working and is alive in Saskatchewan 
in 1995. 
 
(1500) 
 
This is proof of that. But what's even more special and even 
more gratifying about this particular arrangement is that the two 
partners will enter into an arrangement that will create hundreds 
of jobs and obviously will create enormous spin-offs for the 
communities and for the province, but as well the two partners 
have set up a sustainable management of hardwood and 
softwood forests in the north-east part of the province. 
 
And that is good news for the provincial economy. It's good 
news for the province, the north-east part of the province. It's 
certainly going to be used as an example of what the private, the 
public, and the cooperative sector, can do as far as the 
management of a very important resource  a resource that we 
have to protect and we have to ensure is used in the best 
possible fashion. And a resource that is going to be there for the 
future, of not only our children, but our children's children. 
 
I want to just briefly describe this particular working 
arrangement because I think it is a model of cooperation in 
1995 and a model of what this government has created in this 
province. 
 
The SaskFor Products Limited Partnership is 50 per cent 
equally owned, of course, by Crown Investments Corporation 
and MacMillan Bloedel. The new company includes, of course, 
the former Sask Forest Products Corporation mill in Carrot 
River and the plywood plant as well in Hudson Bay and the  



May 2, 1995 

 
1928 

MacMillan Bloedel oriented strand board plant in Hudson Bay. 
 
And I also want to say that this particular venture builds on new 
technology because what . . . the product we are using is a form 
of the new technology in particular in the strand board industry. 
And of course again it's an example of what the technology and 
research does for the provincial economy. 
 
The construction of the new mill, this new mill at Hudson Bay, 
will create 150, 150 direct jobs and 100 more seasonal spin-offs 
within the forestry industry. Imagine the economic spin-offs for 
the communities like Hudson Bay and the Carrot Rivers and all 
of those communities in that region. Those are the direct 
spin-offs. True, these 150 new jobs . . . but the countless  
hundreds  spin-off jobs. 
 
But imagine what this particular merger and this particular 
partnership will create for the provincial economy. It's 
unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, and it is good news for those 
people. I'm very pleased for them and I'm sure it's going to be a 
very successful venture that will prove that our plan is working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to comment a bit about the importance of 
education in the economy, the provincial economy. And I noted 
 and I'm sure all our partners were part of it  they told us 
very, very clearly in the development of the Partnership for 
Renewal document, that we had to look at incorporating and 
getting education to play more of an important role in the 
provincial economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what we are doing. We have looked at 
our educational system. We have taken some very bold steps 
forward to address and to answer to some of the concerns and 
some of the suggestions that our partners have made. And what 
you'll find of course in this year's budget is that we have future 
programs like Future Skills, programs like JobStart; proof again 
that this government is responding to what our partners have 
told us, but responding again to the needs of Saskatchewan 
people, Saskatchewan young people. 
 
These are programs that are going to give our young people the 
skills and the talent necessary to enter into the job market, 
secure suitable employment, and look forward to the future with 
a positive aspect. And, Mr. Speaker, these are certainly . . . 
these programs are an important initiative and will bring 
certainly benefits. 
 
The reason we've done this and the reason we've taken these 
bold steps and these programs is of course we recognize that the 
future skills, the future skills of our young people are so 
important. They are the most important thing we have and we 
should ensure that we train and give these young people the 
opportunity as much as possible to able to secure for themselves 
a very important employment. 
 
And we recognize now and we see — and it's been highlighted 
time and time again — that 30 years ago or 40 years ago an 
individual may have had one or two career changes in his or her 
lifetime. Well what do we see now in 1995 and beyond into the  

21st century? We see that individuals and employees will 
probably have to have four or five career changes in their 
lifetime. And what we have said is that that offers us a major 
challenge as a government and as an economy to ensure that our 
education system addresses some of the problems that this 
could create for these individuals. 
 
And I firmly believe that programs like Future Skills and 
JobStart are a step in the right direction in trying to prepare our 
young people for the numerous challenges and numerous career 
changes that they might have to make in their lifetime. And 
what it does as well is it recommits this government to putting 
the emphasis where it should be  on young people, on 
education, on economic development  so that they will be 
able to have the proper employment and be able to contribute to 
the provincial economy and be full partners and be able to 
accept the challenges, but also the rewards of their employment 
in the economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, we're seeing the signs of the growth 
and the confidence all over the economy at every level. And 
right across our province we're now seeing, where a number of 
years ago people, young people in particular, were leaving this 
province for opportunities in other areas of Canada, well I could 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that trend has now been stopped. 
And why has it been stopped and why is it going the other way, 
Mr. Speaker? It's because of the climate for growth that this 
government has created. We are now seeing the population 
growing in Saskatchewan — not large, but it is growing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that's good news for Saskatchewan because it tells me that 
the opportunities, the jobs, for Saskatchewan people and people 
who have left the province, the jobs are now starting to be 
created and they want to come back here because they believe, 
first of all, that there is employment in this province. And 
number two, this is one of the best places to live and to raise a 
family anywhere in Canada. 
 
I want to speak as well about agriculture because agriculture is 
a very important component of the provincial economy. It 
contributes again enormously to the growth and to the welfare 
of our communities and to the development of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we've seen last year a phenomenal growth in 
the revenues of the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We've seen as well the other elements of the agricultural 
industry — the manufacturing, the value added. And that is 
good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
On the issue of the primary producers, 1994 was a very good 
year. They had a good crop, good commodity prices, and 
certainly they enjoyed one of the best years. 
 
1995, Mr. Speaker, will prove to be a bit more of a challenge. 
Some of the challenges facing prairie farmers — of course the 
elimination of the transportation subsidy which will cause great  



May 2, 1995 

 
1929 

difficulty for prairie producers, for our farm communities. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we are still going to continue to try to urge the 
federal government to look at trying to soften the impact of this 
massive cut-back to the prairie agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the primary producers were enjoying a great 
year in 1994, they also enjoyed the great year on the hog 
production side, on the livestock side. We've seen a 
phenomenal growth rate in the number of livestock cash 
receipts, which is good news. We're also seeing an expansion 
on the hog side of some of the products — the products of the 
pork industry which are certainly finding new markets. 
 
And again there on the Partnership for Renewal we have said 
that we're going to work with the livestock industry to expand, 
to identify new markets, to promote the products, the 
Saskatchewan products. And our partners are happy to see the 
progress that we're making in that particular direction. 
 
We have also introduced the agricultural innovation fund which 
will identify future possible developments, projects, on the 
value added side of farm commodities. 
 
And in Saskatoon we have what I called the centre, the critical 
mass of technology in Canada, in particular the technology on 
the ag biotech side. For any of the members who haven't had an 
opportunity to visit this particular centre, Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon, should take some time to set up a meeting and go 
and visit. It is truly a remarkable centre for ag biotech 
excellence in Canada. And we now have 30 per cent of all the 
ag biotech research in Canada, and our sights are for a lot 
higher in the 21st century. 
 
What I want to say about ag biotech and describe briefly some 
of the advantages — and this is again building on some of the 
strengths, the natural strengths that Saskatchewan has — is of 
course taking the resources that we have, adding value to it, and 
trying to apply some of that Saskatchewan ingenuity to be able 
to create more wealth and more opportunities for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we have done basically in Saskatoon is we have 
amassed, as I said, the critical mass of intelligence when it 
comes to ag biotechnology. And that is very important. We 
have put together a very important cadre of researchers and 
technicians and people who have put a lot of time and energy 
into looking at these research . . . these particular commodities 
and adding value to it. 
 
And one of the them — we always cite certainly an example — 
is the canola industry. And the canola industry and most who 
are familiar with canola, not 25 years canola was only used for 
one end product . . . the end product was only used for one 
thing and that was as a form of motor oil. It of course had an 
enzyme in the particular oil that was unfavourable for human 
consumption. 
 
The researchers at that time and governments at that time put a 
lot of money and effort into ensuring that we would look at  

canola for other uses. And we did that. And now we are seeing 
some of the benefits of that particular money that was invested. 
 
Canola prices, as you well know, and they have soared in the 
last number of years and they're going to continue to be strong. 
Why? Because there is that demand for canola. And the reason 
for that, of course, is because of the research and development 
that we have ploughed into this particular industry. And we are 
starting now to reap the benefits of that. 
 
(1515) 
 
Recently of course, Cargill announced a major crushing plant, a 
state-of-the-art crushing plant right outside of Saskatoon in 
Blucher. And what was the reason for Cargill locating near 
Saskatoon? Number one is they decided, of course, that this is a 
major canola belt and they want to be in the canola growing 
region. That was one of the important . . . . 
 
But the second important factor motivating and being the 
catalyst for Cargill relocating in . . . or locating in Saskatoon 
was, number one, they felt that this economic development 
strategy that had been placed by the government was a good 
and sound policy, and it gave them stability and the belief that 
this government had a handle on economic development and 
the finances. 
 
The third reason was, of course, the 9 per cent tax credit that 
this government announced in its recent budget. This is the kind 
of favourable tax environment that the Cargills and other firms 
are looking to when they relocate or they establish or they 
expand in Saskatchewan. 
 
Another important reason for Cargill locating in Saskatoon was 
because of the high level  that critical mass  of technology 
that I talked about at Innovation Place. Cargill realized that they 
want to build some synergies with Innovation Place. 
 
And I tell you that is because of what we have built in 
Saskatoon and what this government is placing as the important 
elements of the future of technological development. We're 
placing the emphasis on that. And the Cargills are realizing it 
and building those synergies, not only for today, but for the 21st 
century. And that is good news for the Saskatchewan economy 
and that is good news for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now of course Cargill has identified all of these important 
reasons for their move to Saskatoon, and this is going to create 
enormous benefits to the province. I think all of us are aware 
that it's going to create something like 130 full-time jobs as well 
as something like 250 jobs in the construction stage. These are 
again real, tangible proof of the Partnership for Renewal 
working and working in a positive fashion for Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to identify another project, and again citing the 
importance of adding value to Saskatchewan resources and the 
importance of positioning ourselves for the future in that 
particular sector. 
 



May 2, 1995 

 
1930 

One of the companies that's located at Innovation Place is called 
Canamino; and Canamino of course started to look at the 
possibility of oats. And oats of course has always been grown 
here for years and years; it was used mostly in the past for 
livestock feed. There was some that was sent to export, but only 
in niche markets; it was not a high volume. But it is certainly a 
hardy crop in Saskatchewan, a crop that has been very 
important to the agricultural economy. 
 
But of course the price of oats in recent years has been quite 
low, and one tonne of raw oats in Saskatchewan today is worth 
about $80 a tonne. Not a lot, and certainly when you calculate 
with the changes, the damage from the elimination of the 
transportation subsidy, it's all even more important that we look 
at adding value to these particular crops. Well on the oats side, 
Canamino has started experimenting and started researching 
and looking at opportunities to add value to raw oats. Now what 
they came up with was very interesting. 
 
They started looking at some of the components of oats to be 
used in the cosmetics industry. And so they started to reach out 
to some of the larger cosmetic companies in the world to see if 
again, again building on cooperation, see if they couldn't attract 
some of these large companies to build synergies to assist them 
in research. And they did that, and some of the largest cosmetic 
companies are now in with Canamino, assisting Canamino. 
 
What has come out of that particular research and that 
technology now is that Canamino is adding value to oats, is 
transforming oats into cosmetics. And what we are seeing now 
is that $80 a tonne raw oats — the value of raw oats today — is 
now transformed into $9,000 a tonne when it becomes 
processed for cosmetics. 
 
Imagine that, Mr. Speaker, $80 a tonne transformed into $9,000 
a tonne. That is the kind of success stories and that is the kind 
of benefits that can come out, can flow out, of ag biotech. And 
that is why this government, through the agricultural innovation 
fund and other initiatives, is supporting this kind of 
development. We are putting our money where our mouth is 
when it comes to research and development, not like the federal 
government that has chopped — has chopped — massive cuts 
to research and development. And I tell you, that is going to be 
harmful to Canada, harmful to Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has taken a different approach. We are putting 
the emphasis where it should be, and that is ag biotech, that is 
research and development, and we're going to continue. 
 
So that is another success story, and certainly the agricultural 
industry is benefiting, the provincial economy is benefiting, and 
everybody is going to be winning out of this particular situation. 
 
I just want to comment briefly on some of the other success 
stories and some of the reasons that this government is very 
proud about the climate that we have created. We look in 
Regina; of course because of our technology, our technological 
leadership on the telecommunications side, recently we were  

able to get CIBC call centre located in Regina. And again there 
when you ask CIBC, when you look at what propelled them to 
come to Saskatchewan and choose Saskatchewan over other 
competing provinces, it is very clear, Mr. Speaker, what those 
factors were. 
 
Number one, the telecommunication leadership and the 
advancements we have made in that particular sector, that was 
very important. They cited that and they said that it was one of 
the important reasons. 
 
But secondly, they also cited, they also cited the stable financial 
outlook of the Saskatchewan economy and what this 
government has done to stabilize the provincial finances and set 
and put a plan in place. That was very important for them and 
for good reason. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you're a business and you're looking to expand 
or you're looking to move to another province, what are you 
going to look for? Well number one, you're going to look for 
the ingredients that comprise your particular business venture. 
You're going to want to locate as close as you can to that. 
 
But number two, if you're a business — and having been in 
business I know this, Mr. Speaker — you look for how the 
government is approaching the finances and how they are 
approaching economic development. And I could tell you, this 
government wins hands down when it comes to attracting the 
CIBCs precisely for that reason — because we have a plan. 
 
We have a plan on economic development. It is a plan for 1995 
and beyond in the 21st century. We have a plan for the finances 
of this province, not only for 1995 but the future into the 21st 
century. 
 
And that is why businesses are coming to Saskatchewan. That is 
why indigenous businesses that are here and have been here for 
a long time are staying here, are expanding, and are talking 
positively about the future of Saskatchewan; about the future of 
their particular industry. And let me tell you, that's good news 
for all of us in this province. 
 
So I just want to finish off by saying that this government's plan 
is working. All of our hard-working members of the Legislative 
Assembly, our hard-working members here, have gone out and 
have talked about the plan, the economic development plan, the 
Partnership for Renewal. They've talked about putting the 
finances in order. They have talked about preparing 
Saskatchewan for the 21st century and they're talking about . . . 
with a positive . . . with an optimism, with confidence. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, businesses are responding. Saskatchewan 
people are responding. They feel the enthusiasm, they feel the 
confidence, and I believe that the future looks very bright for 
Saskatchewan. I believe that this is going to be a province that 
is going to own the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. We are doing it 
for Saskatchewan people, doing it the Saskatchewan way. 
Thank you. 
 



May 2, 1995 

 
1931 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can 
assure the Assembly that I'll be much briefer than the member 
from Kinistino was in his remarks. I guess sometimes, Mr. 
Speaker, you have to speak at great length in order to cover up 
your tracks, and obviously that's what the member from 
Kinistino was doing today in the Assembly. He was speaking at 
great lengths to try and convince us, and the people watching, 
that actually something had taken place, during the last three 
and a half years, of some significance. 
 
The one thing that I always find amusing, Mr. Speaker, in 
listening to these lengthy renditions from New Democrats about 
how wonderful the economy in our province is, is that they 
leave out the luck factor. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, when you aren't blessed with high 
interest rates, when you have grain prices and other farm 
commodities reaching levels that they haven't seen in 20 years, 
when you see livestock prices at a peak that we haven't seen in 
20 years, when you see oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, contributing 
not a hundred million but $200 million alone in land sales, and 
when you see world economies, Mr. Speaker, moving ahead 
because of free trade, which New Democrats almost universally 
opposed a few years ago, then there is a certain luck factor that 
I never hear any of these people talk about — never anybody 
talks about at all. It's as if all of these things happened because 
we in this province unfortunately elected a bunch of New 
Democrats in 1991. 
 
And I guess what we should talk about in here, Mr. Speaker, in 
debating this motion, is fairness. We should apply the fairness 
test to what the New Democrats have done and to the results, 
Mr. Speaker, that we see. You should apply fairness in talking 
about the New Democrats' promises of '91. Things such as, they 
would eliminate the PST, that they could make do with 4.5 
billion, that they would protect and open hospitals, not close 
them. 
 
When you put all of those promises, which they said were fair 
promises in 1991, and you stack them up against what has 
actually happened, Mr. Speaker, where we've seen the PST go 
from 7 per cent to 8 per cent to 9 per cent, when you've seen 52 
rural hospitals closed, when you see union-only tendering — 
something which was unheard of 10 years ago — where you 
would ask taxpayers now to have the family of Crown 
corporations pay 10, 15, 20 per cent more on any particular 
tendering project, and you say then, does that meet the fairness 
quotient? And the average taxpayer is going to tell you, no. 
 
So I know why the member from Kinistino had to speak longer 
than the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, because there's 
a lot of tracks to cover and there's a lot of convincing to be 
done. And if I were a New Democrat and I was in a rural 
constituency today, I'll tell you, I'd be out there talking and 
talking and talking because you're going to have to cover a lot 
of tracks, Mr. Speaker. 
 

If I were a New Democrat in the North or the east side of this 
province today and I look at what's going on out there — some 
people going into their third crop with no crop, and this is the 
government that took away their GRIP program, which used 
their GRIP program to balance the provincial budget last year, 
which gave $317 million of their GRIP program to the federal 
Liberals — I'd be out there talking on every corner of every 
town. Because the tracks that they've got to cover, Mr. Speaker, 
are long and deep. There's a lot to be covered up. 
 
And how are they going to justify when those farmers out there 
this year — a good many of them may miss a third crop, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and all the luck in the world, with rising grain 
prices and rising oil-seed prices and rising livestock prices, Mr. 
Speaker, aren't going to help a lot of those people out. 
 
And when you pile on taxation after taxation after taxation, if 
you're a person in rural Saskatchewan today and you go through 
the fees that have been increased in your operation, then, Mr. 
Speaker, I say to you, it doesn't meet the fairness quotient. 
 
And the Partnership for Progress is fine for the Economic 
Development minister — the guy that can somehow 
hornswoggle the Finance minister and Treasury Board into 
giving him in excess of $20 million to build himself a casino in 
downtown Regina that he gets to build out of the cash flow of 
the liquor and gaming corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
And he gets to go and he gets to play with Hitachi, and he gets 
to play with all of those big guys that he can give tax credits to 
and he can give breaks to. But what does the average person in 
this province — the average home-owner, the average 
businessman, the average farmer, the school teacher, the person 
that's paying the load, the taxes — say? Is that fair? Is it fair that 
those guys, those big people, the ones that the New Democrats 
used to stand in this House and castigate over and over and over 
again and they now do business with over and over again . . . I 
mean, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting; it's now up to 150 million a 
throw. 
 
It's 150 for Mac-Blo; it's 150 for Crown Life. I mean the longer 
they go, the more it goes up. CIC, Mr. Speaker, has their little 
shell game going on and they say last year we lost $13 million. 
After we've raised every utility rate in the province of 
Saskatchewan for the last three years, we've still lost $13 
million. 
 
And yet along comes Mac-Blo — oh, no problem, we got 150 
million bucks, we've got 150 million bucks. That's because the 
minister from Elphinstone likes to get on the plane and fly 
around the world. 
 
And I say to you, we should apply the fairness test. It's like the 
Premier's pension, Mr. Speaker. I never heard anybody on the 
New Democrat side of the House, back when they were in 
opposition days, talking about the member from Riversdale and  



May 2, 1995 

 
1932 

the other seven and their pensions because, well, that's mine, 
that's mine. And when taxpayers raise questions about a 
Premier's pension that'll be $20,000 more than his salary, there's 
a whole bunch of indignation. 
 
Where's the fairness, Mr. Speaker? Do I hear the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloyd or the member from Kinistino talking about 
$120,000 pension for the Premier? No. But they'll stand up and 
talk for hours about this Partnership for Progress. Quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, that is as hollow as the words it's spoken 
from. Because the average person is not part of the partnership; 
the average person, Mr. Speaker, pays — the average family of 
four. And the Finance minister doesn't doubt the figures. It's 
4,500 bucks more since 1991 — $4,500. 
 
Well who grows? In this partnership, this taxation partnership, 
who grows? The province of Alberta grows. Swift Current 
Chamber of Commerce says $55 million came out of our 
community and went to Medicine Hat. Business men and 
women in communities all up and down the west side meet 
tomorrow in North Battleford because they've said, in this 
partnership of taxes, what happens? Our communities die; our 
businesses die; the business goes to Alberta. The Finance 
minister can't make time to talk to us and we keep on paying the 
9 per cent. 
 
That's a great partnership, isn't it, Mr. Speaker? I wonder why 
we never hear about those partners. 
 
And then we have the partners that are called the family of 
Crown corporations. How do they fit into this, the Partnership 
for Progress? Does SaskTel, with $88.6 million in profits last 
year? What kind of a partner are they? SaskPower, SaskEnergy, 
the Gaming Corporation — these are great partners to have, Mr. 
Speaker, if you're the New Democratic Party. But if you're the 
average home-owner in this province, what kind of a partner are 
they? They just pick your pocket, over and over and over again. 
 
And then we see in the summary financial statements, Mr. 
Speaker . . . The auditor always tells us to look at the summary 
financial statements. And he says, because that's where you'll 
find the Crowns and the Consolidated Fund. And all of a 
sudden we look at their equity and there's $1.2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, sitting there. Now those partners are doing very well. 
 
But the rest of the folks in the partnership — the ones that have 
to pay the bills in order so that Jack Messer and his ilk can sit in 
high places in Crown corporations and tax us through the back 
door — those aren't the kind of partners that I would have 
expected New Democrats to talk about, especially after I 
listened to them, Mr. Speaker, for many years when they were 
in opposition. That's not the kind of partnership they talked 
about while in opposition. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the facts are that the average family in this 
province pays that much more. The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that 
a lot of rural Saskatchewan has substandard health care and 
indeed are second-class citizens. 
 

And the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has confirmed 
that over and over again, that rural people now in the 
Partnership for Progress don't count. They're not partners any 
more, Mr. Speaker; they are now second-class people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are people on every border of this 
province that say, I don't fit the partnership any more because 
everybody shops some place else. My hardware store, my 
lumber yard, my car dealership, my appliance store — we're not 
part of the partnership any more because we can't make a living, 
and we can't do business. 
 
But I never hear the New Democrats talk about those 
partnerships. It's as the member from Kinistino talked about — 
all of the friends of the Economic Development minister and 
how wonderful they're doing. And that partnership obviously is 
working very well because that minister can hand the money 
out. 
 
He's got access to the growth fund. I don't hear the New 
Democrats talking about the growth fund. There was about $35 
million in it when we left power. I wonder what's in it today. 
The immigrant investor growth fund — that's where he gets a 
lot of the money, Mr. Speaker, to parcel out to these people. 
 
I don't hear New Democrats talk about it. Is the second tranche 
full? Is the third tranche full? Are we on to a new program? No, 
they don't talk about that, Mr. Speaker, because the Minister of 
Economic Development's busy handing that out. Is that part of 
the Partnership for Renewal? I don't know; they never talk 
about it. Instead I hear long speeches. They try and cover up the 
promises, the broken promises of '91, in long speeches about all 
of their powerful friends now. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the simple fact is that the average household 
in this province wants to be a partner. And if we're balancing 
budgets on the backs of those people, Mr. Speaker, then they 
should be the ones to get the first benefit — no one else. It 
should be the men and women who run the small businesses 
that make our communities go that should be the first 
beneficiary. They should be the ones that have a downsizing in 
government. They should be the ones that see the PST lowered. 
They should see leadership from their government officials so 
that obscene pensions aren't even an issue, that the size of 
cabinet isn't even an issue, that the amount of hacks that you 
have running around this building are not an issue — but they 
are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here we are in the dying days of an administration and a former 
federal MP (Member of Parliament), lawyer from Moose Jaw, is 
hired by this administration with a few short weeks to go at a 
salary in excess of $44,000. Now why should a former MP, a 
man who had access to a good-sized pension plan in Ottawa, 
lots of benefits, a lawyer, have to come into this building as an 
MA (ministerial assistant), as an MA to a minister, as an MA to 
a minister just to give him a little bit of padding  because he's 
a good New Democrat  just before the election? A little bit of 
salary, a little bit of coin in his pocket. 
 



May 2, 1995 

 
1933 

Is he part of the partnership, Mr. Speaker? Is that the 
partnership that the member from Kinistino was talking about? 
You've got to drag Rod Laporte in here and give him a little bit 
of the taxpayers' coin just before an election. Former MP can't 
look after himself? 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, people don't believe they're part of 
this partnership. They don't believe they're part of the 
partnership. And that's why a motion like this, Mr. Speaker, this 
close to an election, rings so hollow. It rings hollow. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they'll have to speak a 
lot longer, a lot longer and in a lot more places, to cover up 
what has actually happened to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
And I think it would be appropriate, Mr. Speaker, I think it 
would really be appropriate, moved by myself, the member 
from Thunder Creek: 
 
 That all the words following the word "have" be deleted 

and replaced with the following: 
 
 ". . . struggle to survive in the face of the provincial 

government's onerous taxation policies and expensive 
and divisive labour policies." 

 
That we should move this amendment to the motion, Mr. 
Speaker, and that will be seconded by the member from Morse. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I find the amendment in order, and the 
discussion will continue on the motion and the amendment. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be supporting 
the amendment to the main motion, and I will point out some of 
the reasons why I believe that we need to amend this motion. 
 
As has been often noted in previous debates, it is appalling that 
this government would try to boast of its accomplishments in 
job creation when even the revised Statistics Canada figures 
show that the government is off of its job projections by 
10,000. It's off of its projections that it has forecast for itself by 
10,000 jobs. 
 
Through the last three years of budgets and of throne speeches, 
we have seen the number of expected job projections with this 
amount of possible jobs created. And what do we have, Mr. 
Speaker? I would just like to repeat that one figure, the new, 
clarified figure, just so we all know once and for all that we are 
reading off the same page. 
 
Statistics Canada has shown that job growth in Saskatchewan is 
limited to 2,000 jobs. Keeping in mind that even this modest 
accomplishment still leaves the province with a deficit of a 
thousand jobs compared to 1991, the government claims that it 
has created over 12,000 jobs in the past year. I suppose that all I 
can say in parliamentary language is that there is a gulf between 
this figure and the real facts. 
 

In spite of the government's attempts to paper over the problem 
with misleading statistics and by exaggerating the importance of 
its 2,000 low-wage jobs, it is clear to everyone that there is still 
an employment crisis in this province. This problem arose in 
spite of the fact that economic growth in Saskatchewan 
outstripped other province. This is quite an accomplishment on 
the part of the government — a near jobless recovery. 
 
For the ordinary person in Saskatchewan, this is like an eggless 
omelette. It is quite clear to everyone but the members opposite 
what the cause of this crisis is. As Professor Eric Howe of the 
University of Saskatchewan observed in the Leader-Post on 
February 1, he said and I quote: 
 
 "The NDP is getting us out of our provincial budget 

deficit through higher taxes, and higher utility rates," . . . 
"The effect of both of those things is to weaken job 
growth." 

 
(1545) 
 
Of course the government, far from being ashamed of this, is 
proud of it. They love to tell anyone who will listen how they 
balanced the budget without the deep government spending cuts 
that Ralph Klein undertook. They love to portray the Klein 
government in Alberta as hard-hearted and uncaring, especially 
to them and their thoughtful preservation of the state of over-
government in this province. 
 
And yet for all the government's propaganda on this subject, 
Ralph Klein's government created 36,000 new jobs last year. I 
would suggest to the Premier and the Minister of Finance that it 
is more humane fiscal policy to reduce the burden of 
government on the taxpayer and thereby create 36,000 jobs than 
it is to kill job growth and to throw tens of thousands of people 
onto the welfare rolls by pushing taxes and utilities through the 
roof. 
 
It has been the frequent charge of this government that the 
Tories in Saskatchewan and Alberta adopt policies only out of 
ideological zeal without regard for practicalities. In looking at 
the job creation issue, we can easily see that this is a case of the 
pot calling the porridge black. It is bad enough that they are so 
ideologically wed to the idea of big government that they will 
not suffer their bureaucratic empire to be diminished in any 
way. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, however, they are still 
caught up in their socialist ideas of labour reform. Last year 
they refused even to consider that perhaps during an 
unemployment crisis it was not the best time to introduce 
radical new labour reforms that are bound to have a chilling 
effect on job creation. It took months of grass roots protest from 
small and medium business owners for the government to back 
off on the most radical aspects of this Bill. 
 
But even after backing off so far that they've alienated their 
labour friends, they still can't get the full support of the business 
community. As Joyce Reynolds of the Canadian  



May 2, 1995 

 
1934 

Restaurant and Foodservices Association said in the 
Star-Phoenix on February 4: 
 
 We are still very concerned that the legislation will 

ultimately harm more than it will help. 
 
This is the kind of comment that business people have been 
making from the beginning and which the former minister of 
Labour has sneered at continually, in fact making very rude 
comments about them. You really have to wonder why this 
legislation exists. As the members well know, our caucus made 
efforts to correct this problem by introducing a Bill to rescind 
last year's damaging labour legislation. 
 
After all, no one in labour likes this Bill. No one in business 
favours it. So just whose interest does this Bill serve, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and why not get rid of it? However, with their 
usual commitment to democracy, the government refused to 
even listen to debate on this Bill. As far as I can see, the only 
reason last year's labour legislation is still on the books is so 
that the former minister of Labour can say that he didn't back 
down on his ideological principles. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Hon. Associate Minister of 
Finance is no longer the minister of Labour, since he so bravely 
switched portfolios on the day that the legislation was 
proclaimed. With that member gone from that portfolio, we had 
hoped that the government would become more reasonable on 
these issues. Perhaps they can begin to see that a government 
that creates 36,000 jobs is maybe doing something right, 
something that they should try to imitate. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that didn't happen. 
Apparently the Associate Minister of Finance is not the only 
one over there who has the blinders on about subjects like big 
government, taxation, job creation, and the economy. 
 
As we have seen, the government has pushed ahead with its 
divisive labour policies through the announcement of the 
Crown tendering policy; and thereby, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
excluding 80 per cent of construction workers from working for 
the government. This policy can only serve to throw still more 
citizens out of work. And for what? To buy the support of 
union leaders for the NDP. What a noble cause. 
 
While the government is quick to pat themselves on the back 
for every small accomplishment in job creation, they are not so 
quick to remind the public that they inherited a legacy of solid 
economic development policies — policies, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, which gave the province the basis for a diversified 
economy. 
 
The associate minister recently said the recent announcement of 
projects which are creating good jobs, high-paying jobs, is not a 
coincidence. Well indeed it is not a coincidence, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Let's just review some of the recent announcements to 
which he is referring. 
 
An announcement regarding the Co-op and Bi-Provincial  

upgraders, Saskferco, the boom in the oil and gas sector, can be 
traced to policies set in place in the '80s. Cameco, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan — we've all read about it in the 
paper. They just took over a company, a billion and a half 
dollars worth of assets. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they financed 
it from within themselves. That, Mr. Speaker, is confidence in 
the public and the public's confidence in this business. Millar 
Western. All profitable companies that have contributed to the 
tax base. Meadow Lake is fast becoming the forestry capital of 
Canada, again because of the policies laid out in the '80s. 
 
Flexi-coil, we recently had some announcements regarding 
Flexi-coil. Why were they in a position to go forward and move 
forward into the international market? Because the former 
government put them into a position where they could easily do 
that. 
 
Hitachi — Hitachi — and the minister responsible for 
Economic Development has serious problems with this. Talk 
about Hitachi — who brought it to Saskatchewan? Who 
brought it to Canada? Who brought it to North America? Was it 
this administration? No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was not. 
 
Cargill, those bad and evil international multinational 
corporations — Cargill — evil. When we were talking about 
that in developing a Saskatchewan fertilizer company, the evil 
that Cargill would represent in this province was just 
horrendous, Mr. Speaker, as demonstrated by the people who 
are now government and now who are now making deals to 
build a new canola-crushing plant just outside of Saskatoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these people have another thing to consider. 
What about Crown Life? Crown Life came to Saskatchewan 
and they said, well that's not a good deal either. What about the 
federal government moving Farm Credit Corporation to 
Regina? Oh, that wasn't a good deal either. But when we have 
them here, what did this government just do for Crown Life? 
Added $150 million to the debt of this province. 
 
And the list goes on. And I could take a . . . put a common 
thread through here. These initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
were all made by the Leader of the Conservative Party at the 
time, the member from Estevan. It seems as though the 
government has taken the idea of recycling a little too far. 
Instead of recycling newspapers, they are recycling news by 
reannouncing pre-1991 economic development achievements, 
since they clearly have none of their own. 
 
Perhaps that last comment is not quite fair. Some of the 
government's business tax reduction initiatives have attracted 
some businesses to this province and they should get the credit 
for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. However, once again I would like 
to point out a fallacy that the Associate Minister of Finance has 
recently uttered. 
 
And this is what he said, I quote: 
 
 Underlying these tax reductions is a goal of producing  



May 2, 1995 

 
1935 

 ot low productivity, low-wage jobs; what we are intent 
on producing in Saskatchewan is high productivity, 
high-wage jobs, and we're well on the road to 
accomplishing that goal. 

 
And that's out of Hansard, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well I was not aware that being a telemarketer for a phone 
centre was what was considered a high productivity, high-wage 
job. But once again it is better than a kick in the head. 
 
Another area where the government likes to take the credit for 
job creation is the oil and gas sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
once again let me remind the members that the oil and gas 
industry was pretty much a closed book in this province until 
the Progressive Conservative government of the '80s said . . . 
and they had some sense to realize the potential it had for the 
wealth creation and job creation in this province. 
 
As for this government's contribution to this industry, I refer to 
an interview with David Manning from the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers. In the Leader-Post he says 
this, and I quote: 
 
 Manning says Saskatchewan's tax climate is making the 

region less competitive for many oil and gas producers. 
We feel that is unwise, given the amount of 
unemployment and the fact that revenue from the oil 
and gas industry last year had a very significant impact 
on Saskatchewan's budget-balancing exercise. 

 
And, as the member from Thunder Creek said, $200 million in 
land sales alone. 
 
 The industry is not primarily concerned with the 

province's royalty regime which was revamped 
significantly a year or so ago, he said. We haven't 
addressed the royalty question as much as we have the 
array of taxes (Mr. Speaker) which are not dependent on 
production, such as corporate capital tax, utility rates, 
and property rates, he said. 

 
 There would appear, in our estimation, to be more 

taxation events being lowered onto this particular 
industry than to others, said Mr. Manning. 

 
There you have it, Mr. Speaker. Even the people the 
government thinks are their friends won't back them up. To 
reiterate, Mr. Speaker, the government's legions of expensive 
political assistants have done their best to paint Ralph Klein as 
some sort of Canadian Darth Vader. While the Premier and the 
Finance minister may want to try to hide behind ideology and 
rhetoric, they can't hide from the hard facts. 
 
We have heard time and again from economists that the 
government's high tax policy costs jobs. The government 
doesn't deny this, and even their best figures show that the 
province has lost a thousand jobs since 1991. In the meantime, 
the Klein Conservative government has created 80,000 jobs in  

that same period of time. 
 
New business incorporations in Alberta jumped 21 per cent in 
1994, with a consequent rise in revenue from corporate income 
tax. Alberta's GDP (gross domestic product) has been over 3 per 
cent for the last two years. Here the government talks about a 
dramatic turnaround, but unless you are a bureaucrat you are 
not likely to notice any difference. 
 
The NDP have institutionalized almost unbelievable high levels 
of taxation. And I have a list of them here: 10 per cent rise in 
income tax, 20 per cent rise in telephone rates, 17 per cent rise 
in the price of gasoline, 27 per cent increase in natural gas rates. 
Most astonishingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 29 per cent rise in 
the provincial sales tax from the man who campaigned on doing 
away with this tax — do away with the PST. 
 
The Associate Minister of Finance says the balanced budget has 
been accomplished through the efforts of the hard work of 
Saskatchewan people. He is more correct, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
than he cares to admit. The people have borne the brunt of this 
government's fiscal policies. There is hardly an NDP politician 
or bureaucrat in this province who has had to suffer in the 
slightest in order to balance the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this House has spent enough time 
hashing over this government's paper-thin job creation policy. I 
believe it is time that we move into more substantive matters. 
With a provincial delegation on firearms regulations heading to 
Ottawa shortly, we must settle once and for all the stand this 
province will take. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move: 
 
 That this Assembly move immediately to debate on Bill 

No. 31. 
 
(1600) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I find the motion is not in order. The 
member is the seconder for a motion that is currently before us, 
and therefore he is not eligible to move another motion at this 
time. That doesn't preclude any other member from moving 
such a motion. But at this point the debate continues then on the 
amendment by the member for Thunder Creek and seconded by 
the member for Morse. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think it's 
certainly appropriate that the Assembly do take the time to 
address issues that are fairly pertinent, or not fairly pertinent but 
are of major concern to people of the province of Saskatchewan 
in view of the fact that the present Justice minister and some of 
my colleagues have been invited to attend a meeting in Ottawa 
in discussion and debating the whole issue of gun debate. 
 
And I think it would be only appropriate that the Assembly 
would take the time to address a motion of a very serious nature 
that would just strengthen the resolve of this committee. And 
therefore, with leave, I move: 



May 2, 1995 

 
1936 

 That this Assembly now move to debate on Bill No. 31. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:06 p.m. until 4:16 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Swenson Neudorf Martens 
D'Autremont Toth Britton 

— 6 
Nays 

 
Thompson Wiens Lingenfelter 
Anguish Atkinson Johnson 
Trew Kowalsky Cunningham 
Upshall Bradley Lorje 
Teichrob Pringle Cline 
Murray Draper Sonntag 
Flavel Roy Scott 
Stanger Knezacek Carlson 
Keeping   

— 25 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an unintended 
pleasure of mine to rise today to speak to this particular motion. 
I'm prompted to rise to my feet with a combination of some 
good news and unfortunately to try and refute some statements 
made. Frankly, I'm disappointed. I thought the member from 
Thunder Creek and the member from Morse had more personal 
integrity than to say some of the things that they did. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the big untruth that the member 
for Thunder Creek was busy talking about. He spoke of the 
1991 election promise that New Democrats made and that we 
fulfilled. 
 
We promised, with respect to the E&H, the education and 
health tax, that we would not see it tied in to the GST. We 
promised that. What it resulted in is many services are no longer 
taxed under the what would have been the harmonized PST that 
the former government had brought in place; the legislation was 
there to take effect January 1. 
 
You will recall that the election was October 20, and before that 
January 1 came along, we repealed that particular Act. We did 
not bring in the harmonized PST. That move itself, I feel very, 
very strongly about it because I can remember a great deal of 
discussion that went on in the then opposition caucus — a 
tremendous amount of discussion. And I don't think I'm even 
telling secrets because I think it's fairly widely known that that 
issue, of to harmonize or not to harmonize the PST, was the big 
question that we all wrestled with. 
 
We wrestled long and hard because frankly, at the time, the 
former government was so unpopular it wasn't a question of do 
we need to promise not to harmonize to win the election; it was 
a question of the fundamental principles on which the 
CCF-(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation)NDP have been  

started: the principles of fairness; the principles of standing up 
for regular people; the principle of looking out for our 
neighbours and treating everyone with the same respect that 
we'd like to be treated with ourselves. Those are some of the 
guiding principles that went into the debate. The discussion that 
we had was one of . . . look, if we say we will deharmonize this 
PST, then we best do it  true to our tradition of making 
promises pre-election, and then fulfilling those promises in the 
course of the next term of government. 
 
I'm delighted, Mr. Speaker, to say that we won the argument to 
deharmonize the provincial sales tax. That move has saved 
hundreds of millions of dollars from the pockets of some of the 
middle-class and lower middle-class people because a PST 
unfortunately, if it covers all goods and all services, attacks 
people with the lower disposable income much harder than it 
will attack people with a higher disposable income. 
 
The question of fairness that the member for Thunder Creek 
kept coming back to . . . I'm delighted to say that we want 
everybody in the universe, not just Saskatchewan — although 
we'd be satisfied if everyone in Saskatchewan judged us on the 
principle of fairness — judged us on what we said we would do 
and what we have set about to accomplish doing and the 
manner in which we've done it. The whole question of fairness 
for the people of Saskatchewan is one where the New 
Democratic government will stand up very, very well. And I 
anticipate that people, whether they share my particular views 
or not, are going to, in all likelihood, have an opportunity to 
pass their judgement in the finest democratic tradition of our 
country and our province. And frankly I look forward to it. 
 
It strikes me as rather odd that members of the opposition have 
a complete lack of enthusiasm for calling an election. When I 
was in opposition, for at least a year and a half, every time we 
made a statement in the Legislative Assembly, every single 
question we asked, every single comment we made, ended with: 
when are you going to get the courage up and call an election? 
I've yet to hear that from opposition members. 
 
So there's very good reason why we're talking about this 
economic state of our province, very good reason, and there's 
very, very good reason why members on this side are proud. 
 
Saskatchewan . . . as was pointed out in the opposition 
speeches, if you were listening, as was pointed out, 
Saskatchewan led all of Canada in economic growth in each of 
the last two years. Well how is it then we can be going to heck 
or to Hades in a hand basket on the one hand, and on the other 
hand we're leading the entire nation in economic development? 
 
Well perhaps, perhaps it's because, as members are so fond to 
point out, perhaps it's because agriculture has blossomed, has 
done very, very well, and that's absolutely true. Agriculture is 
the biggest industry in our province; that's an inescapable fact. 
Agriculture is doing very well. 
 
But how does this stack up to 1992? I kind of remember the 
opposition saying that when we made some changes in the  



May 2, 1995 

 
1937 

agricultural area  particularly I'm speaking of to GRIP  that 
that was going to be the final nail in the coffin for farmers, the 
final nail in the coffin. 
 
Well I just remind all the members of the opposition, you can't 
have it both ways. We can't have driven, in 1992, the final nail 
into the coffin of all farmers and in 1994 have record income in 
agriculture. I mean we'll accept responsibility, but frankly we've 
had our share of good luck too. The big guy above is smiling at 
Saskatchewan, has blessed us with great crops. Commodity 
prices have been very good. We have helped work with farmers 
to move them into more value added product. And as a result of 
it, there's more jobs. There's more farm income. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, you come back to the question of fairness. You 
come back to what works. We in Saskatchewan have a long 
history of knowing we have to go with what works in our 
province. 
 
The member for Morse talked about the job situation. And that 
seems to me to be very directly tied to economic development. 
The member for Morse was making the case, as has the Leader 
of the Liberal Party, in the opening days of this legislature, 
60-some days ago, made the argument that somehow or other 
we're hemorrhaging jobs. We're losing jobs. 
 
And yet it flies in the face of what StatsCanada is reporting to 
us regularly. It flies in the face of things like there being 7,000 
more jobs in February 1995 than there were in February 1994 
— 7,000 more jobs, year over year. It flies in the face of the 
statistics with respect to young people, where we had . . . in 
1992 we had 62,000 young people working; 1993, 63,000; 
1994, 64,000. Modest gain, but it's a gain, it's a move in the 
proper direction. 
 
Is it enough? Clearly it is not, clearly, not enough job growth. 
And that's why we've said we're going to be spending the next 
few years chasing job growth with the same diligence that we've 
spent wrestling the Tory deficit. And we've wrestled that one 
pretty well to the ground. 
 
As you know, we've delivered $119 million surplus last year. 
And I know that the Tories will say, well you know, you've had 
all kinds of good luck. And that's absolutely true. New 
Democrats have had good luck. 
 
But it seems to me that on every hockey team I ever played for, 
when we had the best luck was when we had the best team. We 
had the best luck when we worked harder than the other team. 
We had the best luck when we made our own luck. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan have done just that. The 
people of Saskatchewan have stuck with us, by and large, 
through some very trying times as our Saskatchewan went 
literally from the edge of a precipice over which, if we dropped 
over the edge of it . . . there was indeed some talk of the federal 
government having to step in, run the province for awhile. The 
speculation was, of course, that they would sell off some of our 
assets, thereby reducing the debt a little bit, hand it back to us,  

and say there you are — you run it. 
 
Well we've stepped away from that precipice. We've stepped 
away from it in a very dramatic fashion, in such a dramatic 
fashion that Saskatchewan is in fact the first province in all of 
Canada to get a credit rating upgrade. 
 
It's the first province to introduce a balanced budget. And it will 
be, at the end of this year, the first province to have two 
balanced, surplus budgets in a row. And at the end of next year, 
it'll be the only one to have three successive, balanced, surplus 
budgets. And we predict balanced, surplus budgets for the 
following two years out. 
 
(1630) 
 
We're committed to doing that. We're committed to the 
economic growth. We're committed to job creation. And we're 
now just getting through the worst of the having to clean up the 
former fiscal mess. We're through having to take care of the two 
upgraders that were hemorrhaging money. Both of them, 
frankly, were going to be millstones in perpetuity. 
 
Both of them now have a reasonable expectation of making 
enough dollars to pay off the remaining debt and to maintain 
their equipment in a very good fashion. Both of them now will 
be contributing jobs and economic prosperity to Saskatchewan. 
Both of them, however, did take an influx of money, and there's 
no magic to an influx of money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I am fond of saying to my constituents, you know there's no 
magic in this whole game. You elect an MLA from whatever 
party, whatever stripe you want, that MLA does not bring 
money out of their own pocket into the big pot. All MLAs that 
get elected are dealing from the public purse with respect to any 
monies that are spent by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So there's no magic to it. The question is one of integrity. The 
question is one of the direction of the MLA, and the party, the 
government — who it is you think will best match your views. 
That's what matters. Who's got the integrity, who's got the 
honesty, who deserves your trust? I think we stack up on all 
counts. I think we stack up very, very, very well. 
 
And the question of Weyerhaeuser . . . I know the member for 
Thunder Creek brought up Weyerhaeuser. There's a well-known 
fact that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan had put in over $150 
million into Weyerhaeuser to build the fertilizer plant out at 
Belle Plaine. The bad news is we've got all that money tied up 
in it. The good news is, the fertilizer plant is running very, very 
well. And the other goods news is that the fertilizer prices 
worldwide are very high, relatively speaking. Now that's good 
news for the Cargill fertilizer plant, of which taxpayers own 49 
per cent. It's very good news that way. 
 
But it's not such good news for farmers. And you ask any 
farmer that's buying a nitrogen-based fertilizer this year and if 
they want the choice between the prices of last fall or last spring 
versus the prices of fertilizer this spring, I absolutely  



May 2, 1995 

 
1938 

guarantee they'd jump for the chance to buy fertilizer at last 
year's price. 
 
But fertilizer being a commodity that is internationally traded, is 
selling . . . commanding a fairly high price right now. And that's 
good news for the fertilizer plant. The fertilizer plant will make 
money, as long as the fertilizer keeps selling. 
 
But I want to contrast that $150 million taxpayer money there 
for the creation of . . . name the number of jobs, but something 
less than 100 jobs at the fertilizer plant. We'll say 100 jobs. I 
don't want to get too hung up on that. 
 
And I compare it to the Cargill crushing plant that is being . . . 
in the process of planning and will be built just outside of 
Saskatoon — the Cargill crushing plant that came to 
Saskatchewan in no small measure because of some changes we 
made to the provincial budget, introduced in the budget, this 
very budget that opposition members are stalling at every turn, 
seem to be determined not to have passed, this very budget that 
encourages the manufacture of product in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it encourages the manufacture of Saskatchewan product, 
Mr. Speaker, by, when a manufacturer buys equipment or 
machinery to produce something in Saskatchewan, we do not 
charge that manufacturer the E&H (education and health) tax on 
that piece of equipment. 
 
So we've got a crushing plant in Saskatoon worth roughly $80 
million, and for that we have to forgo in the neighbourhood of 
$3 million in E&H tax. So worst-case scenario that you can 
make if you're trying to run up the costs to the provincial 
treasury for that crushing plant is $3 million versus 149 million 
for a fertilizer plant by the former government. 
 
I'll match a $3 million . . . forgoing $3 million worth of revenue 
to create over a hundred jobs to a direct grant of 150 million 
that the former government did to create the same magnitude of 
jobs, around a hundred jobs — 3 million versus 149 million by 
the former government. 
 
Where do you think the big risk is? I don't think it's with $3 
million; 3 million is no real small peanuts, but it's certainly 50 
times smaller than 150 million. 
 
It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, to hear the members opposite 
speaking about oil. I was born in Saskatchewan and I've always 
known that there was oil here. We've always had a relatively 
active oil field. The oil patch goes up and down in its activity, 
but it's always been my experience that what caused the oil 
patch to go up and down the most was things like what the 
federal government does with respect to oil. 
 
And the other thing that affects it is world price of oil. When 
we had in 1973-74 the OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries) oil crisis, we saw a fair amount of activity 
in the Canadian oil patch, and certainly Saskatchewan was a 
beneficiary of that activity. 
 

Was it a direct result of something that the provincial 
government did? By and large, no. By and large, it was the 
larger picture. Through the 1980s the oil industry in Alberta and 
in Saskatchewan enjoyed very, very prosperous years. In the 
main, by and large, because of things beyond the control of 
either of those two provincial governments, notwithstanding 
that all through the '80s we had the Alberta government, 
Conservative government, and the Saskatchewan Conservative 
government, falling all over themselves to see who could lower 
the oil royalties the fastest — falling all over themselves to 
collect as little revenue as they possibly could because they 
knew that if they gave up $50 million, that would create two 
more jobs. 
 
And I suppose it worked. I suppose it worked. It depends what 
measure you want to use. It seems to me that whatever success 
the former government had with its largess, with its spending a 
billion dollars a year more than it took in in revenue, I think that 
success is more than offset by the fact that this year we're going 
to spend taxpayers' money, $850 million interest, on that debt 
that they ran up in nine and a half years — $850 million. 
 
I don't know how the member for Estevan or the member for 
Thunder Creek or the members . . . any of the members that 
were part of that former government, I honestly don't know how 
they can look themselves in the mirror and say yes, I'm proud of 
what we did; yes, I'm proud. 
 
The third biggest provincial expenditure in my province is 
interest on the debt, and that's going to remain the third largest 
expenditure for a good long time into the future. Simply 
because we don't have the capacity to buy down the debt 
quickly enough to get that interest payment reduced quick 
enough. 
 
Wouldn't it be wonderful, in a world of what-ifs . . . and I'm not 
going to dwell on that very long — but long enough to say that 
if we had at our disposal $850 million a year, we could run a 
complete prescription drug plan, for example, to $5 per person. 
We could run that plan on the $850 million for five or six years, 
between five and six years, without doing anything to taxes. We 
could do astounding things. Anybody could. 
 
Although you know, Mr. Speaker, I say anybody could do 
astounding things if they had that $850 million a year. I'm not 
so certain. Because I look at the record of the former 
government, elected in pretty good times — the oil industry was 
going gangbusters in Saskatchewan — they squandered it and 
more. They squandered the wealth of the province and they 
piled up this massive debt. This massive debt that the people of 
Saskatchewan are doing their very best, and we are all 
collectively, digging our way out from under it. 
 
I am so pleased to be a part of the government that has focused 
on, first cleaning up the mess; first thing we had to do, clean up 
the mess. Second thing we had to do, get the fiscal situation 
under control. And I think we can argue that we've cleaned up 
the mess to a very large degree. There's always going to be 
some other little problem cropping up. As one of my friends  



May 2, 1995 

 
1939 

and colleagues says, if it isn't one darned thing it's another 
darned thing coming at you all the time. 
 
But I have noticed in the nearly four years that we've been in 
government, that in the first year it wasn't just one darned thing; 
it seemed like a whole avalanche of darned things coming at us 
from every direction. The second year that backed off a little 
bit. The third year it backed off a whole lot more, and finally 
we're to the stage where we are daring to dream about economic 
expansion. We're daring to dream about the future. We're daring 
to cause, for my province, for my constituents, for my relatives, 
for my friends, we're daring to cause that brighter future of the 
new day dawning. 
 
We're daring in this year's budget, that the opposition refuses to 
pass, we're daring to, for the first time in some years, actually 
reduce income tax — a reduction, Mr. Speaker, of $150 per 
taxpayer, $150 per taxpayer per year. Is it enough of a 
reduction? No, absolutely not; it's not enough, but it's what we 
can afford. 
 
And it fits with our plan, the Saskatchewan plan of taking all 
the future surpluses that we have on an annual basis and we will 
spend one-third on program enhancement and job creation, 
one-third on tax relief, and one-third direct to buying down that 
$15 billion mortgage. 
 
Through that, Mr. Speaker, we are going to be able to focus in a 
way like we've not seen before in Saskatchewan on economic 
development. We are going to be focusing on the future, the 
future for my children, for your children. I know that, Mr. 
Speaker, you have on occasion told stories of your son in here. 
But the future for all of our children — for all our children. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That has nothing to do with economic 
development. 
 
Mr. Trew: — And the member from Moosomin says, what's 
that got to do with economic development? Man, economic 
development is all about the future of our province and it's 
about the future for your children as well. Your kids didn't ask 
to be born into a Tory family; no kids ask to be born into any 
political family. The future of our province is all our children's, 
regardless of their political affiliation. 
 
That's the future — that's what economic development's all 
about. That's what we've done in very meaningful ways. That's 
why we've done some things with student summer jobs, no 
longer political appointees. As you would be very, very familiar 
with, that's how it used to be. 
 
(1645) 
 
Economic development, Mr. Member for Moosomin, is about 
the future of us all. What this government is about is about 
integrity for everyone. It's about opportunities throughout 
Saskatchewan. We've got jobs being created. We are saying the 
government promises to work as hard at creating jobs as it did 
to get the province's financial house in order. 

And I want to tell you, I'm reading that out of one of our 
publications, our admittedly partisan publications. But I'm 
telling you, if we print it there we mean it, and we're going to 
go after jobs with the same diligence that we've gone after 
getting the financial house in order. 
 
We have had the good fortune of seeing a bit of a turnaround  
quite a turnaround  in agriculture. We're seeing the short line 
farm machinery sector expanding. In the past year there's been 
more than 2,000 additional jobs created in the manufacture 
primarily of short line agricultural equipment. That's 2,000 jobs 
— that's 2,000 jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
We've got a service sector that's growing. We've got retail sales 
that grew at a rate of in excess of 9 per cent last year — retail 
sales growth that grew faster in Saskatchewan than any other 
province in Canada. And this is, to hear the member for 
Thunder Creek and the member for Morse, this is a province of 
doom and gloom? 
 
Well I don't believe it — I don't believe it for a minute that this 
is a province of doom and gloom. Saskatchewan is the province 
of the future. We've got tremendous resources, starting with a 
super population that has got a history of willingness to work, a 
history of ability to learn very quickly, and an ability to make 
things work. Why? Because we've always had to rely on 
ourselves to a large extent right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
As I am about to close, I just want to again say how pleased I 
am with the original motion from the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, the original motion commending the job of 
the government on economic development. 
 
Needless to say I won't be supporting the amendment preferred 
by the opposition, those doomsayers, those naysayers, those 
people that are so deeply mired — not in the '80s, but mired in 
the 1930s — mired so far back that there's absolutely no hope 
for them. I'm obviously not going to be supporting that. 
 
But I'm delighted to support this motion commending the 
Government of Saskatchewan on its economic development. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the debate be 
adjourned on this motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 
 
 
 


