






















































May 15, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 15, 1995 

 

 
2233 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed, I would ask the Minister of 
Municipal Government to please introduce the officials who 
have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, to my right I have Bill 
Reader, the deputy minister of Municipal Government; behind 
me to my right is Ron Davis, assistant deputy minister of 
municipal services; immediately behind me is Larry 
Chaykowski, director of finance and administration; and in 
front of me is Peter Hoffmann, director of financial operations 
for housing; and to my left is Bill Werry, director of sport and 
recreation. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister and officials, I'd like to welcome you here this 
evening. 
 
I have some information here that I'd like to pass on to you if I 
could have one of the pages, please. It deals with an individual 
who's having a problem with Sask Housing, specifically. He, as 
the story was related to me, he had a loan through Sask 
Housing; he also had loans with his financial institution. He 
contacted them with the thought that all of his loans were paid 
off. He was informed by the financial institution that indeed 
everything was cleared off. Then a year later, he gets a call back 
from, I believe it's from Sask Housing, saying that you still have 
a loan here which you're in arrears on. Why is this happening? 
Well he'd been informed that his loans were all paid up and he 
no longer owed them anything. 
 
So I believe that you're aware of the situation, Madam Minister. 
I can see, with you looking at the information, that your 
officials at least are aware of some of the circumstances 
involved here. 
 
As was explained to me, he has a credit problem now with 
Equifax Canada that he is on their books as having been 
delinquent on his loans, and still is. He informs my office that 
he has the money set aside in a trust account and is prepared to 
pay to Sask Housing if they will clear up the matter with 
Equifax Canada. Equifax Canada supposedly says that they are 
prepared to . . . clearing up his record if they can get a letter 
from Sask Housing that says that an error occurred some place 
in the system. 
 
And my understanding is, it doesn't have to be that the error 
was at Sask Housing or where, but just that an error occurred 
and then Equifax Canada, if he pays the money, is prepared to  

say that his credit is good. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you can give me some 
information on this particular case as you understand it, and 
what seems to be the problems in getting this cleared up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, this is a very long and 
complicated case and we have been working diligently to try to 
resolve it. At this point in time, the Ombudsman is . . . it has 
been referred to the Ombudsman's office, and he is working to 
try to resolve the problem. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How long has 
this case been in arrears? Can you give me that information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The account is in arrears by about 50 
months. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Is that 50 or 15? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Five zero. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. The 
information that I gave you on that verbally, is that reasonably 
accurate in your interpretation, or are there some other 
circumstances involved here? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I wouldn't say that it is accurate in all 
aspects. I think there is differences in interpretation. But in 
general, the circumstances are that a loan was taken out. The 
loan was unsecured, and it was on a promissory note. And the 
house was sold. The loan wasn't paid off. The loan went into 
arrears. And from that point in time, there has been a discussion 
and some points of difference about what happened when the 
house was sold. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Was the 
loan registered against the home at all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No. In 1986 up until — let me see — 
1988, February 1988, the loans were unsecured at that point in 
time and they were taken out on a promissory note. There was a 
change in policy after 1988 where loans were then taken out 
with a caveat against the . . . registered against the property. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — After 1988 when the caveats were being 
taken out on the loans, were all of the previous loans transferred 
over to the caveat system or were they remaining on the 
promissory note? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No. At that point in time, the ones that 
were taken out previous to 1988, February, were left under the 
old policy, which was simply a promissory note. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the 
questions that this individual asked . . . or he phoned in to the 
president of Sask Housing and wanted to know who, after a 
discussion with the president, who was the person higher up the  



May 15, 1995 

 
2234 

ladder that he could contact to discuss this issue. He was told by 
the president of Sask Housing that he was the highest person in 
the chain of command that this client of Sask Housing could 
talk to. Would you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I'm the minister responsible for 
Sask Housing, but the day-to-day operations and the 
supervision of the housing division rests with Mr. Ron Styles, 
who is associate deputy minister of the department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So if someone was to ask Mr. Styles 
who his boss was, that would be you then. Correct, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I'm the minister responsible for Sask 
Housing. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. Well why would Mr. Styles, 
if he did indeed say it, suggest to this client from Sask Housing 
that there was no one else that the client could talk to other than 
Mr. Styles; there was nobody else further up the ladder that he 
could go to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I don't know that Mr. Styles did 
that, and I'm not aware of any of his comments so I don't think 
I'm going to comment on that. Mr. Styles is a very capable 
associate deputy minister and he has a very good reputation in 
handling the day-to-day operations and supervising Sask 
Housing. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Perhaps it would be worth your time to discuss the situation 
with Mr. Styles in relationship to the chain of command to 
ensure that he does indeed . . . is aware that there is someone 
higher than he is. Just to refresh his memory on that perhaps 
would be a worthwhile effort. 
 
Madam Minister, I'd like to ask you some questions now about 
the globals. I notice in the travel that this year in province you 
have $1 million, $1.042 million, allocated for travel. That is the 
year ending March 31, '95. I look at the year ending March 31, 
'94 and the in-province travel was 614,000. We have an 
additional 400,000 — approximately a two-thirds increase. 
 
Madam Minister, what changed in your department that would 
warrant such a large increase in the amount of travel? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The numbers you have for 1993-94 are 
not the final numbers for the departmental budget for that year. 
And so, when you're comparing the year-to-year numbers, you 
have to compare the final year end, fiscal year 1993-94, with 
$1.107 million. So there has . . . you don't have the final 
numbers on the 1993-94 fiscal year before you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, when we get 
these globals we are led to believe that they are reasonably 
accurate. Now if the global for the year ending in March 31, 
1994 as what you gave us last year, it says here: travel expenses 
in-province $614,697.32. 

So if you have some other figure that is the accurate figure, then 
what's to say that any of these figures are accurate, Madam 
Minister? Is there some discrepancies there that aren't available; 
why the real numbers aren't available? When you give this 
information out, it's our belief that this is the gospel and that it 
is accurate. Now are you telling us, Madam Minister, that these 
figures are some reason suspect; that they are indeed not the 
real facts? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The numbers that you quoted were 
accurate at the time you asked the question because we hadn't 
got the finalized figures in for that year end. On December 12, 
1994, your office was sent the final figures for 1993-94, so you 
do have the final figures for that year, which were $1,107,622. 
That was sent to you December 12, 1994. 
 
The numbers that you referenced just now were numbers that 
were used earlier before the year-end figures were all tabulated. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, how do you 
calculate your figures then for this period of time ending at the 
fiscal year? You say you sent us figures that . . . updated figures 
as of December, which is nine months later. When does your 
reporting come in? When would you have prepared these 
numbers that you've now sent us? Let's use this year's even. Is 
the figure $1.042 million for travel accurate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member 
opposite would tell us what numbers he's using and where he 
received those numbers from because . . . Again I will say, 
when we gave you figures that you referenced to the year end 
for 1993-94 . . . haven't been completed, and to the best of our 
knowledge the numbers we gave you were accurate to that date. 
 
As a year end has been completed and all the numbers have 
been tabulated, the final results are in. And for 1993-94, it's 
1,107,622. And for the year 1994-95, it is 1,139,544. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I was 
using the in-province numbers for 1995 which are 1.042 
million. 
 
Now that number — 1.042 million — when is that accurate 
until? Is that accurate until December 31 or February or January 
or March, or when is that number for? And how long a period 
of time are we talking? Are we talking from March 31, '94 to 
some date after that but not yet till March 31 of '95? 
 
Because I don't know when these numbers are supposed to be 
accurate for. You say that well this is what we have to date. If 
that's what you have to date, where do the other numbers come 
from that will change that figure, as happened in '94? You had 
in-province 614,000 at the end of . . . once you added all the 
numbers together, I gather, you had a total of 1.107 million, or 
you can use the other numbers, the total travel for the province 
in March 31, '94 of 680,000. There's still a 400, $500,000 
difference there. So when do those numbers come together to  



May 15, 1995 

 
2235 

make it a reliable and accurate number? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The year ends March 31, and within a 
month after that all the numbers are in and tabulated. So the 
numbers that you have, if they've been tabulated within the 
month of April or by the end of April, are all correct. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So, Madam Minister, the numbers that 
you gave us this year on the globals are accurate. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you. Last year's numbers, it 
says here, date submitted March 25, '94, for the year end 
reporting of March 31, '94. Would those numbers have been out 
a month? Would they have been out three months? What kind 
of a time frame are you looking at here for the inaccuracies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — At that point we would've only had the 
February figures tabulated, so we would have been missing two 
months. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So you would have missed both 
February and March? Or they were tabulated in February, is that 
what you're saying? So it would have February and March that 
were missing? The minister is nodding that that is accurate. 
 
Madam Minister, why then in the '94 year, and would it have 
occurred also in the '95 year, that you would have spent 40 per 
cent of your budget in two months, in the last two months of the 
budgetary year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — That was for 1993-94. We don't have our 
records here and we aren't quite sure, but it could have been that 
the CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) were two or three or four 
months behind, and they all come in at the year end. So all of 
the accounting for CVAs are probably within the last two or 
three months of the fiscal year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you can give us some indication of what was spent then on a 
monthly time frame for the last three months of this fiscal year 
that we just completed  so January, February, and March. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We don't account for the travel by the 
month. And I guess if you would like, we will try to compile 
those figures and pass them over to you at a later date. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The reason 
I'm asking is it just seems a little curious to me that for the '94 
figures you would have used up 40 per cent of the budget in the 
last two months. It makes one wonder if you had certain funds 
allocated for travel, and so all of a sudden you haven't used 
them and so you rush around the province and visit various 
corners of the province simply to utilize the budget. And I was 
hoping that those figures would not have corresponded into the 
'95 year, because if they had, then something really would be 
suspicious. 
 

So I would appreciate it if you could get me those figures, 
Madam Minister, for the last three months of the fiscal year, to 
find out just what was happening on those. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you could give me information 
related to your personal travel as the minister in your 
department — the dates, the destinations, and the purposes of 
each trip, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Do you want in-province travel or 
out-of-province travel? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — If you can give us both of those please, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I have the pages here, if you would like. 
The total for the in-province travel is $5,954 and the total for 
out-of-province travel is $4,000 . . . oops, just a minute. I have 
to get a new total here. The total in-province travel is 12,000. 
 
Okay, let's take this out-of province travel first. The 
out-of-province travel, there was a trip to New Brunswick for a 
ministers' housing conference; a trip to Victoria for the opening 
of the Commonwealth Games and ministers responsible for 
local government meeting; and a trip to Grand Prairie for the 
opening of the Canada Winter Games. The total for the 
out-of-province travel was $4,863.12. 
 
The total for the in-province and out-of-province travel is 
$23,182.16, so I guess in order to find the in-province total you 
will have to subtract the out-of-province from the grand total. 
But I'll pass this over to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the 
information that you're passing over, would that also include 
who might have accompanied you on those trips, particularly 
the out-of-province ones? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The out-of-province travel includes the 
office staff who accompanied me on those trips. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you could give us an indication who those staff persons were 
that were accompanying you and what duties they fulfilled. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The trip to New Brunswick was a 
ministers' meeting for responsible for housing, and Harlene 
Balsdon accompanied me. And the meeting in Vancouver, 
which was a ministers responsible for local government 
meeting, Perry Erhardt accompanied me. And the trip to Grande 
Prairie for the opening of the Canada Games, Margaret 
Morrissette accompanied me. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you could give us a little bit of detail please on the local 
government meeting in Vancouver. How long was it? What was 
involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The meeting in Vancouver was two and a  



May 15, 1995 

 
2236 

half days, and the ministers responsible for municipal 
government from across Canada were at that meeting. 
 
We discussed issues like the role of the property tax, different 
service . . . different ways of providing services at the local 
level, some issues regarding economic development and the 
role of municipal governments, and trying to get an 
understanding across all jurisdictions about how legislation 
pertaining to the role and responsibility of municipal 
governments is similar or different from one area to another. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In those 
two and a half days how many hours of meetings would you 
have actually participated in? A couple hours a day, or eight 
hours a day, or what would it be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The first day was an afternoon only, of 1 
to 4. The second day was a full day from 8 to 5, and the last day 
was from 8 to 12 — a half day. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. It 
sounds like you were doing your work there; that's what I was 
concerned about. Since Commonwealth Games were on at 
exactly the same time I was . . . Okay, you said attend the 
Commonwealth Games and local government at the same time, 
so I was wondering how much time was spent at actually 
working and how much time was spent enjoying the hospitality 
of the Commonwealth Games? So if you spent that much time 
working you didn't have a lot of extra time to enjoy the 
hospitality of the Commonwealth Games . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . We're just making sure of that. 
 
Madam Minister, how much of the travel would be not related 
to land travel within this million-dollars-plus? Is the vast 
majority of it vehicular travel or are you using aircraft quite a 
bit? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well first of all, I want to correct what 
you thought was a trip where we had a good time at the 
Commonwealth Games. The Commonwealth Games started 10 
days after the ministers' meeting, and I on my own expense 
went over to Victoria and stayed with my mother, so there was 
no expense to the government. So I didn't make the trip to 
Vancouver, come home, and make the trip back to Victoria and 
come home. It was one trip and I stayed there, just so that you 
know that we weren't having a good time all of that time. 
 
In regard to the in-province travel, most of it is CVA vehicles 
and there are some plane trips, mainly up to northern 
Saskatchewan, on two or three occasions that I've gone up to 
visit municipalities in northern Saskatchewan. But by far, most 
of the expense is related to car travel to visit municipalities 
within Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When 
you're travelling by air, would you be travelling commercial; 
would you be using Executive Air; just what form are you  

using? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Just to make sure that you understand 
that that million dollars you talked about includes all of the staff 
who works for Department of Municipal Government, 
including the people who work in housing and so on, and we 
use Exec Air to travel in province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, is your department involved in any legal actions, 
either on behalf of the department or is someone taking legal 
action against you? I wonder if you could detail any of that, 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The housing division of Municipal 
Government may have some minor legal actions where they are 
trying to collect arrears or some loans that are owing, but that 
would be the only legal action that is undertaken by our 
department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — How much money would you spend on 
legal fees in a year, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We don't have that exact number with 
me, but my officials say it would be equivalent to about 
three-quarters of a PY (person-year) within the Department of 
Justice is what we would spend approximately in one year on 
legal work. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you 
repeat three-quarters of what? I didn't catch what? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Three-quarters of one PY in the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
Three-quarters of a person is probably relatively inexpensive to 
feed. 
 
Going back to that initial case that I brought forward, Madam 
Minister, what other measures have you taken other than legal 
recourse to try and resolve that circumstance? 
 
I would think that if it could be settled through some other 
means, other than through the legal court system, that perhaps 
the taxpayer could save some money on it if you were to use 
perhaps mediation services or some other entity that could help 
resolve the situation rather than simply going through the court 
system which is an expense for everyone. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well first of all, this case has received a 
fair bit of attention from the staff in my office and from the 
staff over in the department. And everyone, including the 
deputy minister, has tried to resolve it. There is no legal case 
right now. What we have done is refer it to the Ombudsman for 
comment. And so a collection agency is handling it and, like we 
have in many instances, we have referred accounts that are in 
arrears to a collection agency and they are the ones who have 
tried to collect this account that is approximately 50 months in 
arrears. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2237 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you hired two more in-scope, permanent employees 
and then your wages though within that category have increased 
by $215,000. I wonder if you can give us some details as to 
why, after hiring two individuals, you've had such a large 
increase in the salaries. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The reason for that difference is the 
in-scope, 2 per cent negotiated wage increase was in effect for 6 
months in 1993-94 but was in effect for the full 12 months in 
'94-95. In addition, the employees in housing division of our 
department were converted to the main table of the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) agreement and 
that agreement was in effect for 9 months for 1993-94 and for 
the full 12 months in 1994-95. 
 
And reclassifications amounted to $20,358 on top of that, and 
there were other increments as well. So to recap, it was a 2 per 
cent increase that took effect for the last six months of '93-94 
and the full 12-month period of '94-95. A conversion of the 
staff in housing was not in full effect until 1993-94, and there 
were reclassifications. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Within the 
in-scope increases that took place, was there an equal 
distribution of the funds? Did everyone receive the 2 per cent 
increase or did some people receive a greater amount and some 
people a lesser amount? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The 2 per cent was an average, 
depending on where they sit within the range, but on average it 
amounted to 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Would you have any employees, Madam 
Minister, in your department that would earn less than $12 an 
hour? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, did any of the 
employees that were earning less than $12 an hour receive a 
top-up that would have been greater than 2 per cent with the 
settlement of this contract? 
 
And you may be wondering why I'm asking this, but we had 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) in 
here this afternoon and the employees in SPMC who were 
earning less than $12 an hour were all topped up to $12 or 
greater. Did the same thing happen within your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would the 
employees of your department be under the same union contract 
as the employees in SPMC? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No, we have a separate agreement; 
agreement that's different than SPMC. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm sure 
those people earning less than $12 an hour in your department 
would be interested in talking to the employees of SPMC that 
were earning less than $12 an hour, which they no longer are. 
 
Madam Minister, in the in-scope areas your spending has 
increased by an additional 267,000 for temporary employees, an 
increase of about 25 per cent. What's the reason for this? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The increase in non-permanent staffing 
covered new, short-term programs like RRAP, the residential 
rehabilitation assistance program, that was implemented by the 
federal government jointly with the provincial government last 
year. 
 
There was increase in staffing at Eastend for the T-Rex 
discovery. We also had people who were working on the 
Northern mines in order to secure the lease agreement. And we 
also had someone working as an aboriginal liaison. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. In 
the budget Estimates your full-time equivalent staff utilization 
for '94-95 was given as 380.5, and yet in our global questions, 
you're reporting 429 employees as of March 31. Are both those 
numbers correct, and if not, what . . . where's the discrepancies? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Could you please tell us where you got 
that first number from? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, it says in my notes that 
this is out of the budget Estimates for '94-95, so not this year's 
budget but last year's. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well I understand what you have for the 
estimates in 1994-95 from last year, was 380.5 PYs . . . or FTEs 
(full-time equivalent). 
 
And what we had last year were 12 additional people added to 
the department. There were two people who were doing 
aboriginal liaison. There were two people working for northern 
mines monitoring committee. There were four people working 
in Eastend paleo field station. The residential rehab assistance 
program had three people. We had one person working on 
treaty land entitlement, and we had a third of a person working 
in public safety. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In your 
department, you've had quite a number of reclassifications. In 
fact this has tripled this year over last. You went from 12 to 38. 
And the costs increased correspondingly for about 81,000. Why 
so many reclassifications, Madam Minister? What's changed 
within your department for the need to upgrade so many 
people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The reason for the reclassifications was, 
when we underwent the restructuring in '93-94, we brought 
together three different departments. There was parts of the  



May 15, 1995 

 
2238 

department that had public safety, parts of Rural Development, 
part of Municipal Government. And when they came together, 
there was a lot of reclassifications as people fit into the new job 
descriptions and within the total, larger, expanded department. 
So it had to do with the restructuring of parts of three 
departments, reorganization into one new department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, when you were 
bringing in these three departments in together, surely there 
would have been all the managerial positions already in place 
within each of those departments. And as you bring them into a 
larger entity, I can see that there may have been one or two new 
areas that needed to be made, but at the top of the pyramid, you 
still have one person and then going down from that. 
 
So I would question why you would need 38 reclassifications 
simply because of the combining of the three different 
departments. You're not going to have three deputy ministers 
now; you're going to have one deputy minister. You may have a 
couple of assistant deputy ministers, but you're . . . down the 
line, you're not necessarily going to still have three departments 
side by side under your ministry that are reporting separately. 
Now you have them all integrated, and surely you don't need as 
many managerial positions to deal with that. And if you do, 
obviously something is wrong there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well my staff tell me that when the 
departments were amalgamated, all the out-of-scope staff was 
reclassified in order to fit into new positions and new job 
descriptions within the new department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm going to 
have to look over my notes here a little bit more and just see 
what the changes all were. 
 
I wonder if you can give me the total number of vehicles you 
have leased within your department and what those vehicles are 
utilized for. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I will pass over to you a paper that shows 
how many vehicles we have that are leased in each of the last 
three years, but we don't have here tonight which areas of the 
department leases these vehicles. I would imagine that they are 
distributed through housing and municipal services as well as 
public safety and recreation and culture. But we will get a 
breakdown for you. There are eight vehicles that were leased in 
1994, and I will ask that our department officials provide for 
you the detailed breakdown as how those are allocated in each 
division of our department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, if you 
would, please. My information was that you had 59 leased 
vehicles. Yes, and on here you have 43. So if you could provide 
that information, Madam Minister, please. 
 
In the globals, you also provided us with a list of people who 
are no longer with your department. I wonder if you could give 
an indication, of those that are no longer there, if any of them 
— and if so, who they might be and where they went — that  

moved into another government department or into a Crown 
corporation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — In your global question no. 4, you asked 
us to provide you with a breakdown on the employees and when 
they were terminated and for what circumstances. We have 
provided you with that, but we don't have tonight with us 
information about where these people transferred to, whether 
they went to the private sector or retired or took up other 
positions within the provincial government. 
 
So we will endeavour to find that out, but we don't have that 
with us tonight. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If you 
would please investigate that for me. 
 
Madam Minister, a number of committees that were on the 
globals last year no longer are and I was wondering if you could 
give me some indication whether these committees have been 
discontinued, if they were overlooked, or what it might be. 
They included the MPI (modification, products and innovation) 
selection committee, the Minister's Advisory Committee on 
Multicultural Legislation, the Minister's Advisory Committee 
on the Status of the Artist, Saskatchewan Heritage Advisory 
Board, Saskatchewan Heritage Property Review Board, the 
Saskatchewan multicultural advisory committee. 
 
I wonder if you could give me some indication as to the status 
of those committees. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Some of the committees were set up for a 
short term and they finished their mandate, and as they finished 
their work they ceased to exist. So we have provided you with a 
number of committees that we have. Most of them are current 
and operational, and there were a few like the advisory 
committee on multiculturalism and so on, that when they 
finished, handed in their report, they were disbanded. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
wonder if you can give us a cost breakdown on the committees, 
and who may have served on those committees, and what they 
received for per diems and expenses. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I have the information 
that the member asked for and I would ask him to take it over. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you have, I believe, six contract employees within 
your department. I wonder if you could give us their names, 
their terms of reference, their job descriptions, benefits, offices, 
and principal residence. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The information we have, and I . . . we 
have, in 1994, as of March 31, 1994, there were nine people on 
contract and the total compensation was 367,269. And as of 
March 31, 1995, there were six people on contract and the 
compensation for that period, for 1995, was $312,785. 
 



May 15, 1995 

 
2239 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you can give us the names of those employees and what their 
job descriptions are, where their work location is at, and what 
their terms of reference are. Like are they employed for six 
months, a year, for a particular project, that type of item? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We don't have that detailed information 
with us but we'll compile it and provide it to your office. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, in your globals you have one major item of purchase 
under computers. That was a purchase for $380,866. You 
purchased 125 computers plus a dozen printers. Madam 
Minister, was that purchase tendered? And who will be utilizing 
those computers? With approximately 129 employees in your 
department, that's one new computer for about every three or so 
employees. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The purchase of the new computers were 
all tendered and as we purchased the new computer network . . . 
or computer hardware, some of the older computers were 
passed down to other staff within the department. I will give 
you a breakdown where these new computers are in the 
department. 
 
In inspection services we have four; the Provincial Library has 
13; the minister's office has two; finance and administration has 
12; communications has four; culture and recreation have one; 
human resources have one; recreation has four; emergency 
planning has two; municipal policy and legislative services has 
three; municipal finance has three; community planning has 10; 
northern planning has two; housing in Regina has 27; housing 
in Prince Albert has nine; housing, property management, has 
14; the Fire Commissioner's office has four; heritage has seven; 
arts and multiculturalism has three; for a grand total of 125. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Why 
would housing need an additional 50 new computers? Did they 
have computers available before, and if so, why 50 new ones 
were they required? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — In housing they switched their 
accounting system from an ISM (Information Systems 
Management Corporation) package to an in-house package and 
so they purchased new computers in order to be able to more 
efficiently make use of that service. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Am I to 
take it then that ISM was providing a software program along 
with the hardware, and then when that service was discontinued 
they took their hardware back with them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Housing division was just hooked up to 
ISM, the main computer, so when we changed to in-house we 
just disconnected. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam  

Minister, you moved a substantial amount of office space to the 
London Life Building this past summer. Would you mind 
explaining why that move was necessary and outlining the 
tendering process that may have been undertaken in selecting 
that location? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — When we amalgamated the . . . or 
restructured the government, three or four different departments 
came together as the Department of Municipal Government and 
they were located at various places around the city. Last year we 
brought all the various divisions of Municipal Government 
under one roof and that change saved us in lease costs and 
operations over $400,000 a year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How large 
of a change . . . okay $400,000. But what kind of a savings were 
you getting per square foot on that compared to what you were 
paying? I noticed that in questioning other departments that 
they have also been moving, changing locations around the 
province while maintaining rental space at other areas. Was 
there other rental space available that was already being paid for 
and leased by the government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I can't answer for SPMC. I can tell you 
that we had 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 different locations from which we 
operated. And when we relocated under one roof, it saved the 
department's budget annually $426,000. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, for 
your questions. I'm through, but I believe one of our colleagues 
is in the House today and wishes to ask you some questions. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. 
In the . . . on subvote 3 under housing, I see there we have an 
increase in the home improvement program subsidies by a fair 
amount of money. And I was wondering if you could just tell 
me why this has increased in this upcoming year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The subsidy is directly related to the 
prime interest rate. And as the prime interest rate goes up, the 
amount of the subsidy goes up also. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you tell me what the outstanding 
balance of these loans would be today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — $125 million. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And how much of this would be in 
arrears? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We have 43,000 accounts at Sask 
Housing, and about 1,500 of them are in arrears. We're talking 
about accounts. We're not talking about total value. Forty-three 
thousand accounts, 1,500 are in arrears. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Do you have a dollar figure, as far as what 
these would amount? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well this is a little bit technical. We have  



May 15, 1995 

 
2240 

$7 million in accounts; some portion of those are in arrears. So 
it's a small percentage of that total $7 million. Do you 
understand what I'm saying? Of those accounts in arrears, they 
total about $7 million, but there's only a percentage of those 
that are in arrears at this point in time. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, I guess I'll have to have 
you explain that again. I thought I understood you when you 
first started talking, but if you're saying that you have $125 
million outstanding, $7 million is in arrears — but only a 
portion of that is in arrears at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We have $125 million; that's the total 
portfolio, the total accounts. Of that, there are about $7 million 
of those accounts that have . . . they have a portion of that 
account in arrears. It's not the whole thing in arrears. It's a 
portion of that account in arrears. 
 
You have to understand how this works. There are people who 
are paying rent. There are people who have loans. And it's not 
easy to quantify, but of the $7 million, there are a portion of 
those that would be in arrears. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Are you then saying that the 125 million 
isn't just in the home improvement loan program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The 125 is in the home improvement 
program, but there are other portfolios that are beyond that. But 
125 million is related to the home improvement program. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Madam Minister. Can you 
explain to me what you meant by a portion of this is in rent 
because I didn't realize that there was any part of the program 
that rents would apply. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I'm sorry; that was my error. I should 
have said it was the home improvement program that we're 
talking about. That's a collection of our accounts on that 
program. So I misspoke. Please strike that from the record. 
There are no rents. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell 
me how many dollars have been written off each and every year 
since the program began? Do you keep a running total? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We have that information but we don't 
have it here tonight. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The program, I think it was a 10-year 
program, wasn't it, the home improvement? And if it is, then 
you're going to probably be projecting this year the amount of 
write-offs you're going to have to wind the program up. And I'm 
just wondering where . . . at what stage you are at with these 
calculations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The program was in place for five years. 
The loans themselves were a 10-year term. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Madam Minister, would you be able to  

provide then the past years, the amounts that have been written 
off, because that would be over and above the figures we were 
talking about earlier? But also what you project for this 
upcoming year as far as write-offs, because the loans 
themselves, that part of it's going to be winding down. You said 
it was . . . the program started in 1986, '85? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The time when we had the most 
difficulty with those accounts is past. We're into the end of the 
program now, of the 10-year term, and so we are . . . our 
collection rates are much higher than they were before. We 
don't have a lot in outstanding accounts. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you then tell me, once again, what the 
$125 million is? What I was leading up to, I thought within the 
next year and a half, this $125 million would be coming back 
into the government coffers. So I guess we'll have to sort of 
start this again, Madam Minister. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Okay, this is going to get easier now. As 
you remember, the home improvement program was a loan 
taken out by people. They went to their banks and those loans 
were guaranteed by the provincial government. The banks have 
$125 million worth of those loans that are current and the 
clients are paying them. 
 
There are $7 million worth of loans that have gone into default, 
and as the guarantor of those loans they've been passed to the 
provincial government. We are now collecting those loans and 
some portion of those loans are in arrears, but it's not the total 
$7 million. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Madam Minister, that does clear 
it up. But of course you're still going to be able to give me then 
the amount of write-offs or any monies that the government had 
to give to the banks, or did you just take over all of the loans 
that were becoming delinquent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — This $7 million has been taken over from 
the banks because we guaranteed those loans. The banks 
couldn't collect them; they collected it from us; we go and ask 
the client to pay. 
 
We try as much as possible to collect those arrears from the 
clients, and when it's impossible we then turn it over to a 
collection agency and the collection agency then takes on the 
task of collecting from those clients. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you tell us what the total cost of the 
program has been since its inception to date? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The total number of loans that were 
taken out at the banks were about $408 million. But the portion 
that we have to pay for, which is the subsidy and some of the 
arrears, we don't have those actual figures with us, but we will 
calculate them and pass them on to you. So the actual 
obligation, the financial obligation on the provincial  



May 15, 1995 

 
2241 

government, has to be calculated on what we paid out in 
subsidies and what we paid out trying to collect the arrears. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And I'm not sure if I recall just what the 
interest rate . . . Was it 6 per cent on both . . . on the loan? And 
I think there was a grant. Are we also talking about the costs of 
the grant that was involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The write-down was to 6 per cent. The 
provincial government subsidized the interest down to 6 per 
cent. And the grants that were paid out, that $1,500 to each 
home-owner, we haven't got those figures with us tonight. The 
program was cancelled in March of 1990. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You would be able to send across the 
amounts of the grants? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We can go back in our records and find 
that but it will take some research. This program has not been in 
effect for the last five years. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — If that was at 6 per cent money, then the 
program that actually the New Democrats had to compete with 
at that time, 7-7-7 or 7 per cent interest over 7 years and such, 
did you . . . was there any costing done on that by the 
department officials? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No. I say that the department officials did 
not calculate that proposal out at all. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — On subvote 7, the community 
development program, where there's 10 per cent of VLT (video 
lottery terminal) profits, I guess, go back to each community, 
have you done a breakdown of revenues to date or expected 
revenues by community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Are you going to keep a running total of 
each community's proceeds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — No. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Is there any reason why you couldn't keep 
a running total of the proceeds sent to each community? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — You'll have to ask that question to the 
minister responsible for Gaming. This is simply 10 per cent of 
net VLT revenues that are designated to be placed in a program 
for community development purposes, and it was not meant to 
relate directly to how much money was being spent in VLTs in 
each community. There was never a connection between each 
community spending on the VLTs and what was going back 
through this program. We never made that connection. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So the 10 per cent money — that's spread 
amongst all communities, or is it just spread amongst those 
communities with the VLTs? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — When we put the 10 per cent into the 
community development program, we said we would take 
advice from SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) about how it would be distributed and what it 
would be spent on. And we're still talking with SUMA, SAHO, 
and SARM. There has been no conclusion in that discussion 
yet. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I thought the minister might ask 
the member from Shaunavon what 50 per cent would cost. 
 
Madam Minister, I've raised the question of housing, and I'm 
wondering what has been done to address some of the requests 
for housing in view of the fact that Municipal Government and 
Sask Housing has basically wound down its housing program. 
And in view of the reduction in funding coming from the 
federal government, what do communities like Fairlight do? 
 
And are they any communities that may have existing housing 
that is not being utilized at the time? Would the department take 
the initiative of seeing whether they can make some of these 
units available at a cost — letting them up for tender, if you will 
— and see is some of these communities could bid on them and 
maybe look at moving them as an alternative to the other 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — First of all, your comment about putting 
them up for tender, we don't sell off our social housing units, 
but where there are vacancies in communities, we undertake 
community consultation to try to fill those vacancies. And if 
they cannot find residents to live in those units then we do 
relocate them to communities that do have a need and have 
identified that need. And it is important for us to continue to 
work with the communities, both the ones that have vacancies 
and the ones that have expressed a desire to have more units. 
 
It is a concern to us that the federal government no longer funds 
a capital program. And we must continue to express our 
concern to the federal government because we believe very 
strongly that housing is a very important social program. And it 
is extremely critical to residents in the North, but it's also very 
important to people living in our cities and in our communities 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
So our desire is to continue to negotiate with the federal 
government to try to impress upon them the need for further 
capital funding for social housing programs. But at this point in 
time we really do have very limited options. We cannot pick up 
that cost entirely by ourselves; we must have the partner with us 
and that partner must be the federal government. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, is it beneficial for a community 
to have a Sask Housing Authority in their community to receive 
any assistance? If not, who would I put a community — or the 
leadership in a community, such as the mayor and council, as 
far as the department  in touch with to just find out whether 
there are vacant units available that Sask Housing may be  



May 15, 1995 

 
2242 

looking to make available to other communities to purchase and 
to move to their communities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — If there is not a local housing authority, 
then that community should write to the deputy, Bill Reader, or 
to Ron Styles, the associate minister responsible for housing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, a 
question regarding assessment and I raised this the other day as 
well. What's the department, or Municipal Government, if you 
will, doing in their discussions with both SUMA and SARM in 
dealing with the assessment question and the rate of taxation on 
houses on small rural properties such as acreages in the rural 
areas? 
 
I brought this to your attention the other day when we were 
discussing a Bill, and the fact that some residents are finding 
now that they would be better off having purchased a lot and 
built in a community or bought a house if it was available. At 
least they've got the water and the sewer and those other 
services available to them. But since there wasn't anything 
available . . . and a couple that have been brought to my 
attention chose a house that happened to be vacant, fairly new, 
and are finding themselves facing substantial assessment and 
taxes on that property. 
 
Is your department doing anything to try and work together with 
SUMA and SARM to address this question so that at the end of 
the day we're not overcharging for people because they chose to 
live on an acreage, but at the same time they're not getting it . . . 
as a resident of a local community might feel they're getting it 
for next to nothing. I think what we're looking for here as well 
as fairness . . . and I'm wondering if you could just fill us in as 
to where we are in the discussions that are . . . and are ongoing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The responsibility for assessment rests 
with SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency), 
and SAMA will eventually make the decision about how they 
are going to value those properties. 
 
In regard to the taxation issue, we are endeavouring to provide 
municipalities with as many tools as they can so that they can 
make their own decisions about how they want to tax residents 
when they live on small property holdings in rural 
Saskatchewan. So there is an issue both of taxation policy and 
an issue of assessment policy that must be dealt with. 
 
SAMA will deal with the issue of assessment policy, and we 
will discuss the issue of providing tax tools and some degree of 
discretion for the municipalities so that if they want to provide 
incentives or if they want to undertake a policy that would give 
them some ability to encourage residents to live in rural 
Saskatchewan and not to be obliged to pay an onerous tax bill, 
then we want to make sure that municipalities have that 
discretion, and they can make it at their own local level. 
 
(2030) 
 

Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, Madam Minister, then is, 
municipalities do actually have that privilege right now or that 
opportunity to set rates based on where a person lives and 
services that are available. 
 
However, there really isn't a clear, I guess if you would say . . . 
clear rules that would establish the same pattern or an equal 
playing-field right across the province. That's what I'm 
gathering from your comments. Wouldn't it be fair for the 
department to establish and lay out some of those level 
playing-fields, whether through regulation, so that each RM 
(rural municipality) is treating the property owner, especially 
the acreage owner, on the same basis? 
 
And as well, Madam Minister, if a person . . . and a question 
that was just raised today: a person happens to have a trailer in 
the same yard as . . . and in a lot of cases we have where a son 
starts farming with a father, and to start off with just moves a 
trailer onto the same yard. And the complaint was with the cost 
of the power and everything. And then the taxation . . . would 
that trailer tax separately too, and is that an issue that may be 
addressed though some regulations and guidelines? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We are aware of the problems that you've 
just talked about. It is a concern to us, and we will look into it. 
The only tools that municipal governments have right now is 
they can make a decision if they want to discount, abate, or 
exempt property taxes. So they have at their disposal right now 
under the municipal Act the right to make some of those 
decisions. 
 
But they are difficult, and they sometimes are reluctant to 
undertake those kinds of initiatives. So I'm aware of the 
problem that you have just related to us. It is a concern. We are 
talking to SARM about it, and we are trying to find a solution 
for it. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 
members opposite for their cooperation and their questions and 
I would like to thank my officials here tonight for providing us 
with their support. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and her officials, including those in the 
galleries, for their support this evening and for providing the 
answers to our questions. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2243 

General Revenue Fund 
Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, I would ask the 
minister please reintroduce us to the officials who have joined 
us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairperson. To my left is Dan Perrins, deputy minister of 
Education, Training and Employment. To my right is Lily 
Stonehouse, assistant deputy minister, advanced education and 
employment services. Immediately behind me is Ken Horsman, 
assistant deputy minister, K - 12. And to Mr. Horsman's left is 
Mae Boa, director of finance and operations. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
Madam Minister and her officials. Madam Minister, a couple of 
questions that have been brought to my attention. 
 
First of all, I'll deal with one that's been brought by teachers. 
You're probably getting the same letters as I am, regarding the 
feeling that the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) 
anyway . . . that there isn't meaningful negotiations regarding 
the salary and a number of the issues. And I'm wondering where 
we sit on that issue and what's basically taking place at this 
time. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can report to the House that the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation met with the 
Government/Trustee Bargaining Committee on May 9 and 10 of 
last week to pursue a collective bargaining agreement. The two 
teams will be back at the bargaining table on May 18 and 19, or 
Thursday and Friday, to bargain the issues that will successfully 
lead to a conclusion surrounding a collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess, Madam Minister, just from the one letter 
I received from the STF representation of my area is the feeling 
as it eventually came down to . . . boiled down to the salary and 
the fact that they felt that there was no initiative whatsoever to 
at least look at the . . . what they've lost over the last couple of 
years. And I suppose we could all argue that every sector of our 
society, that everyone's had to give up something or other. 
 
But I'm not sure. Are you anticipating that there may be a 
collective bargaining agreement in the near future? Or the 
process, as it's taking place right now, is the government 
directly involved, or are we strictly dealing just through the 
representation from the STF and the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association), and is there a government 
representative on that bargaining committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Government/Trustee Bargaining 
Committee has tabled a financial package. The teachers are 
aware of that financial package. The teachers' bargaining 
committee has notified teachers from across the province  

through their bulletin. We expect that as bargaining goes on that 
we will get to a collective agreement in the near future. 
 
I just want to make the point that contrary to what other 
provinces are doing across the nation, our government/trustee 
bargaining team has not tabled an offer that in fact would take 
money away from teachers as we've seen in Manitoba and 
Alberta, as we've seen in Ontario through their social contract, 
and the Maritime provinces. 
 
Teachers in this province and all public sector workers have not 
had to face the possibility of not a wage increase, but wage cuts. 
And our government has chosen not to do that, even though we 
have been successful in bringing in a balanced budget. We 
acknowledge, very much so, the contributions that teachers and 
trustees and all of our other educational partners have made to 
the government's plan to get to a balanced budget and to keep 
the budget balanced in the years to come. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, when it comes to 
balanced budget, it may look well and it may appear balanced 
on the general revenue side as far as the Minister of Finance's 
numbers would show, but certainly there are a lot of third 
parties that have seen significant reductions that have had to . . . 
they've been used to address and probably bring in a balanced 
budget, but the reality is, at the end of the day we still pay the 
same taxes. 
 
And so I guess if there is one issue that when it comes right 
down to it, I think parents look at it, and I look at what's taking 
place in the two school divisions in my area and the substantial 
reduction in teachers in the unit. I guess at the end of . . . when 
we cut right through everything, I think most people would 
probably agree that probably that you don't necessarily want to 
see cuts in teacher population, which may require that 
everybody has to give a little bit. 
 
(2045) 
 
And so I can only say we hope the process works and people 
will understand what's taken place. 
 
Another question comes from . . . and it's a Cindy Sweet from 
Moosomin, and it was brought to my attention by a gentleman 
in the area who had run across her, had gone for coffee, and she 
was . . . he knows her quite well and she was kind of really 
feeling down about a couple of days ago, and it's regarding 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology). 
 
And this individual had applied . . . she applied on January 2 for 
a medical laboratory technician. The course was cancelled 
because of lack of employment and I'm wondering if you could 
just inform me as to the reasons behind this. That was the 
reason that she was given. She was told this on March 31, so 
then she transferred in SIAST or transferred her application to 
computer systems technology on April 5, but she was informed 
that she wouldn't be accepted because of lack of related work 
experience and extracurricular activities. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2244 

That was on May 5 she got that notification, so she then she 
thought well, she'll try for a lab tech. She applied for a lab tech 
in March '94 and was rejected because of a low average. She 
just doesn't know where to turn any more. 
 
She tried SIAST. She tried three different programs and I guess 
she was really dejected the other day when this gentleman 
happened to be talking to her so he brought this to my attention 
and just asked where are we in the SIAST programs? Is there a 
cut-back, and if there is what are the reasons for them as far as 
the cut-backs? 
 
And the other problem is, you apply January 2 and it's March 31 
before you hear that a program is not going ahead. It leaves a lot 
of people kind of out in the lurch determining how they're going 
to pursue a career in their lives and the education they're 
looking for as they look at the different alternatives. And I'm 
wondering if you could just fill me in as to what has been 
happening and transpiring with SIAST and why so many 
rejections may have arisen. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. I'm advised that the medical lab 
technicians course was stopped for 1995 because the program 
had a poor employment rate. And what SIAST is doing is 
redeveloping the course so that students who graduate from that 
course in fact are hired in the various institutions that would be 
hiring medical lab technologists. 
 
In terms of the other programs, what students do is they make 
application. And we know that we have a limited number of 
seats in any one program and we have lots of people who are 
trying to get into those programs, so it is possible that, for 
whatever reasons, other applicants came before her. But I 
would suggest that if she wants my office to follow up on 
precisely what happened to her, I'd be quite prepared to do that 
and get back to her. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister, because I think as 
well she'd like to take the time and at least know there's 
someone who's willing to listen and maybe could offer some 
suggestions as to some other alternatives. I think after you've 
been turned down through three consecutive applications, it 
could be somewhat discouraging. So I'll get that information 
and pass it on to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
Madam Minister . . . or Deputy Deputy Chairman, whatever it 
might be. Madam Minister, I believe it was last year that 
presentations were made to you requesting that the 4-H program 
that is quite widespread across this province be counted as a 
part credit for school work. I wonder if you could give us some 
details on what's happening with that request and whether or 
not some of the 4-H programing will be included in the 
educational process. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand from our officials that 
we've had many requests for out-of-school activities and credits, 
or partial credits, towards a high school, I guess, certificate, or a 
grade 12. As part of our high school review, we  

will not be making any precise decisions about what will and 
will not be counted for out-of-school credit until the fall of 
1996 when we begin to implement our high school curriculum 
that we announced a year ago. 
 
So there have been no decisions made as to whether, for 
instance, 4-H or cadets or other out-of-school activities can be 
counted towards a high school credit for the purposes of 
receiving a grade 12. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, if you're going 
to implement this — the possibilities of 4-H or air cadets or 
whatever it might be — for the fall of 1996, surely there must 
be some lead-in time prior to that program actually starting in 
the fall of '96. Will you be providing the 4-H — because they're 
the ones that have requested it — some information prior to 
that, that their courses will be acceptable? Or on September 1, 
1996, will you simply say, your course is now acceptable or 
your course is not acceptable while somebody else's is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is only May of 1995. We still have 
a whole school year, in essence, to go, and it's our intention to 
consult with not only 4-H but other groups that are asking for 
out-of-school credits. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, will the 
organizations that would be involved have some lead-in time to 
this? Will they receive a notification April of '96 that their 
course will be eligible for out-of-school credits for the fall of 
'96? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have to go through a process of 
determining what would be appropriate and what would not be, 
but we would give the organizations enough lead time, if that's 
the question that you're asking. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. It 
was this spring, I believe, if I can find the date on this . . . no, 
October 21, '94. In the Star-Phoenix there was an article about 
the Premier stating that he had monies available to fight the 
federal government's changes to funding for education. I was 
wondering if you would give me an indication of how much 
money was spent on that particular effort, and what was the 
purpose of it, what did it accomplish. Who got the money and 
from where in your department did those funds come? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department approved a little over 
20,000, I believe, $21,000 or thereabouts. We don't have that 
precise figure but it's in that range. 
 
Groups that received funding were the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) students, the U of R (University of Regina) 
students, the SIAST students  students on the Woodlands 
campus, Palliser campus, Kelsey campus, and Wascana  as 
well the Gabriel Dumont Institute students, and the SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College). 
 
The students used the funds to prepare briefs to speak to the 
parliamentary committee that was here in Regina, and, as you  



May 15, 1995 

 
2245 

know, the federal government has not decided to unilaterally 
take $100 million out of post-secondary education only. What 
they have decided to do is lump EPF (established programs 
financing) post-secondary, EPF health, and CAP (Canada 
Assistance Plan) into one big pot, and we've not yet heard in 
precise detail exactly what the impacts will be on the province 
when it comes to social spending, education spending, and 
health spending. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you 
think this was a worthy place to put $21,000 and what results 
did you receive for that 21,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As a matter of fact, what I found so 
interesting about the federal Liberal government's parliamentary 
hearing process was that they gave a number of different groups 
in this province funds to appear before the parliamentary 
committee to act as interveners. They did not give student 
groups any funds to act as interveners, yet we knew that it was 
their intention to eliminate EPF. I think that for $21,000 
students were able to participate as interveners in the process 
that the federal government engaged in, i.e., parliamentary 
hearings. 
 
Student concerns were certainly heard in this province because I 
know that members of parliament from all sides of the political 
spectrum were contacting students to find out precisely what 
the impacts would be on students. Students clearly organized 
and had chamber of commerces writing on their behalf to the 
federal government, as well as other organizations writing on 
their behalf because the implications were tremendous. 
 
Students were faced with the possibility of $6,000 per year 
student tuition fees. Students were faced with student loans 
escalating up to $32,000 to graduate — that's an average 
student loan. Obviously we think that students, not only in 
Saskatchewan but across the country, got the federal 
government to reconsider its position when doing in EPF 
altogether. We're not quite sure what the implications will be 
when it comes to the big picture of health, education, and the 
Canada Assistance Plan, but certainly it's not just EPF monies 
that are going to be reduced by the federal government. There 
are a number of other departments that will be impacted upon 
as well. 
 
So we'll wait and see. I think that the federal government did 
understand that students could not afford to take a huge hit, like 
$6,000 a year tuition fees. And consequently, I think they 
backed off. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Having just experienced a parliamentary committee in Ottawa, 
I'm surprised. This committee must have been totally different 
than the one that we made our presentations to because they 
weren't listening at all. 
 
But I do question the appropriateness of the $21,000. Madam 
Minister, did you provide any student groups with any funding  

to make presentations to you for the cut-backs that were 
provided in education provincially? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I've met with students across the 
province, talking about funding to post-secondary institutions. I 
happen to live in the city of Saskatoon, I'm regularly in Regina, 
I also go to Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, and so I am able to meet 
with post-secondary education students on a fairly regular basis. 
So I do hear student views when it comes to the province's 
activities. 
 
But we have not increased tuition fees to the point where 
students wouldn't possibly get an education. And that's certainly 
what students were feeling when they looked at the possibilities 
of the total elimination of EPF. 
 
So I would say to you that Saskatchewan is a small place. 
Students have access to the minister, any member of 
government, or to members of the opposition. When you're 
dealing with Ottawa, you've got a bit further to go. And we 
thought it important that students have the research capacity so 
that they could discuss intelligently the impacts on students in 
the province should the federal government decide to do in EPF 
altogether. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, the students that 
I've met don't seem to have any problem in intelligently 
presenting their arguments. And I'm sure that they would have 
succeeded very well in presenting their arguments to the 
committee when they were in Regina or Saskatoon — without 
your $21,000. 
 
In my opinion, the $21,000 was simply a political effort on 
behalf of the government to raise concerns dealing with the 
federal government's changes in funding. And not that I 
disagree with the intent of the complaints against the federal 
government, but I think it was inappropriate that $21,000 be 
spent out of the Education budget for a political effort to fight 
Ottawa. Madam Minister, I think that that money would have 
been better spent providing for efforts within the province to 
provide education for our students, maybe to offset some of that 
$6,000 you're talking about. 
 
We've had a significant amount of increases in tuition in this 
province related to your cut-backs to education, not the federal 
government. The federal government plays a part also, but 
you've had an impact also, Madam Minister. And if you're 
going to provide money for students to fight one level of 
government's changes to funding to education, then you should 
be providing it to fight another level of government's changes 
— or alternatively and better yet, provide no funding for 
political action groups to fight the fundings of government. 
 
If it's important to the students, they will make the 
presentations. They've come into my office and made their 
presentations, as I'm sure they have done in your office and in 
the Liberals' office, if they talk to the Liberals. So, Madam  



May 15, 1995 

 
2246 

Minister, I think that they can make their presentations very 
well without any funding from you. They are very capable, 
intelligent, articulate, and bring forward very good arguments. 
 
I believe that the $21,000 was not related to the effort of 
discussing education per se, but was in dealing with the politics 
of the federal funding cuts. And I believe, Madam Minister, that 
it was wrong to use Education money for that particular effort. 
 
Madam Minister, I have a question dealing with the GED 
(general equivalency diploma) programs and upgrading for 
people who have left school for whatever reason and decide 
they need to upgrade their levels. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you could explain the different 
levels that you would receive in GED. Would you get a grade 
10? Would you get a grade 11? Would you get a grade 12? And 
what is the expectation from that student when they receive a 
certificate for whatever level they may have been seeking to 
improve their education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, just in terms of your comments 
about the students. I just want to make it very clear that I was in 
the meeting with the Premier when we talked about intervener 
funding. The Premier made it very clear that students could do 
. . . this was not a precondition that they had to take a particular 
position with the federal government. What the Premier was 
interested in ensuring was that students could access research 
information so that students could articulate their view with 
some facts attached to that view before the parliamentary 
committee. 
 
And he made it very, very clear that there were no preconditions 
to the funding available to the students. And you can ask any of 
the students that were there. He made it very clear that there 
were no preconditions. This funding was there to assist students 
in their research because students were saying that they needed 
some funding to do the research that would allow them to 
provide a brief to the parliamentary committee. 
 
In terms of GED, as you may know, the GED is an international 
exam and I understand that GED now will only issue 
certificates for a grade 12 standing, that they no longer issue 
certificates for a grade 9, 10, or 11 standing, just grade 12. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. On 
the $21,000, I'm sure that if you ask any student if you're in 
favour of increasing your tuition fees, it's going to be the rare 
student that says yes. So I think the Premier was on fairly solid 
ground when he was suggesting that there was no 
preconditions, you can come up with your own conclusions on 
tuition fee increases for students. He was on fairly safe ground 
in assuming that every student would be opposed to that and 
therefore would be opposed to the federal Liberal initiatives. So 
I think on that area, he didn't have to worry a whole lot about 
what conclusions the students might come to. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, are there any other programs then 
provided within the framework of the Department of Education  

for upgrading skills for people who may have dropped out of 
the school system early? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The other program available to students 
is the adult basic education program or ABE that is delivered 
through regional colleges or SIAST. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When 
someone takes this particular upgrading and completes it, what 
are the requirements that they must meet to fulfil their . . . say a 
grade 9, a grade 10, a grade 11, a grade 12? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Currently, a grade 10 ABE student has 
to meet the requirements of the curriculum as well as a 
Canadian Test of Basic Skills or the CTBS test. 
 
For grade 12, starting in the fall, when you receive an adult 
basic education grade 12, that will be a real grade 12, an 
academic grade 12, and that grade 12 will get you into a 
university setting if that's the route you wish to go. It will be an 
academic 12. 
 
The old ABE 12 did not necessarily get you to university; it 
didn't necessarily get you into the post-secondary institution that 
you desired to go to. Starting in the fall, it will be an academic 
12 and it will get you into a post-secondary institution if that is 
the direction you wish to proceed with. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What 
about the other grade levels, grades 9, 10, and 11. Are those 
also not academic today and will be in the fall? Is there some 
requirement to be at a certain level for reading and writing to 
receive each one of those different grade levels? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Currently we have a 5/10 program, and 
you get a grade 10 if you meet the curriculum requirements and 
pass the CTBS test. In grade 12, it's grade 11/12 and you get an 
academic 12 at the end of your studies. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The reason 
I was bringing this up is I received a complaint from a lady who 
took this particular course, received her grade 10 certificate, 
then went to SIAST, I believe it was, for a home care course 
and was unable to read the course properly to comprehend it. 
And yet she had the certificate to say that she had completed the 
adult basic education for a grade 10. 
 
So I'm wondering what are the requirements for reading skills 
when coming out of this particular program for grade 10. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well CTBS is the Canadian Test of 
Basic Skills and there are various elements to the CTBS test. 
One of those elements is reading comprehension. In order for 
her to successfully obtain a grade 10, she would have to be able 
to pass the CTBS test operating at a grade 10 level. 
 
So I'm not familiar with all the details of the case, but if you'd 
like to provide me with the specific details, we'd be pleased to 
see if we could give the lady some information. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2247 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. I'll 
provide you with the information later on this. Because it seems 
to be somewhat of a concern if people are completing these 
courses and then turn around and are eligible to enter a program 
because they have the grade level — which was 10 in this 
particular case — and yet are unable to do the necessary reading 
to be able to complete the course and comprehend it. So I'll pass 
the information on to you, Madam Minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just in terms of clarification, it wasn't 
GED 10. It was ABE (adult basic education) 10, okay. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, one of the groups 
around the province that has a great deal of concern with 
education today is the SACSC group, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Communities and Schools Co-op, and they 
represent people across the province whose smaller schools are 
either closed, closing, or threatened with closure. And, Madam 
Minister, I believe they have taken a court case forward to try 
and gain some rights  recognition  for children in dealing 
with the education system. I wonder if you can inform the 
Assembly of the state of that court case against the Department 
of Education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that SACSC filed a court 
action alleging that various sections of The Education Act were 
unconstitutional. The government filed an application in court 
to have the action struck down in its entirety based on what the 
Department of Justice believed to be a number of legal flaws. 
We have now received the Court of Queen's Bench decision. 
That decision came at the end of March, and the Court of 
Queen's Bench decision supported the government's view on 
the SACSC action. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is that the 
end of action then dealing with this particular organization, or 
are there any further litigations ongoing? And what did it cost 
to . . . in legal fees in dealing with this particular case? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I understand through the media 
— but I'm not aware that SACSC has actually filed an appeal of 
the Court of Queen's Bench judgement — but I understand that 
they're going to be filing appeal of the Court of Queen's Bench 
judgement. As the matter is still before the courts, I don't want 
to get into the specific details of the case. 
 
In terms of what did the action cost, we have people in the 
Department of Justice that are constitutional lawyers that deal 
with constitutional law issues, and I understand that the 
Department of Justice handled this case before the Court of 
Queen's Bench. And obviously the Court of Queen's Bench 
rendered a decision that supported the government's view on 
this case. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would 
you have any idea then of how much time the Justice 
department spent on this particular case? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't have any idea. You would have 
to ask the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'll try to 
get that question in on him next time he comes up. 
 
Madam Minister, when it comes to students and schools, does 
the department make a recommendation as to what the 
appropriate student/teacher ratios would be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't make a recommendation to 
school divisions what their student/teacher ratio should be. We 
believe that this is in the domain of the local school board who 
is in a much better position to determine class composition, the 
nature of the class, the kinds of students that are in the class, the 
kinds of difficulty students may have. And so student/teacher 
ratios, when it comes to individual classes, is within the school 
board jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Would the department have an ideal 
number of a pupil/teacher ratio that would be appropriate for 
the average classroom? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as I said, it would depend upon 
the student composition and the kinds of difficulties that 
students are facing both educationally or socially or 
behaviourally. Classrooms across the province vary because of 
local circumstances so the department leaves this issue to local 
school boards because school boards are in a much better 
position to determine what is an appropriate class given 
classroom composition and the kinds of issues that individual 
school boards are dealing with. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
wonder if you can give me an average across the province then 
of what the pupil/teacher ratio is. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that the average is about 17 
students per class across the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is this 
average increasing or decreasing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The student/teacher ratio has not 
increased since 1994-95 school year. It's remained the same for 
the '95-96 school year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would 
there have been any changes, say in the last five years? Have 
the averages gone up or down? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It has increased slightly in the last 10 
years. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is there a 
difference between the student/teacher ratios when you compare 
urban to rural schools? 



May 15, 1995 

 
2248 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have that specific information 
here but I'm advised that the student/pupil ratio in rural 
Saskatchewan is smaller than student/teacher ratios in urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I don't find 
that statistic surprising at all. I think that's part of the problem 
with education in rural areas is the lack of students and that's 
creating pressure on the whole system in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at the number of grades in a classroom, Madam 
Minister, can you tell me if there has been any change in that 
over the last five years, the number of classes that are 
multi-grade? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Multi-grade classrooms has been a fact 
of life in Saskatchewan and across the country for many years. 
Nothing has changed in the last year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. This 
trend of increasing the pupil/teacher ratios, while it isn't 
significant perhaps in percentage terms, do you believe this is a 
good trend, or is it a poor trend, that something should be done 
about it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well obviously I think that there are a 
number of issues that contribute to the quality of education. 
Having been a teacher in my previous work life, I know that the 
impacts a large class can have on teaching life. I know the 
impacts that a large class can have on the teacher and individual 
students. It's not a trend that, if you're talking about larger and 
larger classes, it's not a trend that I would find appropriate, 
particularly in younger grades. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I have a clipping here that comes from sometime in 
'95, March 15, '95, from the Star-Phoenix again that talks about 
removing education costs from property on the table. Madam 
Minister, are you looking at and considering removing property 
tax as a way of funding education in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you're talking about a comment 
that I made at a, I believe, a SUMA or a SARM convention, one 
of the municipal governments conventions. I was asked the 
question whether or not this was something that a government 
would consider — I believe it was SARM — whether it was 
something that a government would consider. And I said that 
we're always open to consider a number of different issues. 
 
There's no question that the financing of education is a complex 
question and that the way we finance education in the province 
has led to some inequities in the system. It's my view that we 
need to rethink how we should finance education in the 
province of Saskatchewan and rethink the formula. Because 
there's no question that, if you look at what's happening in rural 
Saskatchewan, our formula, while it . . . I believe there's about 
$70 million in additional funding for rural schools; the formula 
talks about per capita grant — and that becomes problematic  

certainly in some areas of the province, as we have fewer and 
fewer young people living in remote parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think that we need to take a look at how we are going to 
ensure that regardless of where you live in this province that 
you have access to education, and that we have equity in 
education. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Property 
taxation is a very contentious issue particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, and I'm more familiar with that than I am with 
urban, but I would suspect that it's always a contentious issue 
no matter who's paying it, whether you live in rural or urban. 
 
The problem arises though, Madam Minister, is how do you 
fund education if the property taxes are removed? In your 
considerations of this — and I'm not sure yet how in-depth your 
considerations of this are; perhaps they're just cursory — have 
you given any thought to how you would fund education if the 
property tax were removed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I guess if you look at what Ralph Klein 
did in Alberta, was that the province simply began to collect 
property taxes, and that's how they've chosen to redistribute the 
wealth in Alberta to adequately fund their education Alberta 
style. 
 
When I say that we're prepared to consider this, this is a very 
cursory view. I've just had the opportunity to have been the 
Minister of Education for just about two years, and it seems to 
me that it's becoming . . . there are a number of issues that are 
raised in that formula and how we fund education based on 
assessment, and mill rate, transportation costs, sparsity factor, 
small schools factor, and it becomes . . . is a pretty complex 
formula. 
 
Many people would argue that it's the best . . . that it's the best 
way we can fund education, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
But I believe that, based on my experience in the last 18 
months, that we need to take a look at how we are going to 
ensure that there is equity in education in this province 
regardless of where you live. 
 
And so when I say that we're taking a look at it, it's because of 
some of the issues that have come about as a result of that 
formula. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
think if you're going to look at changes to the system, to move 
away from direct property taxation to the school boards, you 
need to look at the incomes rather than at the property tax 
values. Or if you're going to maintain property as part of that 
taxation level, perhaps the way to do it is to look at the 
income-generating capabilities of that property rather than at the 
assigned value by the assessors. Because you may have a piece 
of property which is very lowly assessed in relationship to 
another property, but yet a property from which a significant 
amount of income can be generated through that particular 
piece. And that's not reflected today when you're simply taking  



May 15, 1995 

 
2249 

the assessed values. 
 
And I would disagree with the Alberta government method of 
simply taking in the property taxes unto themselves. If property 
taxes are to be applied, I prefer them to be applied at the local 
levels and controlled by the local level. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe that this is going to be one of those 
issues that does need to be looked at because there are a number 
of inequities in the property tax-based system when it comes to 
apply to the people across this province. And I think that's one 
of the areas that is going to, as I said, need some very serious 
considerations. 
 
Madam Minister, another headline. This time it's from the 
Leader-Post, from March 7, 1995, and it says, "National school 
curriculum near." And your deputy minister was there saying 
that, "The first such project will be in the sciences . . ." 
 
So, Madam Minister, where is this particular agenda in the 
process? Where does it sit today? When will it be implemented? 
And what will it mean for Saskatchewan students when they 
have a program that is being developed across Canada? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me just talk a bit about the history 
of this. As you may know, ministers of Education from across 
the country get together twice yearly to talk about issues in 
education. You may also know that Canada does not have a 
Canadian minister of education, given that K to 12 certainly is 
within the jurisdiction of the provinces and the territories. 
 
It has become increasingly clear to ministers, that given we 
have such a mobile population in Canada, that it's important 
that students who travel or move from one part of Canada to the 
next have what we're referring to as a common framework. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan we have a proud tradition of curriculum 
development. And I'd just like to say that curriculum 
development renewal process was begun in this province in the 
early 1980s. And we have a history of our partners in education, 
meaning the teachers' federation, LEADS (League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the 
colleges of education, the Home and School Federation, and the 
department . . . have been partners in the curriculum renewal 
process. 
 
And based on my travels to other parts of Canada, and having 
met with people across Canada who are interested in 
educational issues, I can say that Saskatchewan is seen in this 
country as being the province for curriculum development and 
curriculum renewal. 
 
It is not our intention, by participating in this framework 
agreement, that our curriculum will be the same as the 
curriculum in Alberta or Manitoba or Ontario or the Maritimes. 
But it is our intention to ensure that students at various grade 
levels will be taught similar concepts in those grade levels  

across the country. 
 
(2130) 
 
So that when you're a student who moves from Saskatchewan at 
the end of grade 9 and you go to British Columbia or the 
Maritimes in grade 10, that you're not behind your counterparts 
in those provinces or ahead of your counterparts in those 
provinces. We just want to ensure that we're teaching similar 
concepts in similar grades so that we can deal with the reality 
that young people in this country and their families are moving. 
 
And we think that it's in the educational interests of Canada to 
have this framework agreement, where our curriculum is not on 
the same page the same day — certainly not that — but the 
educational concepts that are taught in those various grades are 
taught at the same grade level whether you live in 
Saskatchewan, British Columbia, or New Brunswick. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, it's my 
understanding that if you go to a national curriculum, teaching 
similar concepts across Canada, that a student who graduates 
from grade 12 in Saskatchewan would have an equal 
opportunity to enter Dalhousie University as someone from 
Halifax because they have the same basic curriculum and 
concept instruction when they come out of grade 12. Now is 
that the case or will there be an impact that way, that the student 
would not necessarily have an equal access to a school some 
place else in the province and equal access to what that student 
in that province would have? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Students now — I know this because I 
have family members that have gone to Dalhousie — students 
now from Saskatchewan can go to Dalhousie. Students from 
Saskatchewan can go to Queen's or Laval or UBC (University 
of British Columbia) or the University of Victoria or the 
University of Toronto. Our students are getting into those 
post-secondary institutions. 
 
We just want to continue the process of ensuring that young 
people who are moving from Saskatchewan or moving to 
Saskatchewan are taught concepts — educational concepts — 
in the same year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Now would the statement from the 
newspaper be correct: a common curriculum will mean 
students' academic standing will be recognized by other 
provincial education systems and high school graduates will 
have more equitable access to post-secondary education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We just want to make sure that our kids 
have access to any educational institution in the country and we 
just think this enhances their chances. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now that 
we've dealt with national school curriculum being near, and as 
the headline . . . Another headline from December 22, '94 
Star-Phoenix: National test show schools doing good job. So it 
says that our schools are currently doing a good job. But if  



May 15, 1995 

 
2250 

we're going to go to a national curriculum, will we also be 
going to a national testing policy? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, we're not going to a 
national curriculum. We are not going to have the same 
curriculum and be on the same page on the same day. We're not 
doing that. But we're going to be teaching similar educational 
concepts in the same grade, whether you're in Montreal or 
Saskatoon. That's our intention. 
 
Are we going to go to national testing? Well as you probably 
know, Saskatchewan has not yet gotten into the SAIP or the 
school achievement indicators program and we haven't gotten in 
for a number of reasons. I note with interest that while other 
provinces and territories have engaged in testing, I'm not 
convinced that they've done anything substantive with the 
results. I haven't seen changes in their curriculum, I haven't seen 
changes in their teaching education programs, I haven't seen 
changes in how they teach and what they teach, and so we're 
waiting with interest to see how provinces take those test scores 
and apply them in a practical way to the curriculum that they 
have, the teacher education programs that they have, or the 
teaching strategies that they use in their classrooms. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. If 
you've taken the national test and you've discovered that there 
may be a potential problem there, then you have to also step 
back and take a look and see where that problem is and how 
you fix it. 
 
But the first part, I think, is very important, that you find out 
whether or not you have a problem there. And that seems to be 
the part that you as the minister and a number of others around 
the province seem to have a great deal of difficulty taking that 
first step. You seem to be more than willing to take the first 
step in dealing with national curriculum and dealing with 
concepts. If you're learning accounting, it really doesn't matter if 
you learn that accounting on how it relates to a farm, or how it 
relates to a fishing boat, or how it relates to a steel mill. You're 
learning accounting, not farming or fishing. So it's the concepts 
of accounting rather than the actual applications of it. 
 
But when you go to take a test, again it doesn't matter whether 
you're talking farming, fishing, steel mills, or lumber, or 
whatever it might be; it's how you apply that particular concept 
that you've learned in your classes to the test. And that's what a 
national test, I would hope, would provide you the testing of, is 
the understanding of those concepts that if you go with the 
national curriculum you will have learned in grade 12, or the 
concept that you would learn in grade 5, would be similar 
across the country and therefore the testing should provide 
similar definitions of what results you're receiving. 
 
So, Madam Minister, if you're going to become involved in the 
national curriculum and its concepts, why not also become 
involved in the national testing? I believe that you're already 
involved in the sense of participating in the development of 
tests, national tests, so perhaps you can explain why you'd be 
prepared to enter into one part of the equation while being very  

reluctant to enter into the other. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you raise a number of issues. First 
of all, what I want to make clear is this point, that provinces and 
territories have participated in mathematics testing and 
language arts testing — reading and writing skills testing. And 
we have some results from those tests. 
 
What we don't yet have from those provinces and territories is 
how are they going to take those test results and adjust the 
curriculum, adjust their teaching methods, adjust their teacher 
education programs. It's not just enough to test. You've got to 
do something with results, and you've got to have the money to 
do something with the results. And I haven't seen anybody yet 
do anything with the results. 
 
Now let me tell you what we're doing in Saskatchewan. And 
what's interesting is, all ministers across the country have 
adopted a . . . what we're doing. We have a provincial indicators 
program that not only looks at testing . . . and we have done 
some testing. We have tested students in Saskatchewan in grade 
5, 8, and 11 in mathematics skills and language arts skills . . . or 
pardon me, science skills and language arts skills. And we've 
found out some interesting things. We've found out that kids in 
grade 5 have difficulty problem solving. That's the whole notion 
behind our core curriculum and the way we've introduced the 
common essential learnings. The whole notion was to create 
students in the classroom who could evaluate, problem solve, 
and do those kinds of . . . use those kinds of cognitive thinking 
skills. The question that I've asked as a result of those test 
results is why is it that kids in grade 5 have difficulty problem 
solving. Is it because teachers are expected to know all of the 
answers and give the answers in class? Is it because our 
curriculum is too difficult, our testing is too difficult? Why is 
that? And the department is taking a look, a rethinking of why it 
is that our children have difficulty problem solving. 
 
Now it's not just good enough to test. You have to do 
something with those test results. And before we get into the 
national testing program I want to make sure that we're dealing 
with our own curriculum problems, i.e., grade 5 students have 
difficulty problem solving, before we get into some national 
testing and we don't have the capacity to respond to those test 
results. 
 
In terms of the science and why we're participating in the 
development of the science test instrument, we have basically 
renewed the science curriculum in the province, and we tend to 
be ahead of the rest of the country with this regard. And we 
have developed a group of experts in the province who have 
been intimately involved in the science curriculum 
redevelopment process and we've developed some skill. And it 
made sense that the people who are involved in science in the 
province of Saskatchewan, teachers, be involved in the 
development of that test instrument. 
 
We have not yet made the decision as to whether or not we 
want to participate in national testing in the spring of 1996.  



May 15, 1995 

 
2251 

Obviously we will have to make that decision shortly. But if 
we're going to participate, I want assurances that we have the 
money to respond to those test scores, and we in fact will do 
something with it, because I haven't seen any evidence 
anywhere else in Canada that provinces and territories are doing 
anything with the results from those tests. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Perhaps they're all arguing the same argument you are — that 
they haven't got any money with which to do it. I don't know. 
 
But when you're looking at the problem of grade 5's who have a 
difficulty in problem solving, how do we compare to other 
jurisdictions? Do the grade 5's in other jurisdictions across 
Canada have the similar problem? Do some of them have more 
of a problem, or do some of them have less of a problem? And 
if so, what's different? 
 
Now that's one of the items that national testing would give you 
an indication of, not what they're doing differently because that 
would be the second step that you would have to take — to ask 
what's different in province A as compared to ourselves in the 
testing, either better or worse. And I think . . . so that's part of 
what the testing is there for — to make the determination if 
somebody else have a program that works better than ours, or is 
our program the best; therefore we can pass it on to others. 
 
So perhaps we need to find out where we stand in the problem 
of grade 5's and their problem solving. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You see, I don't see education, the 
educational process, as a competition. And this is maybe where 
we will have a bit of a philosophical difference. 
 
Frankly, my worry is with the fact — and it's in the Education 
Indicators report certainly from last year, when it came to 
science; it will shortly be in the Education Indicators report 
when it comes to language arts — that our kids have difficulty 
problem solving. 
 
To me that's a problem that we need to address inside the 
province. I'm not that concerned about how we stack up relative 
to Alberta or Manitoba or Ontario. We've discovered in 
Saskatchewan that our kids have — for whatever reasons — 
difficulty problem solving. And we've got to address that. 
 
We've got to either redesign the curriculum, look at different 
teaching strategies. Maybe we'll have to deal with our teacher 
education program. But we have to get to the root of that 
question. 
 
And so from my point of view, we have this fact before us and 
we need to address that fact before we get into, well, how do we 
compare to Alberta or Manitoba or British Columbia or 
Ontario. Our whole curriculum is designed to assist children in 
developing cognitive thinking skills — evaluation, critical 
thinking, those kinds of skills, problem solving. I mean if we 
are to get into the next century and if we are to do well socially 
and economically and culturally, given globalization,  

continentalism, free trade, deregulation, all of those kinds of 
things, we have to have people in this province, we have to 
develop people through our educational system, that can have 
those kinds of skills. 
 
So I think we need to deal with those issues right here at home 
first before I get concerned about what's happening in Alberta 
or Manitoba or British Columbia. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I agree with you 
to the extent that this is not a competition between our students 
and those in Alberta or some place else across the country, 
although ultimately at the end of the day we want to have our 
students in the position to be able to compete around the world 
with whoever they may have to compete with. 
 
But when you're looking at our problem with grade 5's, when 
you look at Manitoba, do their students have a similar problem? 
Well unless they've been evaluated on the same scale, you may 
not know whether or not their problem is comparable to our 
own. So if grade 5's in Manitoba have a problem with 
evaluations, if students in Saskatchewan have a similar 
problem, is one of them greater or less than the other? If one of 
them is greater and one of them is lesser, perhaps the greater 
has some deficiency in their program that has been addressed to 
a certain extent by the province whose grade 5's have less of a 
problem. And that is what a national testing may indicate to 
you. I don't say that it will indicate it; it may indicate it to you, 
depending on how the testing is structured. 
 
So you need to have some relatively comparable form of testing 
to compare to, to make that evaluation whether our program is 
working as well as we possibly can make it, or does somebody 
else have a solution some place else that would help us. Would 
national testing not provide some of that to you? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well there's some things I do know 
about the Saskatchewan education system. We have participated 
in language arts testing and guess what we found out — that 
our students are the best when it comes to reading and writing; 
that we do well in the area of language arts . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Alberta was right up there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We're up there . . . that we have the 
most literate, literate population in Canada. Statistics Canada 
shows us we have the most literate population. If you look at 
the readership of the Saskatoon Public Library, the Regina 
Public Library, we're no. 1 and no. 4 in North America. 
Saskatchewan people are readers. 
 
All you have to do is go to the University of Saskatchewan, 
University of Regina, SIAST, and you will find our graduates 
anywhere in the world. We compare well. We have people who 
are running large corporations. We have people who are 
running large public institutions. We have people at the UN 
(United Nations). We have people at UNESCO (United Nations  



May 15, 1995 

 
2252 

Economic, Scientific and Cultural Organization). We have 
people at the World Health Organization. We've got people 
everywhere. 
 
And if you talk to employers, if you have a young person from 
Saskatchewan, you know that you've got a person that will do 
well as a working person, and they're hard-workers. 
Saskatchewan people are hard-workers. We have the work 
ethic, and we do well. We know that. 
 
But we can't just rely on our laurels, and Saskatchewan people 
have never really, I think, cared what the rest of Canada thought 
of us. We've been able to go out on our own and do well 
regardless of what other people thought. We're innovative. 
We're creative. We're all of those things. 
 
Saskatchewan is the only province in all of Canada that has 
done the extensive curriculum renewal that we have done. We 
are way ahead of the rest of the country. We wanted to look at 
our own curriculum to see whether it was doing what it was 
intended to do. Now there are many, many aspects of our 
curriculum that are wonderful, and the test results bore that out. 
 
We have one little problem. For some reason we have difficulty 
problem solving, and we're going to get to the root of that and 
find out why and what we need to do to correct that. 
 
So you know, I don't care how a kid in grade 5 stacks up to a 
kid in Manitoba or Ontario. What I do care about is that we 
have a curriculum that will allow our students to develop to 
become the kinds of citizens that we're going to require in order 
to get us into the next century and in order to deal with some of 
the large, international issues that are coming at this province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, though wouldn't 
it be nice to find out whether someone else had a solution to 
your problem? And how do you know that unless you know that 
their measuring stick is the same as yours in determining 
whether they have found the solution or not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I just want to give you an 
indication of some of the things that we have been able to 
accomplish, and this is in the K-12 Schooling: How are We 
Doing? for February 1994. We released an indicators report to 
the public and it's our intention to do this each year to take a 
look at how is our system doing — a report to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I should tell you that ministers across the country are going 
to be doing the same thing, but it's going to be a pan-Canadian 
report. And where do they go to get the information on how to 
do this? Saskatchewan, because we're the first province that's 
taking a look at our education system and we're indicating to the 
people how our education system is doing. 
 
In 1994 we reported that Saskatchewan had the highest 
proportion of 16- to 69-year-olds reading at a level 4, the 
highest level in Statistics Canada survey of literacy skills. Level  

4 is defined as, Canadians at this level meet most everyday 
reading demands; this is a large and diverse group which 
exhibits a wide range of reading skills. 
 
Now when you look at how our students did in grade 6, grade 9, 
grade 12, what did we find? We found that Saskatchewan 
outperformed the rest of the country. And those . . . So we 
know that. That's great. But we still have to have people who 
can problem solve; we need creative, critical thinkers to deal 
with some of the issues that are coming at us. And we know 
that in grade 5 our kids, for whatever reason, with the new 
curriculum, have difficulty problem solving and we're going to 
get to the bottom of that. 
 
And quite frankly I'd much rather have us spend our tax dollars 
on finding out that and doing something about it, than spending 
millions of dollars participating in a test that compares us to 
Manitoba and P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) and British 
Columbia, and then what? You know, then what? So what? We 
know where we stand in comparison to these people. I want to 
know where we stand in comparison to ourselves and how we 
do better. And I think that every taxpayer in Saskatchewan, 
every parent in Saskatchewan, wants the same thing for their 
young people. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, your 
Saskatchewan indicators program was started, I believe, prior to 
1991. The program . . . the report came out, I believe, in 1992 
— the initial Saskatchewan indicators. The core curriculum 
started in the early '80s, as you indicated earlier, under the 
previous administration. So these programs have been in place 
for awhile. 
 
But when you're looking only at yourself as an indication of 
whether you're doing a good job, perhaps you're not using the 
proper measuring stick. You need to look at what other people 
are doing also. 
 
And I understand that you have a great deal of philosophical 
reluctance to do that; that you, for some reason beyond my 
comprehension, just find it totally abhorrent that you would for 
some reason participate in a national testing system. 
 
I believe it's important that we look at how we are doing across 
the province and whether our students are receiving the 
education that they need, whether they could qualify to enter the 
universities or SIAST and whatever. But I just don't understand 
your very vehement philosophical abhorrence to national 
testing. 
 
I'd like to go on to another program, Madam Minister, and that 
is the parenting skills program that is in place with Social 
Services. I'm just wondering which department is paying for 
that particular program. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't know. You have to give me a 
little more information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. November  



May 15, 1995 

 
2253 

24, '94, Leader-Post talks about $70,000 to help develop a 
parenting skills program; along with the Minister of Social 
Services this announcement was made. I'm just wondering . . . 
No, it doesn't say that you were part of it, but with parent 
education, and so I'm wondering if you're paying for this or if 
Social Services is paying for this. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Social Services made that 
announcement. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Your new 
JobStart and Future Skills programs that have come forward, 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you can give us some indication 
as to how many jobs have actually been created to date on those 
programs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that 600 actual jobs to date 
and several applications pending. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And how 
much money would you have expended to date on these 
programs, all told? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — 2.3 million on Future Skills and 
JobStart. Those are the training . . . work-based training 
programs. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and how 
much would have been spent on advertising these programs to 
date? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — $469,258 I believe. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Very good, Madam Minister. I knew that 
you knew that was one of the questions that in all likelihood 
would arise. What was the other 1.9, 1.8 million spent on? 
 
Okay, Madam Minister, you've spent $469,000 on advertising 
JobStart and Future Skills, so that leaves approximately 1.8 to 
$1.9 million. What in particular is that money being spent on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That's separate from the program. 
When I talk about 2.25 million or 2.3 million, that is actual 
money spent on work-based training. That does not include the 
advertising. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Isn't 
that a little high, that you would be spending approximately 1 to 
$5, 1 out of every $5, on advertising the program, rather than 
actually utilizing the program? If you've got 600 jobs in there 
right now, you're looking at about — what? — a little less than 
23,000, probably about $20,000 a job that you've created to date 
for that money. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, this is a $21 million 
program, and I gave you the numbers for Future Skills, JobStart. 
I have not yet included the Partnership summer employment 
program which is a $1.9 million program, and that  

is a subsidy for students to receive employment. I have not 
given you any figures for the reforestation program which is 
another employment program for students, and I've not given 
you the grads in industry placement program. I've not given you 
the Public Service Commission program. 
 
Just to be clear here, there's a $21 million program — Future 
Skills, JobStart — and the $468,258 is the advertisement for 
that entire program, not just JobStart and Future Skills. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
then how about how much money is being spent in the other 
four programs, and how many jobs have they created? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me give you Partnerships '95 which 
is the student employment program. As of May 5, 3,171 jobs 
have been approved at a cost of $1.47 million. There's still more 
applications to be approved because this is a $1.9 million 
program. 
 
Grads in industry — this is a program to create 70 jobs for 
highly technical people. We have received 19 applications 
which have been approved for $261,026. We still have close to 
7 . . . I'll just try to get my . . . $500,000 to go. But we have 140 
applications that have been mailed to employers. We've had 80 
applications returned. We've approved 19 for about $261,000. 
But there's another half a million, close to half a million dollars 
left to approve. 
 
In terms of Future Skills, JobStart, as I said, those two programs 
are $15 million programs. We've expended $2.25 million. We 
still have money to go, and we've got many applications before 
us. So it's a little more complex than . . . We've spent $468,000 
on advertisement. This is a very large program with many 
different components to it, and it's not as simple as some 
politicians would like it to be. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, whenever 
government gets involved it's never as simple as we would like 
it to be. 
 
Madam Minister, I'd like to ask you if you could supply me with 
the figures on the grant structures for the different school 
divisions. I can't remember or recall whether you supplied that 
to me or not the last time, so if you haven't can you please 
supply that again. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'll send it over to you again. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have 
some questions now dealing with the globals. I wonder if you 
can give me some information dealing with your travel both 
inside and out of the province  how much was spent on that, 
where you went? What was the purpose of the trip, and who 
accompanied you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that you asked for this  



May 15, 1995 

 
2254 

information by way of a written question. I'm also advised that 
this information is being compiled for you and I'm told that 
you'll receive it shortly. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. That 
just shows how efficient we are. We keep asking until we get 
the answer, and we haven't got the answer yet. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you can please provide me with 
the information dealing with any legal actions being taken 
either for or against the Department of Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We're not aware that we have any legal 
actions other than if SACSC launches a legal challenge to the 
Court of Queen's Bench decision. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. It 
must mean that you're a little more careful when you're . . . with 
your comments than the Minister of Justice is. Every time he 
turns around, he seems to be getting back in court. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe you have three contract employees 
retained by your department. Can you please give us their 
names, their job . . . terms of reference, job descriptions, 
benefits, office locations, and principal residences. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There's only one that's currently on 
contract and that's Gerald Weinstein, and we'll have to get you 
the other people because we don't have it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Some questions on the personnel report that you provided us. 
Your in-scope, permanent personnel rose by 19 persons with a 
rise in wages of 765,000. Can you explain the need for the 19 
new people within your department and the salary increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. I'm advised that we converted a 
secondment to a permanent position. These aren't actual people; 
these are positions. 
 
And then we've got two information technology people . . . that 
was converted from a contract to a permanent position; two 
private vocational schools; two student financial aid, they are 
converted from contract to permanent; one regional services 
converted from a secondment to a permanent position; one at 
the Teachers' Superannuation Commission; and two in the 
evaluation and assessment unit. And that will get you the 10, 
the difference of the 10 people. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. For some 
reason I had a difference of 19 in-scope people. This would 
have been from the '94 Estimates until today. 
 
The same thing in out-of-scope. I believe that there is 12 more 
people there for seventeen hundred and fifteen thousand 
dollars. What were those additional 12 people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We do not have 12 more management 
positions. We did not create 12 new management positions. No. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I notice in 
the Estimates book for '95-96 that your full-time equivalents 
have gone up by 16 approximately, and you've had a decrease in 
total budget of $8 million and yet your staff costs have gone up. 
 
Would it not be better to have that extra money that has gone 
into staffing going into providing educational services for the 
children around this province, rather than being absorbed within 
the Department of Education? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. I gave you the 10 positions. As 
well, there are seven new non-permanent positions for Future 
Skills, JobStart, and the training program, because we have 
people now in strategic parts of the province to work with 
employers and employees on the work-based training. As well, 
we lost a secondment. So if you take the 10, the 7, and we lose 
1, that's 6, for 16. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you could give me some information as to the duties 
performed by the Associate Minister of Education, along with 
that minister's office. Most of the departments have one 
minister and one office; your office is spending $19,000-plus a 
month in salaries. The associate minister is spending almost 
$19,000 a month on salaries. 
 
Exactly what benefit does the Department of Education receive 
for the assistant minister of Education and his office? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Associate Minister of Education is 
responsible for all of the K to 12 and post-secondary issues 
surrounding Indian and Metis people. And as you know, we 
have a very large Indian and Metis community in the province 
of Saskatchewan, so he spends a vast majority of his time 
addressing Indian and Metis educational issues, both at 
post-secondary and K to 12. 
 
As well the minister, myself, and the associate minister 
collaborate a great deal on educational direction, educational 
policy. I'm not sure if you're aware of the associate minister's 
background, but he does have a master's in education. He has 
administered community colleges in the province. He 
administered Gabriel Dumont Institute. He has a vast 
knowledge in the whole area of educational philosophy, so 
obviously he is a great assistance to myself and the department, 
and to the cabinet. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. We 
see very little evidence of it in the public view as to what the 
associate minister is doing, and therefore I believe a question is 
necessary to determine whether or not the department is 
receiving any value, or the taxpayer is receiving value, for the 
monies that are being spent in that particular office. 
 
Since the minister is not dealing with the full load of a cabinet 
minister, would it therefore be not more appropriate that his 
office and any other associate minister's office have less staff in 
them, and therefore less cost, than what the minister in charge  



May 15, 1995 

 
2255 

of the department would have? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the associate minister, as I 
indicated to you, is in charge of all Indian and Metis issues in 
education as well as northern issues in education. 
 
As well he has an interest, along with myself, in all of the other 
issues in education. I mean this is a very complex, very large 
department. We have many school boards, many teacher 
associations, two colleges of education. We have high school 
renewal process, the provincial indicators program. We've had 
many reviews, and we're putting together educational policy in 
the province of Saskatchewan. This is a huge job, and the 
associate minister is there day in and day out representing 
cabinet colleagues, the Premier, the government, in all kinds of 
educational issues, functions, meetings. He is a full participant 
in the business of education in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I'm 
not sure though that the Department of Education is any more 
onerous or complex than the Department of Health which is 
now being handled by one minister, previously two. And I'm 
not sure what the associate minister did there when he was the 
associate minister. But now that is being dealt with by one 
minister. And so I don't believe that the Department of Health is 
any more complex . . . any less complex, excuse me, than what 
the Department of Education is. 
 
Perhaps there is a need for an assistant minister in a sense, but 
I'm not sure that that would necessitate a full complement in a 
ministerial office in supplying that support. So I think that's one 
of the areas, Madam Minister, where your government could 
provide some more funding to be available to the Department of 
Education rather than being spent in the political arena which is 
what is being done now. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'd just like to point out to the member 
that I think in every province, with the exception of 
Newfoundland, every province in this country has a Minister of 
Education, K-12; Minister of Education, advanced education or 
post-secondary. So while you say that there may be no need for 
an associate minister, I would point out to you that in every 
other jurisdiction, with the exception, I believe, of 
Newfoundland, every other province has two ministers doing 
the work of this ministry. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. A 
little earlier you were telling us that we don't need to be 
comparing ourselves to the other provinces and that was not the 
way to go. So therefore I think you should also do that in this 
particular case. 
 
Madam Minister, in your notices of terminations and new 
employees, you had an additional MA (ministerial assistant) 
this year, a Margaret Herman, who was previously with the 
Minister of Health's office. Can you explain why she was with 
you for two months and what happened to her? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — She pursued other interests. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — So, Madam Minister, she's no longer 
with government, either department or Crown corporation, 
whatsoever? The minister is indicating no. 
 
Madam Minister, can you please indicate whether or not there 
are any other employees within your department that may have 
come from the Department of Health? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Do you mean the minister's office or do 
you mean from the Department of Health? Oh, I believe we 
have one person that came from the Department of Health over 
to the Department of Education — the deputy minister. And 
there's one other person who came . . . there are two people: the 
deputy minister and another senior policy analyst. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I gather it . . . then it's the deputy 
minister that everybody out in rural Saskatchewan is nervous 
about. They look at the rural hospital system and think: oh no, 
we're getting the same guy in Education as what they had in the 
Department of Health; what's going to happen to us? We 
certainly hope that the deputy minister's expertise is not in 
closing facilities. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well first of all, I just want to put this 
on the record that the deputy minister was the associate deputy 
minister of Social Services when I was there, and the associate 
. . . or the deputy minister went to the Department of Health 
after the government made the policy decision to engage in 
health reform. The deputy minister has had many years 
experience in Social Services, some experience in Health, and 
he's now in Education for some very good public policy 
reasons. 
 
We have made an attempt to integrate service delivery to 
children and youth in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
thought it important, given that schools are where children are 
and given the deputy minister's vast array of experience in 
Social Services and Health, that he would be a key person to 
assist government in the policy direction of providing a more 
integrated service approach to children and youth in the 
province of Saskatchewan. So there is no hidden agenda here, 
folks. The deputy minister comes with a wealth of experience 
and this is one of the key public reasons, public issue reasons, 
for having the deputy minister come over, was to assist with the 
integration of services given his experience in Health, 
Education, and Social Services. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm not sure that 
it's real comforting to the parents of the province that the deputy 
minister comes from Social Services, although we have seen 
that Social Services have not been shut down, so in that sense it 
will be of comfort to them that his experience from the 
Department of Health will not necessarily translate directly into 
Education. 
 
Madam Minister, in your globals under computer purchases, I 
have a number here of which I'm interested in. You purchased 
for $38,000 some Cabletron equipment for network 
connectivity. Can you mind explaining what that was for? 



May 15, 1995 

 
2256 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised that it was to connect our 
server to a network. It's computers and I must admit I am not 
high tech yet and so this was to connect the server to the 
network. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. On the 
next page of the globals we have a purchase for $35,000 of 
Chameleon software. Now I wonder if you could explain that 
one for me because I have no idea what that would do. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It's the software for e-mail. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. Would that be one software 
package, or is this package to be distributed throughout the 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It's for the whole LAN (local area 
network) network. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I won't ask you for the meaning of LAN. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Local area network. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — That's right. I wasn't sure that the 
minister would know though. Madam Minister, a purchase of 
$120,000 for 50 computers. Was that tendered, and who was 
that for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It was tendered. And it was tendered 
for various areas across the department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Another 
purchase of $56,949 for LaserJet printers. Was that tendered, 
and for whom were the printers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The same as the previous answer. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. I'm getting to the end of my 
questions, Madam Minister. In the supplementary estimates, 
under post-secondary education and skills training on page 144, 
you have an additional expenditure there of $273 million. I 
wonder if you'd mind explaining that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What this is, is a restated blue book. 
The 273 million is the old number for 1994-95. And the 
150,000 is money that was provided by Dumont Technical 
Institute, so we were just restating the figure. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Education, Training and Employment 
Vote 141 

Vote 141 agreed to. 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 
 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
(2230) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd like to 
thank the minister and her officials for coming in and dealing 
with Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I also want to thank the 
officials that were here tonight on the floor of the legislature. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this is a department that is incredibly 
professional, has done an incredible job in the whole 
Department of Education, Training and Employment. 
 
This team of people is backed by another team of people that 
aren't here tonight. That I'd just like to put it on the public 
record that this is a superb department and they've done an 
incredibly good job in the last 18 months that I've been 
associated with this department. So I just want to publicly thank 
everybody who works at Education, Training and Employment 
for all of the hard work and good work that they've done. 
 
And I also want to put it on the public record that this is not a 
department that works from nine to five. This department works 
after hours. It works weekends, and I'm incredibly proud that 
I've had a chance to be associated with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

General Revenue Fund 
New Careers Corporation 

Vote 59 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To my immediate right is Merran 
Proctor, who is the CEO (chief executive officer) and president 
of New Careers Corporation. And to Ms. Proctor's right is Tony 
Antonini, who is the director of finance and administration for 
New Careers. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to 
the minister and her officials. 
 
Perhaps I should just comment on my trip to Ottawa where I 
was sitting in the restaurant having breakfast one morning and 
overheard the people at the next table discussing some sort of 
issue or another, and Ms. Proctor's name came up in that  



May 15, 1995 

 
2257 

conversation with the other people that were at the other table. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And was it well spoken of? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Yes, it was not negative. So you can be 
pleased with that. I'm not sure what they were talking about but 
my ears perked up when I heard your name, so you are known 
across the nation. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you could please give us some 
indication as to any changes within New Careers and the 
delivery of their programs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think one of the key initiatives for 
1995-96 is to improve our linkages between employment 
services and economic development and training requirements 
of communities through the establishment of five regional 
offices, client advisory committees, and increased staff 
development and involvement with employers. As well it's our 
intention . . . and we have been working very closely with the 
private sector. It's not just good enough to — I think we've had 
this discussion before — to have a training program that doesn't 
lead to permanent, sustainable jobs. And our focus is to now 
train people for jobs that exist right now and jobs that will exist 
into the future. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, one of the indications 
with New Careers programing in the past has been the perhaps 
heavy emphasis on single males or males in general being part 
of this program. Has any improvement been made in the 
percentages of females participating in the New Careers 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have a comparison to 
previous years but I'm told that the balance has sort of shifted 
and in terms of all New Careers placement programs, which 
would take us to December 1994, 42 per cent were males and 
58 per cent were female. And if you look at training, 33 per 
cent of the training programs were geared towards men and 77 
per cent were women in those training programs. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That is 
indeed a change, because in the past I believe it was probably 
those numbers flipped the other way. So that would seem to 
indicate that there was probably some change in the programing 
that facilitated the changes. So what were the changes in the 
programs that was brought forward that made that shift in the 
balances? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as you probably know, New 
Careers was heavily involved in the construction, building 
marinas and parks and golf courses and those kinds of things. 
Those tend to be male jobs. And we're still involved in the 
work-experience program, but there is not . . . there is more 
emphasis in other training programs that would fit target groups 
like women. As you know, we have a large number of 
single-parent women that are on the SAP (Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan) case-load, so it's incredibly important that we 
design programs that can assist women in getting training and  

work experience so that they can move on to real jobs and work 
so that their families don't have to be on the income assistance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well what kind of new programs, 
Madam Minister, have you implemented to aim at the female 
population and the single mothers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There's several things that we're doing. 
In the coming year, under JobStart, we do have a single-parent 
program for single-parent women in particular. And that will be 
for young single parents under the age of 25. As well we have 
increased the community employment program for the private 
sector so that women are participating in those kinds of 
programs. As well we have short training programs geared 
towards women so they can receive jobs in the private sector. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — What kind of job skills though, Madam 
Minister, are these programs being designed for? Is it across the 
board or are there certain areas that you're more heavily 
involved in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is literally one job at a time. You 
know, gone are the days where we're going to have 60 people 
and a large employer. So what I'm about to tell you is basically 
one job at a time and we're talking about 1,600 jobs. 
 
So I'll just give you some examples. Mechanic's helper — assist 
mechanic as required  courier work, shop maintenance, 
oil/tire change, general automotive repair work; reception — 
typing, filing, collecting, compiling and editing newsletters on 
family violence; two labourers to undertake landscaping, 
planting grass, gardening, building a root cellar; training as a 
receptionist; training in customer service; data inputting; 
accounting; early childhood education worker; a cook; sales 
clerk; cashier; operation of a store; basic bookkeeping; another 
cook; a liaison officer in the administration; computer software; 
data entry; auto shop assistance; cut and hauling logs; widening 
fire guards; constructing a garage  so that's construction 
industry  general labourer to work in a saw mill; and it just 
goes on and on and on and on. And it's just one job at a time 
and that's how we're solving the jobs question in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have 
another question dealing with the estimates. Capital grants of 
2.94 million — what is that for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The 2.9 is all the work experience 
program, so that's the construction, building, carpentry, 
landscaping, bricklaying, building swimming pools, all of those 
kinds of things. That's what that’s for. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — When you're building these programs, 
this capital works, are those being done in parks? Are those 
being done on private facilities? Where is the work being done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It's all non-governmental organization. 
I was out at the Abilities camp at Watrous and New Careers 
was involved in building a pool for the physically challenged 
young people in the province of Saskatchewan. It's all for  



May 15, 1995 

 
2258 

non-profit organizations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I believe this 
New Careers Corporation is indeed a valuable corporation that 
provides good service for the people of the province in what 
they construct and as an educational tool for people to learn 
some real skills to go on to provide for themselves for the rest 
of their life. And I believe that this particular development is a 
good one. 
 
I believe it's been in place now for a number of years; I'm not 
sure — 15, 20 years, whatever it might be. But it's been there 
for a significant period of time and is providing a very 
worthwhile role in the province. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 59 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'd like to thank the officials for being 
here tonight. I'd also like to thank them for the experience of 
working with them for the past 18 months. New Careers has 
undergone some fairly significant changes as a result of some of 
the social reform processes that are coming to the province. 
And I just want to thank the team here in Regina but also the 
team across the province for their good work. And I want them 
to know that I certainly have appreciated everything that they've 
done for the people of Saskatchewan and the clients they serve. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and her officials for their cooperation this 
evening in providing the answers. Thank you very much. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:48 p.m. 
 


