






















































April 10, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 10, 1995 

 

 
1489 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting Trading in Real Estate, the 
Real Estate Commission and Brokerages, Brokers and 

Salespersons Trading in Real Estate 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause-by-clause 
consideration, are the members agreed that we can proceed 
through this part by part? Is that agreed? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Prior to the supper 
break I believe that both our critic, the member from 
Moosomin, and the minister had a very engaging discussion on 
the aspects of the Bill that we had some questions about, and 
most of those have been answered. There may be a few 
questions that we would want to ask later on, but to expedite 
matters, Mr. Chairman, perhaps we could do precisely what you 
suggest. 
 
Clauses 1 to 92 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Apiaries Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial 
Stability Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting Trading in Real Estate, the 

Real Estate Commission and Brokerages, Brokers and 
Salespersons Trading in Real Estate 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

The Chair: — Before we proceed to that I would ask the 
minister to please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here this evening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have seated 
beside me, Shiela Bailey, who is the Chair of the Public Service 
Commission. Behind me is Rick McKillop, the executive 
director of employee relations. To Rick's left is Elizabeth Smith, 
the director of administrative and information services, and 
across the aisle from Ms. Bailey is Ron Wight, the executive 
director of staffing and development. Mr. Hank Dorsch and Mr. 
Will Loewen are in the row behind that; Mr. Dorsch on the left, 
Mr. Loewen on the right. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
I'd like to discuss first off this evening under the Public Service 
Commission estimates, the affirmative action program, 
Minister. Our office received a call from an individual who was 
employed with the Public Service Commission as an affirmative 
action worker. This was quite some time ago but, however, this 
individual, Mr. Wall, was watching the proceedings of this 
House on television one day and called into our office. Now he 
asked that the official opposition raise the issue of the 
affirmative action when the Public Service Commission comes 
up in estimates, and here we are. 
 
So I'm going to ask you a few questions regarding the 
affirmative action and I will have your responses of course 
passed on to Mr. Wall for his information. 
 
Mr. Wall tells us that when he worked at the Public Service 
Commission that two areas were sadly lacking, specifically, the 
hiring of natives and the hiring of the disabled. 
 
Can you tell us what your government is doing in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the member 
for his very important question. There have been affirmation 
action programs in place in the Government of Saskatchewan 
for some very many years now, and that has been buttressed by 
the employment equity policy of this government, which is 
designed to try and hurry up the representation of aboriginal 
people, of disabled people, and of women in management and 
non-traditional positions. And I think that, by any test, the 
program has been reasonably successful. We're probably still 
subject to criticism for the under-representation of these groups 
in the employment of executive government, but we've been 
making steady progress. 
 
Let me give you some examples. Of persons of aboriginal 
ancestry employed by government, in 1989 the figure was 2.9 
per cent. That is now 5.5 per cent. So we have been making 
pretty good progress there. Persons with disability, the 
percentage employed by government has risen from a figure of  



April 10, 1995 

 
1490 

2.3 per cent in March of '89 to 3.1 per cent of March of '94. 
 
(1915) 
 
Women in management, there again we have shown steady 
improvement. In March of '89 that figure was 24 per cent. Two 
years later, in March '91, it had risen to 26.1 per cent. It is now 
— or at least as of March, 1994 — 30.6 per cent women in 
management positions. 
 
A harder nut to crack has been the women in non-traditional 
positions, but that number is now, or at least in March '94, was 
19.7 per cent; five years earlier it was 18.1 per cent. 
 
We have a total overall figure of women in government 
employment which has risen from 53.2 per cent in March, 1989 
to 54.7 per cent in March, 1994. 
 
So all told I think we have made reasonably satisfactory 
progress in those groups, but we still have some work to do, 
and therefore we are still subject to some criticism from persons 
who have an interest in these questions. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister, for those interesting 
figures. A couple of them caught my attention. It seems like at 
the rate of progress that we're making, anything that most folks 
would call equity will probably coming along in about 30 or so 
years. So while your comments alluded to the fact that you're 
trying to hurry up or speed up, I think maybe 30 or so years 
down the road might seem like a rather slow pace to some 
folks. 
 
And then on the other hand I note your last figure of 54.7 per 
cent of the total government workforce as being women, and 
then you'd almost start to think, well maybe at the bottom levels 
we've gotten a little out of balance and we haven't been 
allowing men to have opportunities. So I kind of wonder if we 
have to take a look at that part as well. 
 
But I want to continue with Mr. Wall's comments and complete 
his series of questions so that he can find out where his 
problems can be solved. His next question was, what is the 
Public Service Commission's goal with regards to the 
affirmative action program, and how is the Public Service 
Commission planning to reach these final goals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The goals are goals set down by the 
Public Service Commission and they're considered to be 
20-year goals, so that they are in every sense long-term goals. 
 
With respect to persons of aboriginal ancestry, the goal is 12.2 
per cent which is the percentage of the population that 
aboriginal people represent. In the case of persons with 
disability the goal is 9.7 per cent; women in management, the 
long-term goal is 45 per cent. So you see we still have a ways to 
go but we are making progress. 
 
These are difficult times in which to make progress because 
we're not increasing the size of the public service. We have in  

fact decreased it over the years so that the number of new hires 
is not as brisk as it was in earlier decades. It's not a time to be 
hiring a lot of new people, although there is some turnover of 
staff and we're working with those turnovers to try and 
implement this program. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Well I understand the 
dilemma you're in, but you know realistically, reducing the size 
of your workforce is not surprising because the age of the 
computer is upon us. And of course when we as a society 
decided that we were going to wholesale buy into the computer 
age, we were bound to eliminate many, many jobs because one 
computer with a good operator can take the place of probably 
10 or 15 ladies that would work in an office keeping records 
and that sort of thing. And that's just one of the facts of life that 
we have to deal with so the size of the public service has to 
drop realistically. There's no way around that. 
 
So I don't think you're going to get out of your dilemma of 
balancing these figures very easily. I readily admit that. In fact, I 
guess, you may have to try some other programs like creating 
jobs for these folks in some other way and maybe work at it in 
that direction because certainly the computer age will not go 
away. And I think we're going to see it in fact probably escalate 
especially when I take a look at some of the other departments 
and the amounts of money that have been spent on computers. 
 
Obviously if you've got hundreds of thousands of dollars 
invested in big computers that are touted by hackers — and I 
know nothing about this personally — but hackers tell me that 
many of these computers are bigger than the ones used in the 
American war machine in the Second World War. And even in 
the south-east Asian conflict — the kind of computers they had 
in that process. The computers that are in Saskatchewan are 
bigger than that even and can handle even more work. 
 
In fact I'm told there's a computer in Regina that could in fact 
take over the entire province's payroll for all municipalities, all 
of the education system, and every other bureaucratic system in 
the province all put together. And it could all be done out of 
one office with one great big computer that is already in Regina 
and been bought and paid for by the government. 
 
So I guess your problem is real. You're going to see an awful lot 
of people out of work as these machines are put into their full 
capacity. But Mr. Wall does have some more questions and I'll 
go on to the next one, Minister. 
 
Are there any quotas set in this regard? If yes, please provide 
those numbers for the different groups being targeted. Now I 
think you said a few of them but maybe you'll want to go over 
all of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There are no quotas set as such. There 
are goals and targets and through a variety of measures we try 
and encourage the development of the affirmative action hiring 
and promotion. But there are no quotas as such, there are only 
goals. 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1491 

Mr. Goohsen: — So what are your personal goals in this 
regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Over the long term, the goal is that the 
population of Saskatchewan will be represented in the 
workforce of the Government of Saskatchewan. So accordingly, 
if the aboriginal population in Saskatchewan is 12.2 per cent, 
our long-term goal is to achieve that level of aboriginal 
employment, more or less, so that the workforce is 
representative of the Saskatchewan population. That's our 
long-term goal. 
 
We don't break it down any finer than that and we don't have a 
quota let's say, for this fiscal year or for next, we just have . . . 
we work towards the long-term goals and hope to arrive at that 
at least within the 20-year period in respect of which they're set. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Well to be a little more 
specific, did the government reach its goal — I guess you don't 
want to use the word quotas so we'll call it your goal — that 
you had established for the last fiscal year for example? Could 
you provide us with what that goal established for last year was 
for each of the different target groups. If you have it on a piece 
of paper perhaps you could table that for us or send it over or 
something like that, and we could forward it on to Mr. Wall. 
 
We'd like to know for him also the number of people that were 
hired and of course if there were any that were let go for any 
reason — those kind of things he wants to know about. And if 
your goal was missed, could you tell us why that might have 
happened; or if you did attain it, would you like to brag about 
how you managed to achieve that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, we have . . . we know Mr. 
Wall, I can tell the member that. And we'll be glad to provide 
this detailed information to Mr. Wall and to the member, of 
course. And Mr. Wall is, I believe, sight impaired and we'll 
send it to him in Braille so that he'll be able to get all these 
numbers; and give it to him individual department by 
department. 
 
We don't have the individual department numbers here. We 
have the aggregate numbers and I gave those to you earlier on 
in percentage terms; what we had accomplished as of March of 
1994 which is our latest numbers on the matter. 
 
But we have a publication, an annual report on employment 
equity for '93-94, and we will be able to provide that 
information and break it down in the way that you suggested, 
department by department if he wants that; or specific 
departments if his interest is more focused on a few of the 
departments of government. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Well I'm glad that you 
know this individual and are aware that he requires his 
information in Braille. I wasn't actually aware of that but I'm 
sure that he will appreciate that consideration. So I'll take the 
opportunity now to thank you for him, for that consideration. 
And I'm also wanting to thank you for your straightforward  

answers for Mr. Wall and we will certainly make sure that he 
receives all of the information that you provide to us. And you 
say you will deliver some personally directly and that's 
welcomed and we thank you for that. 
 
Now we have from the re-employment list a question with 
regards to a Mr. Prabhaker (Parry) Bhatt. And I don't know if 
I've pronounced that quite right and my apologies if I haven't. 
He's of Saskatoon and he's on the re-employment list at the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Now Mr. Bhatt is a former employee who had open-heart 
surgery and then was put on a long-term disability program, I 
guess. Now he has now graduated from the business 
administration and marketing. He has taken some accounting 
and some classes in computer information systems. To date he 
has not received any reply from PSC (Public Service 
Commission) regarding re-employment. 
 
Now he states that he has applied for a number of positions for 
which he is well qualified and has not been given or granted an 
interview. Mr. Bhatt is also of the employment equity target 
group, a visible minority, as well as a person with a disability. 
Mr. Bhatt would like to know what his status is on the 
re-employment list. 
 
Could I have your commitment to look into Mr. Bhatt's 
situation and that someone in your department will get back to 
him on his concerns, Mr. Minister? I have his address and I'll 
forward that to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, I'll commit to that. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
have received a few phone calls from a problem that arose out 
of a transfer of the manager of a community pasture. I just was 
wondering whether that was something that I would ask you 
about, or whether that has to be asked with the Department of 
Agriculture officials, because the individuals that were 
overlooked in the matter seem to have raised some concerns 
with various groups of people, including myself, including the 
pasture advisory committee. 
 
It's raised some concerns on my part, too, that an individual 
who has spent . . . well the family of that particular pasture just 
outside of Kyle has had a tradition of having a certain family 
occupy the management position. And this man's son has spent, 
I don't know, 22 or 23 years in that pasture and he was 
overlooked for a person of lesser qualifications. And I was just 
wondering if that was your responsibility to check into that. If it 
is, then I'll give you the information off the record here and 
have you look into it. If not, then I'll ask the same question of 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We'll take the details and try and look 
into it. It may be that we can provide the information you need, 
and if not, you can go back to Agriculture at a later moment.  



April 10, 1995 

 
1492 

But we'll give it a try, if you just bring me the information 
behind the rail or after we're finished. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I didn't think I'd 
get my chance so quick again. Minister, I have a general kind of 
a question here I guess. Did your office receive the list of 
standard questions forwarded by the official opposition? I 
realize that we have just recently passed the year end and that 
this information may not yet all be available, or perhaps it has 
because I guess the days have been going by as we have been 
waiting to get into this particular process of estimates. 
 
So I guess I'll let you answer for yourself. Do we have those 
pieces of information and when could we expect to get them? 
Or have they been sent perhaps and I missed them? What is the 
status? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, we intend to respond to the 
questions. There is still some information with respect to 
transactions that are outstanding that we haven't yet 
incorporated into our data. But we'll be able to complete these 
responses relatively soon and get the information to you as soon 
as we can. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. We will wait with 
anticipation to get those pieces of information so that we can 
study through them and perhaps have some supplementary 
questions later on. 
 
More specifically, today we thought that you might provide us 
with some information regarding ministerial travel. Could you 
provide us with the information on destinations, purposes of 
trips, and, if any, ministerial assistants that had accompanied 
ministers on the trips. 
 
Now I'm not sure how many ministers this is going to include or 
not, so I'll just let you reply with regards to everyone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I had no travel in connection 
with my duties as the minister responsible. There were, I 
believe, two inside province trips taken by my ministerial 
assistants, but they were in province and not out of province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well perhaps, Minister, you wouldn't mind 
telling us what those trips were for and the details. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm told that they were to take training 
courses in Saskatoon in connection with the Public Service 
Commission responsibilities that they have. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members,  

particularly the hon. member from Maple Creek whom I've 
interrupted. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in the Speaker's gallery this evening we have a 
group from the 81st Scout troop right here in Regina, and their 
leader, Chris Saxby. It will be my pleasure to meet with this 
group in a few minutes. We'll have pictures and then some 
refreshments, and hopefully I'll have a chance to answer some 
questions. I ask all members to join me in welcoming the 81st 
Scout troop. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — With respect to the last question, we 
don't have the details of the training courses, but we'll provide 
them in the usual course as soon as we get the particulars within 
the next day or two. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I'd 
also like to take the opportunity to recognize the Boy Scouts, as 
a past Queen Scout. It's an excellent program that you're 
involved in. In fact I received my Queen Scout sitting in one of 
these desks on this side. And it wasn't last week, it was one or 
two days before that. So if you keep working hard at it maybe 
one of these days you can sit on either side of the House, but 
only once at a time. 
 
Mr. Minister, how often do your staff get the opportunity to 
take this type of training? Were these people new employees 
that you were providing initial training to or was it some 
specialized course that you would provide to an employee who 
was a long-term employee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We're a little lost, Mr. Chair, and I 
apologize to the members opposite for not having this 
information here, but our recollection is that these were the kind 
of courses like effective communication and it was for 
secretarial staff, that sort of thing. They were small one-, 
two-day courses. That's about the level of detail I can give you, 
and we're just guessing from memory at that. We can provide 
more solid detail when we do a little research. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. How 
about something other than those two particular employees. Do 
you have an extensive training program in place for members of 
the PSC, or was this just sort of a specialized, one-time shot 
that you provided to these employees? Do you have a policy or 
a program of providing training for your employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, there are training programs 
and courses and the like that from time to time are taken by 
commission staff, and I think that was your question. It's very  



April 10, 1995 

 
1493 

rare that my office is involved in that. I personally can't 
remember it ever happening before this past year that some 
members of my staff were actually involved in any training 
course. 
 
There is no program as such for the training of commission 
employees. The opportunities arise and the training is approved 
on the basis of a particular need, of a particular purpose. 
 
And there is no preset training that all employees get year after 
year after year. It depends on the individual and on the 
individual's needs and the job needs and the opportunity to take 
that training. 
 
Just before sitting down, I can say that the amount of training is 
not large. The commission has got a relatively small staff for a 
big job, and most of their time is spent at work, performing 
their job, rather than being trained to do it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. How 
would you evaluate then whether an employee needed to have 
some further training within their workplace? Surely you must 
have some sort of criteria that makes a determination as to 
whether it would be employee A or employee B that was 
eligible for further training or that needed further training. So 
what do you have in place, Mr. Minister, to make those kind of 
determinations, to determine whether or not an employee A 
needed to be upgraded in some particular area, and whether or 
not that was the proper employee to receive that type of 
upgrading? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, I'm advised that one way of 
identifying the training that may be necessary for an employee 
— probably the main way — is through the annual performance 
review that the management of the commission does with 
respect to the employees. And during that performance review, 
it is often the case that training needs are identified and that 
would probably be the main way of identifying what training 
would be required. 
 
It is also the case that new aspects of the job may emerge, new 
duties, and some training has to be provided in respect of those 
duties. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. So if you 
make these determinations at the time of your annual 
performance review, surely if the employee was deficient in 
some area previous to that review point that it would have been 
identified by the commission that this person has a problem in 
an area or else they're lacking in a particular piece of training. 
You have new equipment or a new software program or 
whatever it might be that they need to be upgraded in, or a new 
program has come in that they have to deal with; surely you 
must make that evaluation for new training or the need for new 
training before you do the performance review. 
 
I would have to suggest that surely within the commission you 
have identified a deficiency in the training area prior to that 
performance review. Perhaps you let the employee know at the  

performance review that, we believe that you're deficient in 
operating WordPerfect or whatever it might be. But I would 
suspect, or at least hope, that you would have made that 
determination that there was a need for training prior to the 
performance review. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm not certain how I can answer the 
question of the member because I'm not certain . . . I'm not 
perfectly clear what the point is. But I can say this: that the idea 
of an annual performance review has been embedded in the 
operation of the Government of Saskatchewan for many years 
now, and that the purpose of that review is to identify . . . or 
evaluate the performance of the employee for the reporting 
period, and in that regard, to identify how the employee can 
strengthen employment, what particular shortcomings there may 
be, or what needs the job has that the employee is not yet 
trained for and requires some further training in order to 
improve performance. 
 
It is very difficult to generalize about these things. In a 
particular case it would become more clear. This employee may 
have difficulty communicating and so would benefit from a 
course in upgrading communication skills. Another employee 
may have acquired some supervisory responsibilities and 
requires additional training in order to be able to discharge 
those supervisory duties adequately, and so on and so forth. 
 
The performance review looks back on an employee's 
performance in the past and looks forward to the employee's 
performance in the future, and that may involve new duties or it 
may involve performing existing duties at a higher level. So it's 
very difficult to generalize and that's why I'm having some 
problem with the member's questions. 
 
But there is no program of, in year 1 you will take this course, 
and in year 2 you will take a second course, and in year 3 you 
will take a third course. We don't have that kind of a program. 
We try and respond to the individual needs of the particular 
employee in that particular job, to assist him in performing that 
job to a satisfactory level. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While an 
employee is taking training — I believe you mentioned it was a 
two- or three-day course, whatever it was that they were on — 
if it's during the week, do they receive their regular salary at that 
time or do they forgo their salary to take the training? How 
would that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — They're paid a salary while they take the 
training. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the areas 
that I have worked in, it's always been the desire of the 
employees to receive this type of upgrading or this type of 
training, and preferably the longer rather than shorter. So how 
do you make the determination as to who should receive an 
upgrade and who does not? 



April 10, 1995 

 
1494 

If all the employees would like to take advantage of an 
upgrading program — be that in communications, be that in a 
mechanical skill operating a particular program — how do you 
determine that this employee is the one that needs to be 
upgraded, that would benefit the Public Service Commission 
and this employee? While it certainly may aid them in a 
personal sense, how do you make that determination as to 
which employee would receive any upgrading or any training? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Those are decisions that are made by 
the management of the department, probably by the manager of 
the unit in which the particular employee is working. And the 
managers have regard to the needs of their work unit or their 
organization in deciding how much of this training will be 
made available and who will get it. It's not the kind of question 
that ever gets up to the minister's office, of course, but this sort 
of thing goes on within the department all the time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well 
perhaps it doesn't reach your desk but some place within the 
chain of command there must be some direction to those 
managers as to what kind of approvals they can give. Now do 
you train . . . if you have an office of 20 people, do you train 10 
of them? Or, you know, there has to be some direction given by 
upper management to the other managers in the system that say 
we can train one person this year, or we can train somebody in 
accounting or whatever it may be, in how to write reports or 
something. You have to give some direction to your managers 
so that they know what they can and what they cannot do. So 
what is the direction that you provide for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, and to the member, I've just 
taken a short course in how training decisions are made within 
the commission. I had been talking earlier about how the 
individual training needs of employees are identified between a 
manager and the employee. And that is part of the performance 
review and appraisal system that I was talking about earlier. 
 
These managerial units operate within the organization of the 
commission and while the manager appraises the employees 
who are reporting to him or her, that manager is in turn 
appraised and performance is reviewed by someone superior to 
that manager and . . . No, it's not me. But that, and the quality of 
the work that's being done in that area, is part of the review, and 
the extent to which employees may or may not be able to 
perform all the functions are part of that review, and in that 
sense training is also part of that. The training that is being 
provided or required of the employees is part of that review 
also. 
 
The total of all these little individual plans come up in a 
reporting way along with a lot of other information to the 
managers of the divisions and the managers of the commission, 
and they are able in that way to sort of keep track of how much 
training is going on. If things got out of line, either too much or 
too little, the Chair and her senior staff would be able to take 
steps in order to correct the situation. That hasn't happened to 
this point. 
 

But they are generally aware of what's going, and where the 
training is happening, are the new programs for which we may 
be responsible, are the new computer programs and that sort of 
thing, being planned for and sufficient training provided. That 
changes from time to time, depending upon what's happening 
and what's new. And it's a kind of a flexible, sort of responsive 
idea, and my answers I think reflect the idea that it is a flexible 
sort of idea without any very rigid programs or long-term plans 
for the delivery of specific kind of training. 
 
The training, I repeat, is on the basis of the needs of the 
employee to perform the job at hand and as that job will be in 
the future. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Was it 
only the two employees within the past year that received 
training, or were there others also? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This all began with talking about 
members of my staff travelling, and one or two of them 
travelled to Saskatoon for one or two training courses. But the 
commission staff as a whole, probably somewhere between 50 
and 75 per cent of them received some kind of training during 
the last fiscal year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
kind of training would they then be receiving? What kind of 
programs would they receive? Who would provide that 
training? And how do you evaluate the success of the training? 
Does that come up, that they received a certificate for attending 
the course and they got 80 per cent or whatever it might be? Or 
is there some other mechanism that you use to determine 
whether or not you're receiving value for dollar in the training 
programs that you have provided for or allowed your employees 
to attend? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, most of the training was 
provided within government by resources within the 
government. And the kind of thing that it may . . . A typical 
program would be the WordPerfect 5.1 program and how to use 
that, and systems training, how to use the e-mail system, how to 
write better letters, leadership courses. We had a lot of training 
in connection with the interest based bargaining approach that 
was used in our negotiations with the SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government Employees' Union). 
 
And the assessment of the training that the employee received is 
worked out at the level of the manager. I think the best way of 
thinking about that is that they . . . is liking it to a contract. The 
manager and the employee agree that the employee is going to 
take the training and that the objective in taking the training is 
to be able to do a certain kind of work. And then after the 
training the employee and the manager meet and assess whether 
or not that program delivered that kind of skill that the 
employee was looking for. 
 
So these are all internal government programs and there is  



April 10, 1995 

 
1495 

feedback all the time from the people taking them through the 
various departments. And if a program isn't satisfactory then I 
assume they'll make changes so that it becomes satisfactory. But 
there is no rigid, no fixed system of general evaluation. These 
are quite subjective from the viewpoint of the people who take 
the training and reporting and relating back to their managers as 
they perform their job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed, I would ask the minister to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Mr. Chairman, to my right, deputy minister, Con Hnatiuk. 
Behind Con, our associate deputy minister, Neil Yeates. 
Directly behind me, Bob Wihlidal, director of support services. 
And at the back is Shelley Hoover, our assistant director of 
income security. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We'll probably 
agree on this item no. 1 a little later, Mr. Minister. I welcome 
you back. I welcome your staff back. 
 
I was looking back through some of the stuff we'd talked about 
the last time we were together. And I thought what I'd like to do 
tonight is pick up again on the assistance there is available for 
the disabled. We talked a little bit about that but I don't think 
we got clearly . . . I think we got into it a little bit but we didn't 
clear it up. 
 
For instance, I raised a question in the House in question period 
one day when you were unavailable for the answer. And the 
Minister of Economic Development arranged for the member 
from Saskatoon Wildwood to take that and talk to the family 
concerned. And we appreciated that. 
 
But I'd like to discuss it a little further with you, as to what 
happened in that case. Do you remember the case? Would you 
maybe tell us what has happened since that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, 
and the hon. member, for the question. I remember that case 
specifically. I know you'll appreciate that it's very difficult to 
talk about specific cases publicly. But you may recall as well 
that I clarified in the following week, some additional 
information with regard to the question since I wasn't here the 
day you asked that. 
 
But the amount of assistance that's available to a disabled 
person, of course, is all of the basic allowances plus additional 
allowances for special diet, special assistance that's required, 
additional rent, shelter rates. And this program is a needs-based  

program. 
 
So the greater your need, the more available some of the 
allowances are to meet those needs. And of course, the program 
also has to account for the income from all the sources, because 
as you, know social assistance historically has been a program 
of last resort. 
 
So you as an applicant have to explore all sources of income. 
And in the case you're referring to, we of course have made all 
the adjustments we can make with regard to covering the needs 
that are available with all of the provisions and the additional 
monies that can be provided. And we're obligated as well to 
take into account the individual and the family income. And 
then whatever the difference is, will be the level of the cheque 
that would come from the department as part of their social 
assistance payment. 
 
So that's basically how the program works, and it's my 
recollection . . . I think I maybe had the last piece of 
correspondence here, that we have made all the adjustments that 
we can make in that particular case. But the door is always 
open; if there's some need that surfaces, we can always reassess 
it. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's exactly what I 
would like to get clarified with you is, was there any extra help 
you could give this person? Did she qualify for any extra 
besides the $40 a month that we were . . . the last I heard was 
that she was only entitled to an extra $40 a month. Did her 
situation allow her to get more assistance than that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, I am advised that there were a 
number of extenuating circumstances here that had to be taken 
into account, and it's my understanding that yes, there were 
some additional adjustments made in this particular case that 
you're referring to. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
certainly appreciate that because as you remember at that time 
we were a little concerned. 
 
One of the things that the member from Wildwood said at that 
time, and it was to the effect that the poor are poor, and no one 
poor person can be viewed as poorer than another, which was a 
little convoluted. But I guess what they were saying, that there 
was no extenuating circumstances. You were poor, and you 
were poor and that was it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well 
this is the member from Wildwood, in the interview indicated 
that a poor person was a poor person, and that you in your 
wisdom didn't have no room to move. And I think my position 
was that . . . And the phrase you just used . . . There are 
extenuating circumstances in some cases. And so I'm certainly 
glad you recognized that in this particular case, and we certainly 
thank you for that because I personally do believe that there are 
people who are poor, and then there are people who are poor 
and also unable to help themselves as well as being poor. So 
there is a situation where you in your position and your staff 
can help them. 



April 10, 1995 

 
1496 

I was going to ask you if you would agree that there are 
differences, and I think you've answered that for me. 
 
The other thing that I would like to . . . I'd like to develop this 
disabled thing. I wonder if you would agree with me that 
disabled people are unable to change their circumstances. If 
they're disabled to the point where they can't work and it's a 
lifelong disability, they just can't change their circumstances; 
would you agree with me with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — That's a good question, and I think an 
important question from this perspective. You know, as we look 
back many years ago, I've sort of been in this field for about 20 
years, and I know a number of my officials have been in, some 
longer than that. Our views 20 years ago and 15 years ago, 5 
years ago, 2 years ago about what sorts of opportunities that 
people could access, I think, have changed over time. 
 
Persons with disabilities I think have proven to us that it may 
just be a matter of different abilities. And with a little support 
and the right kind of support and some opportunities, I think 
disabled people themselves are saying that there are a lot of 
things that we can do that the non-disabled community has felt 
that we couldn't do for a long time. And what they're looking 
for are opportunities to be empowered, opportunities to 
participate more meaningfully in decisions that affect their 
lives, and opportunities to participate in the wider spectrum of 
the community. So I think this is all very healthy and we should 
do whatever we can to support those with disabilities — and I 
know you would agree with us — those with disabilities to 
access opportunities based on their abilities and their interests 
and aspirations. And as I look back over 20 years, it's amazing 
the degree to which people have been able to, I think, to 
become part of the mainstream of the community, if you will. 
 
Now with the information technology and the information 
highway and the potential to work at home with computers . . . 
for example, if you go to Cheshire Homes today in Saskatoon 
— where I recently was — before long you'll be able to hold a 
job down from just sitting there in your room. It's phenomenal, 
sort of, I think, what kinds of opportunities this is opening up 
for persons with disabilities. 
 
(2015) 
 
Now I think your point as well was that there was some people 
who may not be able to improve their situation; at least I 
assume you meant as it relates to some earning power, to be 
more financially independent. And I would agree with you. 
There probably are some circumstances where that just simply 
won't be the case. And then it's up to, I think, the rest of us to 
demonstrate our generosity and our compassion and our caring 
and support and to work with those individuals and the 
associations that represent those individuals to make sure that 
they can live with dignity and with their self-esteem intact and 
so on. So I think I'm agreeing with you. 
 
But the coming home-staying home program, that is a joint 
federal-provincial initiative to move persons with disabilities  

from Valleyview into the community. We just continue to move 
people out into the community to the point where a lot fewer 
people with disabilities are in institutions, and I think that adds 
another whole dimension to their life that is a very positive 
trend that's been occurring for 30, 40 years in the province and 
in Canada. We need to support disabled persons to maximize 
those and I don't know where it'll end up. Hopefully, we'll be 
able to continue doing that with the kind of support that they 
would like to see. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we're both 
agreeing here. I think what I maybe should have said, there are 
those who are disabled for life, and not necessarily physically 
disabled, but for instance cerebral palsy is something you're not 
going to recover from. And I think those are the people I'm 
thinking about that are unfortunately locked into assistance for 
life. And they can't be retrained and do as you say. 
 
And I agree with you. I really do. I agree that there are people 
today earning a living by themselves who may at some time in 
the past been considered as simply unable to earn a living. I 
agree with you on that point. 
 
But I was just hoping you would agree with me that in some 
cases there are people that no amount of training or instruction 
would ever allow that person to get off of welfare. And the 
point I was trying to make is that there are times when you as 
the minister — and your staff of course, as they're out in the 
field — have to make a judgement like that. So I'm glad that 
we're kind of on that same wavelength there. 
 
The difference I would say is between some young person, 
healthy and strong, with some retraining, probably the rest of 
their life they earn their living, whereas some person that is 
totally disabled have no hope for that. And I believe what I'm 
saying is they have to have that extra little something to make 
their life worthwhile too. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you indicate to me how many people on 
social assistance are unemployable due to disabilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, certainly I agree with the hon. 
member, Mr. Chairman, that there certainly are some people 
who require social assistance on an ongoing basis who would 
be, I suppose, termed permanently disabled. But again  and 
so I agree with the hon. member in that regard  but I also say 
that, and that we . . . of course based on need, but 
approximately those individuals would be eligible for $300-plus 
over and above say a single person who was employable. But 
again, based on needs, it could be more. 
 
But it still is a relative term in terms of the case-load that is 
unemployable because many of them are termed temporarily 
unemployable. For example  and then people's circumstances 
change over time  for example, someone may have some 
short-term emotional difficulties; some may have some 
short-term mental health treatment; some individuals, 
single-parent families, maybe a single-parent mom with young 
children, as the children get older and the opportunities can be  



April 10, 1995 

 
1497 

accessed; and some are in training. But even persons who are 
not fully employable, of course, are in training. 
 
This morning I was fortunate enough to provide some 
additional money from the government to the Voyageur Club in 
Saskatoon, which provides supports to persons who designate 
themselves as slow learners. It is not my terminology; that's the 
terminology that they prefer. 
 
And these are typically people, many of them on assistance, 
who would fall between the cracks in some of the other systems 
— the mental health formal system. They don't necessarily 
require that kind of service, but they require some life skills and 
some parenting support, and some job training support and 
training and this sort of thing. And I think those people would 
fall into the category of temporarily unemployable. 
 
But a little bit more specifically to your question, approximately 
half of the current case-load, that is approximately 19,800 
clients, as of February of this year, we would term as not fully 
employable for some of the reasons that I've just mentioned. 
Sixty-three per cent of those are single individuals, about 29 per 
cent are single parents, 3 per cent two-parent families, and 
about 3 per cent childless couples. 
 
So those are the numbers and the percentages as to the clients 
who would be considered not fully employable. Some of those 
would be partially employable and some of those indeed would 
be working part time. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that 
information. That isn't quite what I had asked but it was 
something we would have got to later. I thought I had asked: 
that were unemployable due to disabilities, not unemployable 
because of the other things you mentioned, which is fine. I 
would have liked that. But how many in your case-load are 
unemployable due to disabilities . . . disabled people, I guess? Is 
there . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well sorry. I'll try and answer this 
another way then to see if I'm correct. Of those numbers that I 
gave you, approximately 20,000 who are not fully employable. 
You're using the term disabled and I think in some ways we're 
talking about the same 20,000 clients. But for example, 5,100 
of those clients, 5,149, are permanently unemployable as 
designated by our system; 4,738 of those individuals would be 
. . . are considered temporarily unemployed or you would say 
temporarily disabled. Almost 1,500 of those individuals are in 
sheltered workshops. Almost 1,200 of those individuals are in 
life-skills programs and so on. Almost a thousand of those 
individuals are actually working part time or casually, even 
though they're only partially employable. And about 7,000 are 
unemployed in that 20,000 that we talked about. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's quite helpful. 
That's kind of what I was trying to get to . . . is to . . . In some 
cases we get critical about the numbers, and you and I have 
gone back and forth a time or two on those numbers. And it 
would help me and I think help me explain to others who  

sometimes beat on me a little bit. If we can take these and split 
them up and show those folks that all of these people . . . in 
some cases these people just can't help themselves. So I 
appreciate that breakdown. 
 
One thing I'd like you to maybe talk to me a little bit about is 
the criteria that you use to determine who is disabled and what 
level that they are disabled at. Do you have a bit of a criteria 
you use? Could you just give us a bit of a short . . . or whatever 
time it takes, I guess, to explain that to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the criteria is certainly based on 
each individual client's assessment. And to some degree the 
information presented at the time of an application related to 
medical information, previous work history, level of education, 
level of life skills, level of functioning, and those kinds of 
considerations and often supported by medical information or, 
you know, a social assessment or so on. But persons who are 
considered fully employable are those who are capable of 
working 36 hours per week. And this includes of course 
persons who are employed now because, you know, probably 
about a quarter of the case-load are actually working now. But 
it includes persons who are self-employed or unemployed . . . 
so 36 hours a week. 
 
Not fully employable but they may be partially employable. Not 
fully employable — as I said — based on some health 
information, physical, or some difficulty in functioning 
emotionally or for mental health reasons; as I say, poor work 
history, some family difficulties, or some social struggles that 
some of our clients sometimes have. Of course persons in 
sheltered workshops and so on are part of this. Sometimes age 
is a factor. Not employable in the market given your age, 
number of children, age of children, and so on as a single 
person. 
 
So those are some of the factors that are determined in the 
initial assessment with qualified social workers. We often, I 
believe, have some of our best trained workers and experienced 
workers on what we call intake to where they first . . . people 
first apply to assistance. Workers who are experienced, who 
know the community resources and the kind of supports that 
people need and can often make the referrals to the relevant 
agencies to help support people, because sometimes we want to 
minimize the length of stay for people on assistance — as do 
they — and we want to provide them with the kind of supports 
that they need to get back on their feet as soon as possible. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd like to just leave 
that now. I think you've given me what I kind of wanted. 
 
I'm going to ask you, Mr. Minister, to your knowledge, has your 
department ever looked at implementing a two-tier system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Now if you're, by two tier, if you're 
meaning differential benefits, in a sense we have that now. And  



April 10, 1995 

 
1498 

I think maybe last time we sent over the rates for persons who 
were fully employable relative to persons who were partially or 
unemployable. And as I've tried to say here tonight, the rates are 
. . . because it's a needs-based program, the rates are generally 
higher for persons with disabilities or who are partially 
employable. And so in a sense that's two tier already, if that's 
what you had in mind. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. What I was 
going to talk to you about and your deputy minister, I think, will 
know what I'm talking about when I talk about the AIS program 
in Alberta — AISH I believe they called it. They called it 
assured income for severely handicapped and for those severely 
disabled or those not treatable. And I was wondering if you've 
talked to your minister about that? I'm sure that he . . . because 
from what I understand that you were involved in that. And 
Alberta offers — I'm told this and you can correct me if I'm 
wrong . . . that a single person on welfare receives about 394 a 
month compared to someone who's on this AISH who would 
receive about 810. 
 
And this is what I was wondering, and I would like to have you 
respond to that. Have you talked it over with anyone and 
thinking in terms of trying to implement that or do you have 
something that's equivalent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we are familiar with that program in 
Alberta. And I guess it's my understanding that if the needs of 
the individual, the person who's disabled, exceed the 
allowances, they still have to apply for social assistance in 
Alberta. And of course we also have the SAIL (Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living) program that we've not talked 
about but services there over and above. And as you know, we 
don't have any health care premiums as they do in Alberta. 
 
So in many ways when you compare Alberta and Saskatchewan 
with regard to the level of support, just with regard for example 
to employment-related expense benefits, there is a flat rate . . . 
in Alberta it's a flat rate that they have available to them for 
employment-related expenses. In Saskatchewan the allowances 
are available according to the actual costs to the individual. 
Rather than allowances necessarily, it's based on the actual cost 
to the individual to become employed. 
 
So you'd have to take a few cases to know whether an 
individual's better off there or here as it relates to some partial 
employment opportunities. 
 
In terms of emergency benefits, again there is a granting system 
there that's available to the individual, where in Saskatchewan 
again it's based on actual costs of the emergency. 
 
So one is based on allowances, the other one's based on the 
need. And I suppose there may be some advantages and 
disadvantages of both approaches. But we would have to look 
at some specific cases to see whether in fact disabled people are 
better or worse off in terms of whether they're living in Alberta 
or Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don't think I was 
trying to compare the benefits of the two in terms of the 
financial end of it. I was just wondering if your minister, Mr. 
Hnatiuk, had talked to you about that system. 
 
I understand that it's income tested, but you don't take the assets 
into account. And my understanding also was that it's run a little 
bit more like a pension program. And I tried to get a pamphlet 
on it but they're not issuing them any more. And I was just 
hoping that maybe because of your relationship with Mr. 
Hnatiuk, he would maybe, you know, have talked to you about 
it. 
 
And I understand then from what you're saying that you have 
taken a look at it, and as you say maybe with . . . you compare 
the two. Maybe Saskatchewan is okay. And I used numbers, 
dollars, but I don't think, as you say, I don't think the dollars 
always tell the same story because of different costs and 
different pressures that's on different people. I just thought it 
was kind of an interesting thing when I ran across it, and I 
thought I'd bring it to your attention. 
 
As you mentioned, I was going to ask you . . . I have only 
contacted three provinces. There was Alberta, Manitoba, and 
Ontario; all use a two-tier system. Could you tell me, have you 
checked to see if there's any other provinces using the two-tier 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — There actually are maybe more, but at 
least two different ways in which we refer to two-tier systems. 
And one is a two-tiered delivery system which involves 
different levels of government providing social assistance, and 
only Manitoba and Ontario still have that system. That's one 
form of two tier. 
 
I think you're talking about two-tier benefit levels. And I would 
say that as far as I know, all provinces, certainly most 
provinces, have differential benefits, more benefits for persons 
who have disabilities than those who do not have disabilities. 
 
I'm going to send the member over information I've just 
received recently about the AISH program in Alberta; formally 
it's called the assured income for the severely handicapped 
persons program. I'm going to send you over information about 
that program, a recent article in the Edmonton Sun, because I 
think it'll be self-explanatory. But that program is under a fair 
degree of criticism right now. 
 
Yes, so I'll send the copy over to the member if I could. And, 
you know, some questions might arise from that, but I just saw 
it, so I think you might find it interesting too. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. 
And I'll ask you another question and you might get the answer 
from your assistant there. In your opinion, Mr. Minister, do you 
think that there'd be more chance for abuse under the two-tier 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I think we really are . . . I guess are not  



April 10, 1995 

 
1499 

really in position to judge the accountability of other programs 
in other jurisdictions. We believe that we are accountable here 
in Saskatchewan. I think, by and large, as you know, we've got 
a number of control measures that we believe are effective and 
believe that we're being judged by the Provincial Auditor to 
being effective with our controls. 
 
I think that accountability is not really based on whether it's a 
one- or two-tiered system, although many times persons with 
disabilities have a more stable health situation, if you will. So 
there could tend to be less change in circumstances which 
means sort of a more regular monitoring of assistance. 
 
But we believe that accountability is really related to the degree 
to which the system is understandable and the program is 
understandable, the degree to which . . . in our case, we're 
probably the most automated system in Canada in terms of 
computer automation, the degree to which the expenditures are 
monitored. And so all in all, with regard to accountability — 
and I won't review all the measures — but in regard to 
accountability we believe that we're running a very accountable 
program with respect to the social assistance expenditures. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I didn't mean the 
question to be critical. I was just wondering if Mr. Hnatiuk had 
. . . what his thoughts were on the two systems because he has a 
chance to . . . he's worked with both of them. And I was just 
wondering if there was any thoughts along those lines. It 
certainly wasn't meant to criticize either one of the systems. 
And so if you got that impression, I didn't mean it that way. 
 
You and I have talked many times about the checks and 
balances and bells and whistles that you have. And I think I've 
agreed with you that they are in most cases adequate. There's 
one or two suggestions we've made to you now and again and 
probably will continue to. 
 
But I think we'll just leave the disability side for now. I 
appreciate the information that you've given me. 
 
And I want to move into another area. And this is an area of a 
concern from an individual. And this individual has asked me to 
raise it in this forum, so if you're wondering why I haven't given 
you a call, that is why. 
 
(2045) 
 
And this Mrs. Attwater, she's from Dalmeny and she called me 
with a number of concerns. And I think she brought up some 
points that, you know, it might look into. And I'm going to 
relate them to you. 
 
And what she's telling me is that she has confronted a problem 
where individuals on assistance are moving without notifying 
the landlord. Mr. Minister, she feels that this shouldn't happen. 
And she's wondering why it does happen and keeps on 
happening. And she's asking how can social services recipients 
be allowed to move without providing notice to the landlord. 
Can you elaborate on that a little bit? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you. Just in finishing off the last 
piece, with respect to the one- and two-tier system and my 
consultation with the deputy minister, I think it's fair to say that 
we believe that the two-tier system is more complicated. 
Because its more complicated and people move back and forth, 
there is a greater potential for information not to be accurate 
and the potential for mistakes and so on to occur. 
 
Now on the point raised by Mrs. Attwater, certainly it's my 
belief and understanding that in the vast majority of cases 
between individuals on assistance who rent, and landlords, the 
relationship is positive. Of course the lease is between the 
individual and the landlord; it's really their contract with each 
other. We really are not in a position where we control our 
clients in that sense. We obviously provide one month's rent. 
We provide one damage deposit. If people move without giving 
notice in a month and go somewhere else, then they don't get 
duplicate assistance. 
 
But this point is being addressed  this is the point I want to 
make  this point is being addressed by a special task force 
that's been set up by the Minister of Justice and all of the 
participants, all of the stakeholders in the landlord and lessee 
rental business, all the participants, so that they can all have 
their say and hopefully make recommendations to the Minister 
of Justice with regard to the effectiveness of The Residential 
Tenancies Act in this regard and in many other areas. 
 
So at this point we're awaiting that report. And if there are, I 
guess, good ideas where there's some consensus reached, we 
will study it, and — I'm sure — take any action that we believe 
might be appropriate. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another reason that I 
was prepared to bring this forward is, as you know, the 
landlords' association are running into this problem, and they 
were asking for a larger deposit because this was happening. 
And the damage deposit was only $125, and they would 
sometimes leave them, and they wouldn't even get the $125. 
And even if you did, $125 don't fix up very much damage. And 
so that's why I thought I would like to discuss this with you on 
the two levels — one from the landlord's side and from your 
own position. You tell me you issue one damage deposit and 
one month's rent. If that person does leave and don't pay the 
damage deposit, how does the landlord get that? Does the 
department pay that for that recipient? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, again I know the point you're 
making. And of course the landlords’ association are very well 
represented on this task force that's been set up. And you know 
they obviously can present their case there. And you know, 
often, especially if they're employable people and they're 
marketable, they're on assistance for a short period of time and 
then they're off. They get a job and they're off. 
 
So in many cases there's a perception that people are on 
assistance and they're actually not. I know this from my 
experience in looking into matters where we get calls. 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1500 

But again, I would just say that the vast majority of clients are, I 
believe, responsible. The essence of becoming independent is 
that you manage your own affairs. 
 
But the Rentalsman is the arbitrator. And it's the Rentalsman 
who's chairing the task force and we will obviously take any 
concerns that come forth very seriously. 
 
You might know, and I'm sure you do, that in Alberta, for 
example, I think as of October of '93, persons on assistance do 
not get any damage deposits in Alberta unless it's a mother 
fleeing a violent situation. There are no damage deposit 
provided under social assistance in Alberta and haven't been for 
the last year. 
 
I don't know how that's working — that's Alberta. But we're 
trying to sort of deal with this in a Saskatchewan way where all 
the parties have the opportunity to express their point of view to 
the Rentalsman. And we'll look forward to their report. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thought I heard you 
say that you supplied one damage deposit and one month's rent. 
What I'd like you to explain to me, what happens if that — 
assuming this person is on Social Services, welfare — that 
person moves to another building? Do you issue another 
damage deposit at the next building and another month's rent, or 
how is that handled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — No, as I tried to say last time but I think 
it's important to say it again, we do not issue duplicate damage 
deposits. In the scenario that you outlined, the damage deposit 
would be considered an overpayment. We would only consider 
issuing it again, without it being an overpayment, if it were two 
years since the last one. Otherwise it is definitely an 
overpayment if we were to issue one again. 
 
Mr. Britton: — I see then. So that if in the case that Mrs. 
Attwater's talking about, and they didn't get their deposit from 
that person, then that person went to another apartment, they 
had to put up their own damage deposit; they wouldn't get it 
from the Social Services. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well that depends. Sometimes we simply 
wouldn't do that. You know, through the pattern of this, we 
simply wouldn't do that. But if we did reissue another damage 
deposit, that clearly, in this case that you outline, would be an 
overpayment to the client. There's no doubt about that. 
 
That would be considered an overpayment and it would not be 
. . . we just don't keep doing this, because we're supporting 
people to be independent. And again, the vast, vast, vast 
majority of cases we know, in fact we also provide a lot of rent 
in the name of the landlord and the client. Ten or eleven 
thousand of these cases, there's a joint cheque. 
 
So we've . . . see again this is one of the measures that we have 
taken to minimize the degree of overpayments and frauds in 
some ways that other provinces haven't done. So in the case you 
talk about, we wouldn't issue it again; and if we did, it  

would be an overpayment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 
official who's joined us here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce 
to the committee my deputy minister, Pat Youzwa, and a couple 
of others will be joining us and I'll introduce them as they come 
in. Seated directly behind me is Mr. Peter Phillips and to my 
right and behind, Mr. Bob Perrin. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister, 
and staff, it's good to see you here this evening. I think we'll just 
start out with an easy first few questions, Mr. Minister. It would 
have to do with your Partnership for Renewal, I believe it was 
called. And I'm just wondering how you're making out, if in fact 
you're on target? I don't have one of the documents here with 
me this evening but I do recall that you had some time lines that 
were associated with several parts of the Partnership for 
Renewal. And can you give us sort of a sketch of where it's at 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. The member asks, I think, an 
important question because Partnership for Renewal is a 
document that was really developed by government, by the 
Department of Economic Development, and by business . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can you send one across to me? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I can . . . cooperatives and working 
people. And it really goes back to a meeting in November of 
1992 at which time — or pardon me, a meeting in the spring of 
1992 really — where in Saskatoon the Premier, and myself, and 
a group of business people, along with a number of cabinet 
ministers, met and worked on a strategy for economic 
development. And we had people from various political 
backgrounds in a room for a couple of days discussing where 
we should go to try to solve the economic dilemma that really 
Saskatchewan was in at that time. 
 
And at the end of the meeting we came up with a mission 
statement which is basically: Saskatchewan in the year 2000 
will be a province where businesses, cooperatives, working 
people, government, and communities have worked together to 
lead the province towards prosperity and security. 
 
This then became the foundation or the basis for what became 
known as Partnership for Renewal. And we then set out three  



April 10, 1995 

 
1501 

main principles or three main goals that were agreed to. And 
they were to create a positive environment for economic 
renewal, because I think most people believe and know that 
creating the right atmosphere for economic development is key 
and fundamental. Secondly, to secure and build on existing 
strengths based on sustainable development. And we identified 
six key clusters for fast growth in the province and we are 
building around those fast growth areas. And then also to seek 
full employment. Those became the three main goals. 
 
In addition to that, we set out a number of objectives. And I'm 
not going to go through all of the objectives now, but just to say 
that out of that came 31 major, broad initiatives. And on those 
we are on target with all of them and we're in different stages, 
depending on which one of them you would want to look at. 
 
But the fact is, this was one of the first documents in Economic 
Development that actually tied dates for development of the 
programs and we are well on target to meeting all of them in the 
time lines that we set out for ourselves. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, hopefully you have 
one of those documents you could send across. I didn't . . . My 
understanding was that we weren't going to be sitting doing 
Economic Development tonight so I don't have the document 
with me. 
 
But if you could send that across, because I think part of the 
document dealt with your regional economic development 
authorities, REDAs. And what I would like to know is just how 
you're coming with the REDAs, how many of them are set up 
throughout the province . . . how many of them are set up 
around the province, what the time lines for having REDAs all 
throughout the province were? 
 
And if I remember, Mr. Minister, when you first set up the 
REDAs, that they weren't to be funded by government. And in 
fact I noticed in the newspaper — I don't know how many 
weeks ago now — that you had allowed a certain amount of 
funding to get REDAs established so . . . well I'll leave it at that. 
You could maybe answer as to some of the questions I've asked 
on the REDAs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes. If you were to flip in your 
document to page 16, you will see the item there to promote 
community-based solutions, and in the second column: 
 
 Introduce community-based Regional Economic 

Development Authorities to support community 
development by streamlining services and focusing 
support on regional strength and opportunities. 

 
You see the time lines, begin implementing authorities in April 
of 1993. At this time we have nine of them up and operating. 
We expect that 16 more will be established by the end of the 
year. So nine of them have completed all the work that goes 
into the implementation of a REDA. Sixteen are at various 
stages of development. A number of them will be announced in 
the next month or two, and by the end of 1995 we expect that  

the province will then be covered by the mandates of the 
economic development authority. 
 
The member from Maple Creek, who is also working with us 
here tonight in estimates, will be well aware of the REDA in 
south-west Saskatchewan because he has been at the opening of 
the REDA and involved in it. And they really are successful in 
those areas where the communities get together. But as the 
name would indicate, regional economic development 
authorities are basically the responsibility of the various 
regions. 
 
Some are up and running, doing very well, creating a lot of 
jobs. Others are slower, but these are not being driven by 
Regina. We go out, we facilitate, we move them along as 
quickly as they would like, but some are slower to develop than 
others for various reasons. Some are starting from a different 
position. Some had rather complicated economic development 
structures already and it made it easier for them to move to a 
REDA. But we expect by the end of the year to have announced 
all of the economic development authorities in the province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But by the end of this year, Mr. Minister, 
given the fact that your target date was April '93, so you're 
going to be two and a half years off your target date, are you 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If you read what it says . . . to begin 
implementing authorities, April of '93 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . To begin. And so we started in April, 1993 and 
we expect to have them completed by the end of 1995. And so 
we expected the whole process to start in 1993 and to be 
completed sometime this year, and we will expect to have them 
completed by that time. 
 
My deputy advises me we're not at 9, we're now at 10. And 
they're coming on a couple a month, one or two a month, and 
we expect to have the balance of the other 16 up and operating. 
 
But I say again you should really get involved in the concept 
because it's a great experience, and what you realize is that 
these . . . the amount of work that goes into the establishment is 
quite phenomenal. And I think to get a system like this up and 
running in two years is actually a major, major accomplishment 
for the communities to the extent . . . I think it's my 
understanding that one of the economic development 
authorities, the one in Prince Albert which was one of the first 
up, has had an invitation to go, and I believe it's to the 
Philippines, and use their expertise in forming a regional 
economic development, to actually help in that country's 
development of a similar kind of program. 
 
But I say again you shouldn't be critical of those areas that aren't 
up and running yet because there just is a terrific amount of 
work in some of those areas that has to be done before you can 
get a proper functioning REDA. And I think if it takes some of 
them a couple of months longer to get to that point, it probably 
is a couple of months that's well worth the time and effort. 



April 10, 1995 

 
1502 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, just to set the records 
straight: I wasn't being critical, I was only asking your time 
lines to having these not just to begin but to when we could 
expect . . . I guess you expect — what? — some 26 once they're 
all up and running to your satisfaction? Would that then cover 
the entire province? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It would. 
 
So can you tell me then how much money that is costing? In 
fact why it was that initially there wasn't going to be any 
money? Or there was start-up money and it was going to end, 
but now there is some money. Can you give us some idea what 
we're looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The concept when we started it was 
based on the idea — and here again this came from the 
communities — that they believed they would need some 
start-up money, and there was an allowance of $25,000 per 
REDA in the initial phase. 
 
But we listened very closely to the communities and they said, 
look don't make a commitment to any ongoing funding initially 
because if we can possibly make this work on our own, we will 
be that much stronger if we are independent from government 
funding. 
 
And we worked along with the associations, the REDAs, for a 
number of months. Some of them have now been up and 
operating since early in 1993. And those that have been up and 
operating say look, we can almost make it on our own but we 
need a small amount. And I think in this case, the exact amount 
per REDA has not been established. I'll just check on that. But 
what they're saying is for a very, very small amount of ongoing 
money they can basically raise the rest of the operating 
financing by themselves. 
 
So this funding that we are looking at setting in place as a result 
of this budget came as a result of those REDAs that are up and 
established saying to us, while we're trying as hard as we can  
the start-up money works to that point  but we need a small 
amount, only a small amount of ongoing funding. 
 
And therefore in the budget this is one of the few areas that 
actually saw extra money being spent because we see economic 
development as jobs, and jobs being one of the big priorities of 
the government, especially as it would relate to youth 
employment. And so this is why REDAs were, as I say, one of 
the areas that got a tiny bit of extra government attention. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, well what do you call a 
small amount of money? I'm not sure in the budget document 
exactly what line we're looking at as far as what monies you're 
committing to the REDA program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well when we finalize this and get 
it operating, it will be a cost share project where the monies that 
we put in will have to be matched by the local REDA. The 
amount for this year, for example, is going to be very, very 
small because as I say, we have 9 or 10 REDAs, 10 REDAs up 
and operating. And you have to go through all the initial  

establishment phase first before you're eligible for the ongoing 
funding. So a REDA that will be in the process of being set up 
— for example Moose Jaw might be one, where they are 
working on their project — we will not need the ongoing 
funding this year. 
 
So the amount of money for the coming fiscal year will be very 
small. And once they're up and operating, the amount will be on 
a cost share basis, dollar for dollar with what is being raised at 
the local level, up to a certain amount, and that will be capped 
at a certain level. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right. Well getting back to the actual 
figures, can you tell me where in the budget document I can 
spot the amount that REDAs are going to cost for this 
upcoming year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It will be under our estimates, 
under subvote 5. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So are these other 16 REDAs then, are 
they also going to get this $25,000 start-up? Is this the kind of 
money we're talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, each REDA will be eligible 
for the start-up program. And I say again, you can't leap-frog, 
you can't combine the two and get all of the money in the initial 
phase. You have to go through all of the steps that the original 
REDAs went through to get to the point of collecting your 
initial $25,000 start-up operating money. And then once you're 
up and operating, and you raise your own money, there'll be a 
matching portion that will come from the provincial 
government. In this year's budget, that money that's allocated 
for a matching portion is 378,000. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, now the RDCs (rural 
development corporation) that the REDAs were replacing, they 
were probably throughout most of the province on a lot smaller 
scale. But if these people that are out there working on these 
community projects or regional projects were given their 
options and their choices, do you have quite a few that are 
telling you they would far sooner be into an RDC rather than 
into a REDA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Some areas where they had existing 
RDCs are continuing their RDCs and it's perfectly all right. 
There's no mandatory situation where one would have to get rid 
of the RDC in order to set up a REDA, so they're not at odds 
with one another. A number of areas though are choosing to 
wrap them together — several RDCs into a regional economic 
development authority — but others are taking a different route 
where they're maintaining both over a given period of time. So 
we're leaving that totally optional to the communities. So there 
never is sort of a butting of heads where you're saying which 
one is better or should we compete with one another. We leave 
it up to the local areas and they're basically allowed to put it 
together, or to amalgamate, or to leave them both as 
free-standing entities. 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1503 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, a lot of the reason why these 
RDCs aren't in fact going to be around in the way that they were 
previous is because the government doesn't fund them any 
longer. Now I've had a number of people that have raised some 
of the concerns with me, that in fact they'd far sooner have an 
RDC, but the very fact that they would have to do all the 
funding themselves and there was no government support led 
them into being involved in the REDA if they were going to be 
involved in an economic development project at all. In fact a lot 
of the concerns that have been raised are probably ones where 
they now . . . the REDA now takes in so many different trading 
areas, it's become such a huge monstrosity of an economic or a 
regional development board that they say it's virtually 
unworkable. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now I could see it if it were in the Regina or Saskatoon 
perhaps, where you have, you know, a lot of other boards: your 
educational boards and your hospital boards and all other 
governing jurisdictions within that same geographical centre 
and where you had coterminous boundaries so to speak. Then I 
could see perhaps the REDA working a lot better. 
 
But when I take a look at the REDA . . . and I'm not being 
critical. I'm just curious as to how the REDA in the south-west 
. . . Perhaps if you're a member or a participant of the REDA, 
and say you're from Eastend or Frontier or Climax or a 
community like that, how is the REDA really going to help you 
if in fact you're working on a project within the REDA that, you 
know, includes the community of Leader within the same 
REDA? What do you hear on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I should say I feel a little 
inadequate answering this question when your colleague, the 
member from Maple Creek, is whispering in your ear because 
he lives right in the middle of it. But quite honestly, I have not 
had a lot of people complaining about the size. Now there may 
be those who would rather be in a different REDA, but these 
are not etched in stone, and we work with the communities. 
And if the community, for example if you say Leader, would 
rather be in a different economic development authority, that 
would certainly be looked at. 
 
One thing about this concept is there is no preconceived idea as 
to where the boundaries should be, and if in the initial phases a 
community would rather be with another economic 
development authority, in Regina we don't go out and force 
them into one REDA or another. 
 
And so what I wanted to say to the member opposite is that I 
have not had a lot of complaints about the size. I speak to 
organizations of REDAs. As recently as a couple of weeks ago, 
we had all of the established REDAs and a number of those 
working at a meeting here in Regina. And while there were 
questions raised about the new funding formula, how it would 
apply, who would be eligible, those kinds of things, I think the 
concept in a very general way is massively supported by the 
rural communities. 

Now that's not to say that there won't be problems as there will 
be with any new endeavour. And going back to 1981 when I 
was the minister of Social Services and we were establishing 
the home care program — just by comparison  at that time we 
were rolling together probably 400 different boards, existing 
boards, meals to wheels, transportation, various home help 
organizations throughout the province — 400 boards, 400 bank 
accounts, and we rolled them into 45 district home care boards. 
 
This by comparison is very, very, I would say, easy to 
accomplish by comparison to what we were done with 
establishing the home care program back in 1981. So the 
concept of community partnerships in Saskatchewan is not a 
new one or one that our department people have to learn, 
because there's a great deal of experience in government in this 
whole area of amalgamating and doing partnerships. 
 
I say again that's not to say that there aren't people who are 
concerned or would like to see things differently. But overall, as 
minister responsible since the inception of this program, I find 
it to be a very, very — enjoyable is not the right word — but a 
very productive exercise and one that is very, very much driven 
by the local people especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I know that the RDC that is 
in Shaunavon — what is it? The Frenchman River Valley RDC 
— they are a very proactive group. They had an economic 
development officer under their employ from . . . I guess he 
lives in the community of Eastend. And they actively went after 
a lot of projects because I think they were able to operate on, 
well sort of economy of scale where they knew that the . . . you 
know the geographical size of the RDC was still a size that they 
could all work together for a common goal. 
 
But when you're now talking about REDAs that are the size of 
these God-forsaken health care districts or larger, I keep hearing 
how this is a lot . . . or is often unable to work just because of 
the sheer size. It doesn't matter if we're talking tourism projects. 
I mean, the tourism, if you're in Leader, Saskatchewan versus 
Climax, what projects would they be working on that would 
have any overlap at all? 
 
Now I'm just wondering, is this something you find all around 
the province, where in fact there's many people that would be 
involved in the REDA because they don't have a lot of . . . they 
don't see a lot of options or other choices. They either have to 
stay in the RDC themselves, fund it themselves, have no 
support — I don't think they would have any support from the 
government, even though they're funding it themselves, would 
they? — but in fact being forced into the REDA. 
 
So what I'm hearing a lot of is the fact that they had to get into 
this program but they don't see a lot of benefit from it. I mean 
can you give us a list of projects that the REDAs themselves 
would have brought into their areas? Do you have that 
breakdown of each REDA in the province and the projects that 
they brought in, which would in fact be outside of the projects 
which would normally move to those communities? 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1504 

I don't want to be critical of the REDAs, but I don't want you, 
Mr. Minister, to also take credit for every job that's ever been 
created in this province by your Economic Development 
minister. 
 
So if you have that breakdown and in fact if you can give us 
some idea, I guess, of the REDA versus RDC as far as being 
actively able to draw business and development projects to their 
area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just so the member is clear on the 
size. If you look at the tourism districts — and these are the 
districts that manage the tourism for the province — down in 
your area the Horseshoe tourism district is one of nine districts 
in the province. 
 
So the province doesn't have 25 different districts, as we do 
with economic development authorities; they have chosen to do 
nine. In Alberta they have even fewer tourism districts; I think 
there's seven. 
 
And so the size isn't nearly as important as the cohesiveness of 
the partnership that exists. And in the south-west area, which is 
the one that I know the best, there's actually a very, very good 
working relationship, for example, between the Horseshoe 
Tourism Authority and the Southwest Economic Development 
Authority, and they work hand in hand. 
 
And if you look at the Eastend group, for example, you will 
find that the REDA works with the tourism authority and they 
actually are managing to get a lot of things done. And the other 
REDAs that I just want to mention, the Entrepreneurs 2000 
REDA which is Rosetown and Elrose  you asked about how 
many businesses and jobs. These are . . . by their numbers, 
indicates that they have assisted the establishment of 35 
business and created 77 jobs. 
 
The Prince Alberta REDA, Mark Hislop who is very much 
involved in that operation, they indicate that they had assisted in 
starting 23 businesses, expanding 18, maintaining 7 businesses. 
And in 1994 the REDA assisted in the creation of 40 jobs and 
maintaining 43, and the list goes on. 
 
And so the point that you're making about us taking credit, it's 
exactly the reverse of that. We are saying local people working 
together are creating jobs, stimulating business by the economic 
development authority, not only attracting business or creating 
jobs but also acting as a sounding-board for business people 
who want to have some place to come and float ideas. 
 
We also know that the REDAs is a different concept than 
RDCs, RDCs of course being basically municipal government 
with no involvement from the chambers of commerce. And 
what we're hearing from business people, that actually that 
inclusion of the business organizations in the REDA concept 
has taken us another step beyond where the RDCs were. And 
here I'm not being critical in the least of the previous 
administration and the RDCs because the RDCs really, in many 
cases, were the building-block on which the REDA concept is  

based. 
 
And so what I would urge you to take is not an adversarial 
approach where you try to nit-pick and take apart or find 
problems, but follow the example of the member from Maple 
Creek who has been very supportive. And we've sat and had a 
number of discussions about the REDA concept and he has 
actually come to many of the meetings and takes part and is 
very much involved and doesn't sit on the sidelines and snipe. 
Because I think the worst thing to an economy is where you 
have an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) that, 
rather than get involved in the mainstream, simply sits and 
waits until something goes a little bit wrong and then attacks 
and attacks and attacks. Because what you'll find in those cases, 
while it may be politically popular to do that, the communities 
suffer a great deal because they end up being divided, business 
against business, family against family. And before you know 
it, you've got bedlam. 
 
And I compare, for example, your constituency which you 
represent and which you're running in now, and I see many 
communities that I believe are odds with one another because of 
the adversarial approach of pitting one person against another 
or one group against another. 
 
And if you compare that to the Cypress constituency where you 
have a different MLA who works in conjunction with 
community groups, you'll find that there are communities there 
that are . . . Go to Leader. Go to Eastend. Go to Maple Creek. It 
is not by accident that those communities are cohesive and 
working together. And I say to you that you have a 
responsibility. 
 
For example in a town like Ponteix which is very, very divided, 
and I would say as a result of your meddling personally in the 
politics of that community, that you should take an example, 
that you should take an example from the member from Maple 
Creek who works cooperatively with the communities as 
opposed to trying for political reasons to pit one group against 
the other. And you would find that it actually works much 
better. And we find in Economic Development that where we 
can form partnerships and communities work together, that 
actually the results are very, very much better. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thanks, Mr. Minister. That was a bit 
of a humorous little speech. But you did mention that there 
were several communities that were — and members of those 
communities — that were at odds with one another. Could you 
table a list of those communities and what they had odds with 
one another over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think the member opposite 
would know that his area is one of the areas, for example, that 
is having the most problem with health care, had the most 
problems with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). And 
the main reason that you're having all those problems down in 
that area, just in your little area, is because of the role of the 
MLA which is one of being a bit of a rabble-rouser and going 
around and, for political reasons, stirring things up. 



April 10, 1995 

 
1505 

And I say again, it's not by accident that in Eastend, for 
example, where their hospital has been converted that there's 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's in my constituency. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, you spend all your time in your 
new constituency which does not include Eastend. But there the 
former member, Mr. Ted Gleim, who takes more the approach 
of the member from Maple Creek, has managed to heal any 
wounds that were in that community. And economically that 
community is doing very, very well. 
 
I say the same thing of Maple Creek and Leader. And I say you 
could use your influence, and I know being a new member that 
it will take you some time to catch up, but the actual fact is is 
that you could do yourself even a bigger political favour by 
acting as a leader to bring people together as opposed to split 
them up. 
 
And I say this legitimately and that you should actually try the 
other approach because it's much more satisfying. You'll get 
more economic development, and you simply won't have the 
heartache personally that you have by trying to pit people 
against one another for your own political betterment. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, this begs so many 
questions now because obviously you weren't interested in 
answering questions on REDAs and RDCs. You wanted to have 
some personal attacks. And I think that's very disappointing, the 
game that you're playing tonight. 
 
In fact what you are saying to these communities is that your 
government is willing to do things to those communities — pull 
out SaskPower offices, close down hospitals, gravel highways 
— do everything because of a member that you may think is a 
rabble-rouser or doesn't support some of your ludicrous ideas. 
 
Well I can see you smiling from your seat, and I think you now 
realize just that you jumped in with both feet there, and you 
wish probably now you hadn't. 
 
But in fact I just want to get back to some of the RDCs and 
REDAs for a moment. And then I'll make sure that we have 
enough time to have a personal debate that you're so anxious to 
get into tonight because it's you and people like your wife, the 
former minister of Health, that devastated those areas, and you 
are going to have to answer for it. And if you want to get into 
that tonight, that's fine. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, getting back to the RDCs for a moment, if 
there are some areas where the RDC is of such a size that they 
would like to become a REDA, would they be allowed to in fact 
do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, if they were to . . . 
 

The Chair: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If there was an RDC that wanted to 
change, to become a REDA, and they went through the policy 
development, that is, including the other business organizations, 
and went through all the structural changes that were needed, it 
would be possible for them to make the transfer relatively in a 
painless manner. 
 
And I say again though, that there are different criteria for 
REDA than there are for an RDC. I say again, an RDC was 
basically a grouping of municipal government — not officials, 
but representatives who work together to better the economic 
development in their area. 
 
REDA's taken a fairly major step past that to include the 
business people, business organizations in the communities as 
well. But if you had an RDC of a certain magnitude that 
included all of the necessary criteria, I say again it would be a 
relatively painless effort for them to make the transition. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, and I raise this from the 
RDC point of view, for the one being in the south-west, 
because that RDC was the largest in the province, I understand. 
And in fact if what was required to bring in a business element 
to it all was just to make some minor changes to the RDC, did 
then they have to get so large as to expand into a REDA which 
really has decentralized so much in the south-west. And I . . . 
granted there's going to be some projects  regardless of how 
large the Authority gets  there are going to be some projects 
that get supported by one means or another. 
 
But in fact it was raised by a few people just in the past few 
days, this RDC already being of such a size and a workable 
RDC — they seem to be a very proactive group. I know that 
they're in the paper every week searching for projects. And I 
just find it strange that they couldn't have been helped along, in 
fact not being made to be even that much larger, but in fact 
rolled some of these RDCs into a smaller REDA if they seem to 
be working. 
 
Now, I notice that there's Community Futures, I think that's the 
federal. Now is there still some movement towards, for lack of 
a better word, amalgamating the REDAs and the Community 
Futures? I guess you're not amalgamating; it's more of a joint 
venture type of affair. Is this still happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It's interesting the member raises 
the issue of the amalgamation of Community Futures and 
REDAs because this is something the federal minister Mr. 
Axworthy and I have had a number of discussions about here in 
Regina, as well as in Winnipeg, and at various meetings that 
we've attended together. But the member will know that, for 
example, our business office in Saskatoon was recently 
amalgamated with the federal government's business office and 
we now have a co-location in Saskatoon which is working very, 
very well. And there actually is within economic development a 
very good working relation between our counterparts in Ottawa 
and Saskatchewan Economic Development. 



April 10, 1995 

 
1506 

And this is also why in the south-west we would very much like 
to keep the . . . because it really is a model of what we can do 
working together between the federal government and the 
provincial government. The Community Futures boundaries are 
virtually coterminous with the new REDA boundaries. And we 
are working on now a pilot project which would actually see an 
amalgamation — and I believe the first one in western Canada 
— right in your own area where the REDA and Community 
Futures would amalgamate. 
 
And I would ask the member, it might be possible for he and I 
and the member for Maple Creek to sit down and begin 
working with Mr. Axworthy about how we keep this as a 
cohesive unit, because the RDCs in that area I think would 
stand to lose if they began fragmenting and working away from 
what was, I think, a very good process where all of them were 
involved in the negotiations, funding, and setting up the — and 
I say again — the very good working system in south-west 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But the fact is, I think, we have a big opportunity, set an 
example for the rest of the country right down with Shaunavon, 
Swift Current, Maple Creek, being the basis for a new, exciting 
system where the federal government and provincial 
government would amalgamate their resources to build what we 
could have as an example for the rest of the country. 
 
And so I would just urge the member to work with us and to 
work with the member from Maple Creek to put together the 
kind of system that Mr. Axworthy and myself have been 
working on for some months. 
 
And not to go back to restate anything that I have said, but I 
think there's an opportunity for you to be a real leader and a bit 
of a hero. And I'm not saying this because I want to help the 
Liberals or I want to help the Conservatives in Maple Creek. 
But I think there is an opportunity for us to work together, a 
tri-party group of Conservatives, the member from Maple 
Creek; yourself as a Liberal; myself as a New Democrat 
minister. And I'd make the commitment to sit with you at any 
time at any place down in the south-west to see what we could 
do to work out the actual funding arrangements between the 
provincial and federal government, and develop a program that 
we could take the REDAs past the stage they're now at, to be 
actually a federal-provincial jointly funded, jointly 
administrated local economic development entity. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While you were 
talking, I got the nod from the member from Maple Creek that 
he would be more than willing to sit down with myself and 
yourself and have this meeting in the very near future. That we 
can accommodate. 
 
But don't miss my point here, what I'm getting, Mr. Minister. As 
far as the amalgamation or the working jointly with the federal 
government, I think that's great. I'll commend you on what you 
were trying to achieve in that sense. 
 
What I do have concerns about is whether we're losing some  

more local drive, which the RDCs I think — at least the ones 
I'm aware of — had, and now to go to a larger picture and 
perhaps to larger-picture projects, maybe that's great. In fact you 
probably need that, working in conjunction with the federal 
government, to make some of this come about. 
 
But I do have concerns that we're losing some of the more 
locally driven projects that wouldn't need to be having 
authorities as large as REDAs to make them workable. In fact 
now that we don't have funding for that RDC, I'm unsure of the 
life of it or how long it's going to be around there for. But I 
think in the end it will be something that will be missed, 
because I just do think that we can end up getting too large with 
some projects. 
 
And I know what some are raising. I don't know if it's legit or 
not, but in fact people are of the fear that it's moving more 
towards a county system. And I don't know if that's what the 
government is wanting to do. Perhaps it's only because there 
were so many things that come around, like the Scharf-Langlois 
report on education, the larger health care districts, now 
REDAs. It just seems like bigger is somehow better in the 
minds of the present government. 
 
And I'm not sure that's where the local people's minds are 
always at. Not to rule out that REDAs can play a role or will 
play a role, I'm just saying that there's this fear out there that 
we're losing some local control. What do you feel about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think there's . . . actually 
when it comes to control, control is really having economic 
development, because without jobs and without some plan for 
the future of your community, you don't have control. 
 
And what REDAs have been able to do, I think, is for the first 
time is . . . and I say again, give credit to the RDCs because they 
really have done a lot of work in the province. But really those 
communities that have REDAs established actually have much 
more control over their economic development than they had 
before. 
 
So what I would urge the member to do is really seriously look 
at working with us on trying to create this new system: 
federal-provincial-local development called the REDA which 
the federal government is . . . Your counterparts in Ottawa are 
very interested in doing a pilot project in that exact area. 
 
And to that end, I really would like to be able to send off to Mr. 
Axworthy tomorrow a letter which would say look, we have an 
agreement of the MLAs in the area who are also now interested 
in cooperating, because it would be very helpful. And I'm 
serious about this because this is a big opportunity to put a 
stamp on something that you could help create. 
 
And I would be more than willing to give the credit to the two 
MLAs from south-west Saskatchewan for taking a major 
leadership role in this. And I mean Mr. Axworthy, when he 
comes and is involved in the official opening — if we ever get 
it to that point — he should take credit as well. But the most  



April 10, 1995 

 
1507 

credit should actually go to the local people who have led the 
way, once again, in south-west Saskatchewan, as they did back 
in 1946, I believe, when the first health region was set up in the 
Swift Current area. That was not at the time government driven. 
It was driven by the local people in south-west Saskatchewan. 
When they got together after the tough times of the Depression 
to actually . . . or during the tough times. I guess it actually 
happened before that, when they formed health region no. 1 in 
order to hire a doctor to take care of some of their health needs. 
 
I say again that I think you as an MLA, the member from Maple 
Creek, have an opportunity here to work with us, to work with 
the federal government. And I say again, try not to fall into the 
trap of trying to hive off an RDC and go to meetings and . . . 
Because you can always do that. Anybody can go out and make 
people angry and get people upset. But it takes a real leader to 
go out there and get people to cooperate together for a common 
goal and a common good. 
 
And I think there is an opportunity for both of us, for all of us, 
to work together in that region to create more economic 
development than what we presently have. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, were you going to provide a 
list of those projects I'd asked initially, as far as which REDAs 
have which projects and what the stage of those projects are? 
And if you could, I guess, give us a comparison as to in those 
same areas the RDCs that there were then and in fact the types 
of projects that they themselves had been working on. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I thought I had given the member 
some examples of REDAs. I'll get it for you as best I can, 
although as you know some have been up and running for 
years; some have just been announced in the last month and so 
obviously those would just be getting under way. But what I 
will commit to do is put together a package that will show you 
some examples of business projects that people have worked 
on. 
 
Saskatoon Economic Development Authority, for example, 
were involved in attracting the Cargill crushing plant and it falls 
within the mandate of that economic development authority, 
and Mr. John Hyshka, who now heads up and is the director of 
that operation, was very helpful in putting together the program 
for the Cargill crushing plant. And so that's one of example that 
you'll be well aware of because it got a lot of media attention. 
 
But there are many, many others and I'll try to compile a list as 
complete as I can of projects, but knowing full well that we 
don't keep all these records in our office; they are basically 
locally controlled and kept track of, but we will try to compile a 
list so that I can feed that to you. 
 
In the south-west area there are actually a number of projects, 
both in the area of tourism and economic development, that 
you'll be well aware of. For example, in tourism you'll know 
that the whole Scotty, T-Rex project that some of our mutual  

friends in the Eastend area have been involved in, have now led 
to the production of a full length, feature length IMAX 
production — probably 2 or $3 million dollars being spent in 
the local economy of Eastend as a result of an aggressive local 
group who got on the bandwagon and through the Tourism 
Authority and with the cooperation of the REDA have landed 
that project. 
 
Who knows how many jobs that will lead to and the great 
profile it gives to the entire province, not only to the Eastend 
area, but this IMAX production will appear in over 100 . . . on 
100 screens around the world and the run of an IMAX 
production is 10 years. And all of these endeavours will have 
the Saskatchewan involvement and the Tourism Authority's 
involvement. 
 
And so the ability of that group working together to identify a 
niche tourism, a very unique tourism opportunity, has led very 
directly to many, many jobs being created not only for a short 
period of time but we believe for the coming years. 
 
So that's just one example, but I'll try to compile a list of where 
communities working together have actually done a much better 
job by having communities amalgamated into a working unit as 
opposed to the idea of this community isolated, doing their 
thing; this community over there isolated, doing their own 
thing. There seems to be a belief in rural Saskatchewan now 
that in order to compete at the world level, you have to have a 
certain mass of people, of investment, in order to make yourself 
competitive at the provincial, national, and international level. 
 
What is the magical number? This is very much left up to those 
local REDAs to work on and . . . but I think they all agree that 
there's a certain size. If you get below that, you just don't have 
the advantage of having an airport, of having a rail system, of 
having certain things that you need within that trading unit in 
order to make a REDA work for you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, on another note. A few 
months ago the member from Prince Albert Northcote, I believe 
it is, raised in Crown Corporations meeting there was going to 
be a fibreboard plant  I think it was called fibreboard  that 
he would be announcing the project probably to go ahead, 
couldn't do it at the time, couldn't do it at the time because of 
some financing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well obviously 
the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) is over there saying, it's a 
lie. I think it would be on your part because you're on Hansard 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — I thought I heard the member use 
unparliamentary language, and I'm not sure. If the member has 
used unparliamentary language of the kind that I thought I 
heard, then the member should stand up and retract that. If the 
member did not say that then we can always check the verbatim 
tomorrow. But if the member has, I give him an opportunity 
now to retract that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I think what I was saying 
was that the member from P.A. Northcote was heckling again  



April 10, 1995 

 
1508 

from his chair and hollering, liar. That's maybe where you heard 
this come . . . 
 
The Chair: — Now I gave the member an opportunity to retract 
that and I ask him to retract that unequivocally and do so now. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I guess then I will have to retract 
that, Mr. Chair. In fact this fibreboard plant . . . 
 
The Chair: — Now did I hear the member retract that, or that 
the member is not sure whether he's going to retract that? Now I 
asked the member to retract that unequivocally and to do so 
now without further debate, further discussion. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Yes, I retract that, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now if I could proceed without constant heckling and never 
having people brought under control. The fibre board . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Now the member is casting reflections on 
the Chair. I ask the member to discontinue and not to cast 
reflections on the Chair or decorum in this Chamber. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I don't want to cast any reflections upon 
the Chair, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The fibreboard plant, Mr. Minister, could you tell me if the 
plant is going to go ahead or was this perhaps somebody's 
dream at one time leading up into a campaign? Could you tell 
me in fact where this plant is today? And in fact is there is 
going to be one or if there isn't going to be one; who's going to 
be backing it, who's the financial backer? Is this something 
once again that SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation) is going to be involved in? 
 
And in fact there's a number of projects that we hear coming up 
in, I guess, in Crown Corporations and different committees 
that in fact never seem to come to fruition. But this one on the 
fibreboard really did stick out because there were so many of 
the officials that were in that meeting that day with the minister 
and they went on for some time talking about all the benefits of 
this fibreboard plant. 
 
In fact I think there was even some employment numbers and 
amount of money that would be invested and brought to the 
province at that time. And I'm not sure, Mr. Minister, is your 
department aware of this? I see your head shaking no, so I'm not 
sure of that. 
 
But I'm just wondering if the Department of Economic 
Development was ever made aware of some of the plans that 
the member from P.A. Northcote — or Northcott, or whatever it 
is — was referring to? Or in fact is this something that he and 
his department alone, perhaps outside the knowledge of the rest 
of the members of the government, were involved in? 
 
If in fact that's not the case, then it would be tougher for you to 
answer this because it would be up to the member from P.A.  

Northcote to try and ‘fess up, I guess, where it was that he was 
getting his facts and figures and some of the stories that he was 
coming forward with that day. But I do know that it's in 
Hansard regardless of what that member hollers from his seat at 
this point. It's in Hansard and I'm sure he took a half-hour to 45 
minutes explaining this plant. 
 
So what I would have to ask you is, if there is such a plant 
coming to Saskatchewan, if there was ever one considered 
coming to Saskatchewan, fibreboard plant, and in fact are there 
a number of other projects that are involved with probably more 
northern development or development of forest products, that 
perhaps the member from P.A. Northcote himself was 
completely off the wall and should have perhaps been talking 
about a different project. And I'm just trying to help him out 
here. I can see he would love to get up on his feet and speak to 
this but . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, if there's any projects that you could think of that 
this member could have even mistakenly been talking about 
because that's the only time I ever heard anything about it. 
 
Our concern, I think, would be, is, if that member is going to be 
announcing, for election purposes, things that were never going 
to come to this province, he's got to offload those costs onto 
your department. So that's where I think not only am I 
concerned and the taxpayers concerned, but you'd have to be 
concerned also, Mr. Minister, because being the minister in 
charge of SEDCO, the financial institution that was going to be 
wound down at some point, and in fact I'm not saying I believe 
this, but I keep hearing it out there that SEDCO stays afloat just 
for political purposes. Would this be a case in point, Mr. 
Minister, where in fact SEDCO would be revived perhaps for a 
more . . . to be used more as a political tool to sort of fulfil the 
hopes and dreams of the member from P.A. Northcote in some 
of the projects that he's going to be announcing? 
 
If not SEDCO, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Minister, then is it this new 
one, SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation)? Now I 
would like to have you answer that as far as whether it's SOCO, 
if not SEDCO, is going to be doing such projects and perhaps if 
you could give us a list of the projects even in the last . . . well 
in the past fiscal year of the projects that SEDCO had been 
looking at and SOCO, because I guess there was some overlap 
in that first year of operation. 
 
So if we could get some understanding as to what both of these 
corporations were looking at and in fact if either had ever been 
involved in some of the projects that the member from P.A. 
Northcote had announced in Crown Corporations. And I'm sure 
you'd oblige me by having some of your officials go through the 
Crown Corporation Hansard verbatim and see just what it was 
that that member was speaking on; because in fact I think it's 
just inappropriate if members for political reasons . . . because 
my sense is that you're unaware of these projects just by looking 
at you shaking your head no. 
 
So I mean at what point then — as people such as myself, as a 
representative of many taxpayers out there — at what point are  



April 10, 1995 

 
1509 

we able to reel some of these people in that are just completely 
off the wall and in fact maybe struggling with the truth at times 
as far as whether or not there's actually projects that are coming 
forward. And if in fact these kind of remarks are just used to 
win votes and to try and get themselves re-elected, Mr. 
Minister, how then does that actually reflect back on your 
department where in fact you perhaps have a number of 
business people that are in the province that — or perhaps 
investors that are outside the province — that would have to be 
looking at such projects in a more, well . . . through the eyes of 
perhaps having to make one of these projects work. 
 
Now if there was companies say that were interested in coming 
here and doing fibreboard plants but in fact caught wind of, you 
know, members like the member from P.A. Northcote doing 
this for political reasons . . . How would you feel, I guess, if 
you were a company wanting to come here with good 
intentions, putting your money up, perhaps putting your last 
dollar up to make sure that you're going to get into a business 
that is really and truly going to work, but in fact being afraid 
that once again the government of the day is going to get into 
some politics and in fact put everything that you're working for 
at a great deal of risk, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I'd be curious then to finding out just how it is that your 
department would handle such cases as that, and in fact if . . . I 
don't know if you're comfortable doing this, but in fact if there 
are other cases of other ministers or other MLAs that are going 
around making these announcements, you know, I know that 
you can't chastise them, but is it possible that you perhaps could 
publicize a list just so that the investors of the province would 
know which ones are, you know, more unlikely to proceed 
rather than likely to proceed. And in fact, you know, I think 
we've got to give some level of comfort to the investors that are 
coming into this province to know if in fact everything that this 
government's announcing in the last while is done for political 
reasons. So I give you a few things to answer, Mr. Minister, if 
you'd be so kind. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, when I conclude my 
remarks, I just, in consultation with the Opposition House 
Leader and my colleague who acts as House Leader for the 
Liberal caucus, we will report progress and call it a day. 
 
But before I do, I want to say to the member opposite that 
fibreboard is a very important product in a number of 
manufacturing processes in the world. And just so the member 
knows, that fibreboard is a replacement in many manufacturing 
processes where fibreglass has been used in the past. And for 
example, in Europe, in the manufacture of automobiles, there 
are a number of components that are now made of fibreboard 
versus fibreglass because the environmental problems with 
fibreglass are so important. 
 
Now what the member may be thinking of when he thinks about 
the fibreboard project is a project . . . I met with Cargill and a 
company called Fibre Form in Canora on Friday. And 

they have set up and are about to hopefully announce a pilot 
project in Canora that will use flax straw. And the process is 
taking flax straw and stripping off the exterior of it, and inside 
there's a very powerful filament. And from a ton of flax straw, 
you can achieve about a third of this material, and that material 
takes that flax product from $50 a tonne for raw flax straw to 
about $500 a tonne. 
 
And this project in Canora, which Cargill believes to be a 
viable project, they're in the process of arranging funding. They 
believe that a number of farmers in the area will be able to grow 
flax. 
 
And what has been to this point a nuisance straw, because it's 
very difficult to deal with because it doesn't break down easily, 
taking that straw, using a process that is being developed at 
PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) at the present 
time — and you'll know about the expansion of the project at 
PAMI, the announcement that the member from Humboldt 
made recently — they will then be able to use this flax straw to 
produce fibreboard. 
 
Now the member opposite may be confusing something the 
member from Prince Albert said with this proposed fibreboard 
at Canora. There seems to be a lot of confusion here in the 
Assembly tonight and it might be that he's mixing that story up 
with the fibreboard plant in Canora. 
 
Or it could be the REDA in Prince Albert is working on a 
hardboard, a process of using hardwood and processing it and 
actually doing hardwood production. This is a project that has 
been worked on by the REDA there, Mark Hislop and his 
group, for the past several months. 
 
So there's two things that the member opposite might be 
confusing here. It might be the hardwood plant that the REDA 
in Prince Albert is working on, or it might be the flax board 
project in Canora. And it would be easy for him to become 
confused because there are so many good projects being 
announced at the present time. 
 
And I don't want to bore the committee with all of them, but 
Cargill has announced a major project. CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) has announced 500 jobs in 
Regina to the point where CMHC (Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation) in their report on April 7 announced that 
Regina is bucking all the trends across Canada and actually 
huge housing starts are predicted for 1995 based on the many 
jobs that businesses are creating here in the city of Regina. 
 
And so I hope that has clarified for the member the particle 
board or the fibreboard plant that is being studied for Canora 
and the hardwood plant that is being worked on by the regional 
economic development authority in Prince Albert. 
 
But I hope I've been helpful here, and, Mr. Chairman, I would 
therefore like to ask the committee to rise and report progress 
and ask for leave to sit again. 
 



April 10, 1995 

 
1510 

The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Sitting Hours of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this is a motion that I 
have spoken to the opposition about, and the member from 
Shaunavon from the Liberal Party, but by leave of the Assembly 
I move, seconded by the member for P.A. Northcote: 
 
 That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, that when the 
Assembly adjourns on Thursday, April 13, 1995, it do 
stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 19, 1995. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:07 p.m. 
 
 


