






















































May 4, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 4, 1995 

 

 
1973 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to present petitions today on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This petition comes from the Carlyle, Alameda areas of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. Oxbow. I'd like to present it today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petition has been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 66 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Municipal Government: 

(1) what was the cost of sending Peter Hoffmann to the 
effective executive program at Waskesiu in 1993; (2) 
the names of all Municipal Government employees who 
participated in the effective executive program at 
Waskesiu in 1994; (3) what are all costs associated with 
these employees attending the seminar; (4) what are the 
names of all Municipal Government employees who 
have enrolled in this seminar for the current year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure today to rise and to introduce special guests in 
your gallery. These guests are former members of the Cafeteria 
Board, which is celebrating its 50th anniversary today. 
 
In May 1945, Premier Tommy Douglas asked the civil service 
to assume responsibility from the Dome Cafeteria in the  

Legislative Building, and at that time, it was the Minister of 
Public Works who was responsible. Now as the Minister of 
Sask Property Management, I am responsible. 
 
So I would like to introduce, Mr. Speaker, some of the past 
board members. If they could stand when I mention their name: 
Ray Fenwick, Jim MacLeod, David Zawislak, Yvonne Duncan, 
Shirley Sebastian, May McPhee, John Yeomans, Nick Rudrick, 
John McLaughlin, and Alice Hehn. 
 
Thank you very much, and I'll introduce a separate group in a 
minute. Could you join me in welcoming these folks? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Also present today are former 
treasurers and auditors of the Cafeteria Board: Ken Arndt, Dave 
Bemént, and Ted Watt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I would like to make also a special 
introduction for Mary Rocan. Is Mary in the audience here? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I'll just mention that Mary began 
her career in the public service in 1938 in the Department of 
Municipal Affairs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege for me to introduce Mary 
Rocan and the rest of the Cafeteria Board members to the 
Legislative Assembly. And thanks again for helping me 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the legislature, 56 
students in your east gallery from McLurg School in my 
constituency. They are accompanied by their teachers, Verna 
Taylor and Carol Grant, as well as parent chaperons Mrs. Wood 
and Mrs. Long. 
 
We will be meeting at 2:30 for a visit and refreshments and 
photos, and I look forward to that meeting. I ask all members of 
the legislature to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, Gerry 
and Kay Adams who are seated in your gallery in the front row. 
They are constituents of mine. As well they are the parents of 
Rhonda Adams, who's a page in our legislature, and they're here 
to observe Rhonda at work today. And I know all members will 
want to join with me in welcoming Mr. and Mrs. Adams and 
wishing them a very pleasant stay here in the city of Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 4, 1995 

 
1974 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon University 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, Sutherland-University. I too 
would like to welcome the Adamses to the legislature today. 
They're old-time friends. And I don't think we need to say that 
Rhonda is doing an excellent job; you knew that she would. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you seven women sitting in the west gallery. Aina 
Kagis is the coordinator of the Pay Equity Coalition of 
Saskatchewan. And she's accompanied by six other women who 
also care very deeply about this issue. I was privileged this 
morning to be able to meet with them to discuss this important 
matter. 
 
And I would ask members to welcome them to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd also like to 
welcome the women who are here today from the Pay Equity 
Coalition and thank them for taking the time to come to the 
legislature and meet with various elected members and 
educating people on the importance of pay equity. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Rolfes: — I hope the members will allow the 
Speaker to make a special introduction today. I would like to 
introduce somebody that was very special in my life — and she 
still is very special in my life — back in the 1970s. She had the 
onerous task of guiding a rookie cabinet minister through those 
early days when you get an appointment and you really don't 
know what it's all about. 
 
Of course I'm referring to a person who not only served in the 
Blakeney government, but served in the Tommy Douglas 
government and in the Ross Thatcher government. Today it's 
my very, very deep pleasure to introduce to you, Blanche Green, 
who I see seated in the Speaker's gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

50th Anniversary of Dome Cafeteria 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As our minister has 
mentioned earlier, today commemorates the 50th anniversary of 
the Cafeteria Board. I know I speak for all of us when I say we 
want to congratulate and to thank them for the many years of 
service to this Assembly. 
 
This afternoon, Mary Rocan, one of the founding members, will  

be recognized. And we have with us many of the past members 
of the Cafeteria Board. 
 
It was in May 1945 Premier T.C. Douglas asked the civil 
service association to assume responsibility for the Dome 
Cafeteria. An order in council was passed on August 23, 1945. 
The cafeteria since then has been remodelled two or three times. 
In 1945 patrons were seated around tables covered with white 
linen tablecloths; waitresses provided the table service. There 
were few coffee pots in the building and so the cafeteria was 
the place to meet. 
 
Some things don't change. In our busy lives the sustenance and 
accommodation provided is sometimes the only part of our day 
that we have time to rest and to refuel. 
 
The cafeteria reminds us that Saskatchewan people enjoy 
gathering around the table for a coffee and for political debate. 
For us it is a place to meet with friends for a visit, continue a 
political discussion with colleagues, or to find a solitary corner 
and reflect. There is one constant that you can rely upon and 
that is the smile you will receive when you're greeted by the 
staff of the Cafeteria Board. 
 
To the board and staff members, I want to congratulate them 
today on the commemoration of the 50th anniversary. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future Skills Programs 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the member 
from Swift Current described two Future Skills projects that are 
providing training to meet the needs of Saskatchewan industries 
for skilled workers. Training under the Future Skills program is 
tied to permanent jobs. 
 
One other fact about the Future Skills program worth noting is 
that its projects are targeted and economical, designed for 
specific jobs, whether the number be 3 or 53. 
 
Here is a sample of some of the projects. First, 37 trainees in 
North Battleford, Melfort, and Yorkton, including some from 
my constituency, are learning the safe use and application of 
farm chemicals, as well as equipment operation, environmental 
impact assessment. 
 
The North West Regional College, SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), and Monsanto 
Inc. are working with the Canadian association of agricultural 
retailers on this project. 
 
In Canora three workers are being trained in the use of 
high-tech weaving equipment used to manufacture equipment 
used in the trucking industry. The training institute is SIAST 
and the expanding industry is Eastern Air Supplies. 
 
And in Prince Albert 12 first nations candidates are undergoing  



May 4, 1995 

 
1975 

geographic information system literacy training, a computer 
technology used for storing information on natural resources. 
The project partners are the Prince Albert Model Forest 
Association and the Prince Albert Grand Council — more 
examples, Mr. Speaker, of confidence in our expanding 
economy. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Nursing Care Policy Manual 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I informed 
the Assembly about a pilot project involving the Twin Rivers 
Health District that will save money for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only is the health district demonstrating sound financial 
practices, but sound policy as well. A team of health 
professionals, headed by Sharon Dick, a nurse from Maidstone, 
has completed a universal policy and procedural manual for 
nursing care throughout the Twin Rivers Health District. 
 
When Twin Rivers formed, at times there were several different 
approaches to performing the same procedures within its 15 
member agencies. So it was decided that a policy manual would 
help alleviate the problem. This manual is a first in 
Saskatchewan, and it will be shared with other districts, so they 
can commit their resources and time to other projects that will 
benefit the province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cooperative effort in the Twin Rivers Health 
District is further proof that our health system is the forerunner 
in Canada, because of the commitment of these health care 
professionals and because of the commitment by our provincial 
government to ensure health care in Saskatchewan is the best 
that it can be. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribal Council Health Agreement 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have just heard 
about our government's commitment to health care from the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. I also have an example 
of how the cooperative spirit is enhancing health care. 
 
Yesterday Saskatchewan's hon. Health minister and the 
Touchwood-File Hills Qu'Appelle Tribal Council signed a 
bilateral accord creating a working relationship between the 
province and the 16 first nations of the tribal council to improve 
health care and wellness. This accord outlines the positions of 
the provincial government and the tribal council on several 
issues and establishes a health partnership task force to address 
them. 
 

It also establishes a joint capital planning committee on the Fort 
Qu'Appelle Indian Hospital. The hospital, which is a federal 
institution, is being transferred to the jurisdiction of the tribal 
council. Tribal council president, Perry Bellegarde, is quoted as 
saying: 
 
 Once the transfer is complete, we will be able to take 

our place in (the) Saskatchewan health care system, not 
just as consumers of the health services but as providers 
as well. 

 
This marks an important stage in self-determination for the first 
nations. 
 
I know that the tribal council, the district health board, and the 
levels of government involved, look forward to the completion 
of this modern health care facility which will replace the 
existing, ageing hospital in Fort Qu'Appelle. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fund-raiser for Chili for Children Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take this 
opportunity to recognize and congratulate a very hard-working 
individual in the constituency of Regina Elphinstone. Mr. 
Speaker, this individual, Theresa Stevenson — and she is also 
known everywhere else in Regina, I might remind you — has 
been working on a hot lunch program which has fed thousands 
of children since it started 10 years ago. It operates out of the 
Albert-Scott Community Centre and serves lunch to inner city 
children three times a week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow night we all have the opportunity to 
show our support for Theresa Stevenson and her work at the 
second annual Chili for Children fund-raising dinner. The 
dinner is being held at the Centre of the Arts and will feature 
chili and bannock. 
 
I want to say now that Mr. Speaker and I have arranged to stop 
the clock in the Assembly until tickets are sold, so we can see 
everyone at the function this Friday night. 
 
But seriously, Mr. Speaker, the guest speaker is Chief Blaine 
Flavel, chief of the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations), and there will be aboriginal performers throughout the 
evening. As well, there will be a silent auction of aboriginal 
artists, many of whom you can see in our First Nations Gallery 
here in the Legislative Building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a province of worthy causes, I know of no 
project more deserving of our support than the Chili for 
Children program. I urge all members to offer their support. 
And on behalf of the Assembly, I want to thank Theresa 
Stevenson and her staff for their tireless work. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 4, 1995 

 
1976 

Doghide River Festival 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two weeks ago 
I rose in the House and spoke about the plans for the Doghide 
River Festival that was to be held in Tisdale. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the Doghide River Festival has taken place and I had the great 
honour and delight to attend this event last weekend. 
 
New Orleans has its Mardi Gras, but I don't believe it can 
compare with Tisdale's Doghide River Festival. Let me tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, mere words are insufficient in describing what an 
outstanding event this truly was. The Friday night opening 
banquet and entertainment set the stage for a wonderfully 
unique and exciting cultural and art experience. And the truly 
marvellous thing about it — it was a total participation of the 
whole community. 
 
The guests to the opening night were all dressed up in early 
western costumes — the young children to the seniors. They all 
displayed great creativity in playing the part of the wild, wild 
west theme. The events in the following two days were an 
incredible array of local talent and ingenuity. 
 
The whole weekend was an incredible experience and speaks to 
the strong spirit that Tisdale people have, their commitment to 
their community, and their appreciation of the role that culture 
and arts play in making everybody's life better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Doghide River 
organizing committee of Hazel Wagner, Elaine LeStrat, Jim 
Weseen, Elaine Desrosiers, Wendy Weseen, Alice Hoffart, 
Grant Wilson, Carol Andrusiak, Mary Ann Vey, Joan 
Broughton, John Abbs, Jim Grant, John Scott, Nancy Carter, 
Barb Krowchenko, Dale Nippi, Bob and Brenda Campbell, 
Carol McPhee, Joyce McPhee, Tibbi Frazer, Marion Zagiel, 
Tracey Taylor, Marion Fargey, Maureen Doneld, Edna Oleksyn, 
Gwen Zimmer, Brenda Samida, Sandra Penner, and Verla Will. 
As you see, Mr. Speaker, there were many, many organizers and 
hundreds of volunteers in this wonderful event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for three 
and a half years the government hasn't listened to anything the 
opposition or anyone else has said in this House. I guess we've 
been going about it all the wrong way. All we had to do was 
make one campaign announcement, put one ad in the 
newspaper, and bang, the Deputy Premier takes our advice and 
caps his outrageous pension. And the Liberal leader says, me 
too, me too. 
 
You don't suppose there's an election coming, do you, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Minister, you didn't go far enough. Your obscene pension  

is just an appalling pension now. The Premier still stands to 
collect over $60,000 a year and over $70,000 a year if he's 
elected for one more term. That's still a higher pension than 
most people earn working in this province. Mr. Minister, will 
you go one step further? Will you reduce your pension cap to 
50 per cent, as we have suggested? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have been listening 
to some of the commentary by the members from the opposition 
of both parties who refer to this debate on the pensions taking 
place because it is prior to an election. And I'm glad that the 
Leader of the Official Opposition isn't falling into that kind of a 
mode here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reforms which we have introduced in this 
legislature . . . which will soon be introduced in this legislature, 
capped the pensions of the members of this legislature under 
the old plan at 70 per cent, the same as it is done in the public 
service, as for teachers, as done for the employees of the Crown 
corporations. That is fair, that a standard that has been tried and 
tested, and people recognize that. 
 
The reforms eliminate the allowance, the special allowance, 
introduced by a former Liberal premier to enhance his salary 
under the administration of Ross Thatcher. The reform prevents 
and expands the areas in which MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) who may be defeated or retire can no 
longer double-dip by becoming appointed as senators or 
become members of the House of Commons as is the case with 
a lot of Conservatives. 
 
This is a good reform, Mr. Speaker. It is fair; it meets the test of 
fairness; and we will stand by that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I ask the next question . . . or allow the 
next question, will the members please just calm down the 
interruptions on both sides. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I guess 
the minister doesn't want to roll his pension back too far, and 
it's pretty obvious why they wouldn't want to do that. If they roll 
it back too far they will not be able to use, will not be able to 
use, their campaign slogan: re-elect us — it's cheaper. 
 
The fact is the Premier, the Deputy Premier, and a handful of 
the front-bench NDP (New Democratic Party) cronies, stand to 
collect still an outrageously high pension, paid for by 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that fair to the people of Saskatchewan? Is it 
fair that you stand to collect a tax-funded pension that is still 
higher than most people earn in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 4, 1995 

 
1977 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 
answer the question by the desperate Leader of the Official 
Opposition. 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that what we have announced 
today is that pensions of members of this Assembly who are 
under the old defined benefits plan will be frozen at 70 per cent 
of the best average of the best four years of income, similar to 
what exists in the public service and other sectors in the 
economy, Mr. Speaker. I think that's fair. 
 
This legislation, Mr. Speaker — I know the members opposite 
will be unhappy with that — prevents double-dipping. If a 
member gets elected to the House of Commons, will not be able 
to collect an MLA's pension because he or she served in this 
Assembly. If a member gets appointed to the Senate, which I 
know the Liberal leader would like to be, and Mr. Berntson is, 
they will not be able to double-dip with the provincial pension 
plan. 
 
If a member becomes, after a defeat or a resignation, an 
employee of the provincial government, will not be able to 
double-dip. I think, Mr. Speaker, that's right. I think that's fair 
and I think the public of Saskatchewan thinks so as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question on a related topic — the outrageously high taxes that 
Saskatchewan people pay to pay for things like the Premier's 
pension. 
 
Last night I attended the PST (provincial sales tax) coalition 
meeting in North Battleford and listened to various business 
people talk about the devastating effect the PST is having on 
their businesses and their communities. But they also talked 
about possible solutions, something I haven't heard out of this 
government in three and a half years. 
 
People at the meeting discussed very realistic proposals to drop 
the PST by at least two points immediately in order to create 
more economic activity and jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister  to the Minister of Finance  when are you 
going to start developing solutions like the people at the 
meeting in North Battleford were doing last night? Why won't 
your government lower the PST? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take the 
question on behalf of the government to say that the objective 
of this government is to continue to work toward lower 
taxation. I want to remind the members opposite, the 
Conservative members opposite, that it was this government 
that provided the taxpayers of Saskatchewan a tax break of over 
$200 million when, three and a half years ago, we  

unharmonized the PST with the hated GST (goods and services 
tax). 
 
I might add that the Liberal leader wants to harmonize the 
federal GST with the PST and put that tax back on again. 
 
That is the biggest tax break in decades that was given to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. We want to work with 
the coalition and we want to work with any interested group in 
working to find workable means to continue tax relief. But 
when our tax relief is announced, it will be for ever, it'll be 
sustainable, it'll be permanent; it won't be at election time, made 
by desperate Conservatives or Liberals to try to get votes only. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, what the 
people of Saskatchewan remember about you is you said you 
would take off the PST effective midnight election night. That's 
what you promised them, Mr. Premier. You broke that promise 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the election campaign upcoming, they will remember that 
promise that you made to the people of Saskatchewan on 
election night during the last election campaign. They will 
never forget that, Mr. Premier, because you betrayed the people 
of Saskatchewan in what you said to them on that day. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, it's gotten a lot worse — it's gone 
from 7 to 9 per cent, even though you promised to take it off 
entirely. Mr. Premier, when are you going to start listening to 
the people like the people who were at that meeting in North 
Battleford last evening, and look for solutions on how to lower 
the PST in this province? When are you going to listen to the 
people of this province and do what they ask and lower the 
PST? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, we were elected in 1991 
precisely because we were listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan, who were telling us, take off that harmonization; 
restaurateurs who were saying, get that harmonization of the 
former PC (Progressive Conservative) administration off our 
backs. Children's clothing. They were saying, get that hated tax 
off our backs. 
 
They were saying the same thing with respect to reading books: 
take it off our backs. And we did. And it was a $200 million tax 
break for all the small-business people. 
 
When we assumed office, however, we didn't realize we had the 
largest per capita deficit in the history of this province and the 
largest per capita debt — still, in some circles, it is argued — as 
a result of the Tory expenditures. 
 
I say to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, the following. 
Our government is committed to lowering the taxes of this 
province and we have done so in selected and targeted ways,  



May 4, 1995 

 
1978 

allowing Cargills to come in and allowing economic 
developments to be announced. 
 
But I tell you, unlike the Conservatives and the Liberals, when 
we announce a tax cut — and we're going to announce tax cuts 
— they will be here, they'll be here permanent, they'll be fair, 
and they'll stimulate the economy. They won't be mere election 
campaign promises like the two of you are making. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Board Deficits 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
trust the Premier has the willingness to stand up and answer this 
question. 
 
In fact it seems, Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that we're 
looking towards answers from the Minister of Health, that I'm 
not sure if he's going to be able to answer them today. We've 
heard the Minister of Health just in the last few days accuse the 
opposition of providing misleading information  information 
that one has to wonder regarding the answer that was given just 
a moment ago from your office. 
 
But in fact, Mr. Premier, yesterday in the auditor's report we 
find that it wasn't the opposition giving misleading figures, but 
certainly who was the person misleading this Assembly? It was 
the Minister of Health. 
 
The Minister of Health told us, when we raised questions on 
Monday, that there were total deficits in the health boards of 
$15 million. And yet his own information showed it was 17 
million. But the reality, Mr. Premier, is the fact that the auditor 
pointed out yesterday the deficit is not 15 or 17, it's actually $30 
million — a $30 million mistake. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you misleading the Saskatchewan people 
about the size of the deficit in the district health boards, and 
will you apologize to the people of Saskatchewan for this 
deception? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is an issue which, 
very simply put, is as follows. The district health boards 
indicated in this report, referring to that year, and the 
government indicated there was a deficit of $15 million with 
respect to the district health boards. I think that's the number 
that's correct. The Minister of Finance will have the actual 
details in subsequent questions. 
 
At issue is whether or not $15 million more, which is capital 
expenditure of the district health boards, should be added as an 
operating debt or not. There are legitimate differences with 
respect to accountants on this issue, and the Provincial 
Auditor's view is that it should be. 
 
The important part, remember, is nobody's health is affected;  

the operations of the district health boards are not affected. And 
this is a suggestion of the Provincial Auditor which he makes 
on a number of areas which indicate his view to the reporting. 
 
We have a different view of reporting. We'll take his 
considerations under consideration and decide what to do in 
future reports. 
 
But let no one be mistaken about it. This is not a question of 
some sort of debt which was covered up. It's a question of 
whether or not the debt is to be reported with the capital plus 
the operating, or whether it's to be separated. And we took the 
latter approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Premier, and I'm sure the Minister of 
Health supported you on this. When you first took office in 
October of 1991, you took great glee in calculating the 
province’s accumulated debt. And that calculation included the 
Crown corporation debt. And at that time you invited a 
gentleman by the name of Donald Gass to take a commission 
and review the books. Maybe you should ask him to review the 
books today. 
 
In 1991 you included depreciation, and that was included, as 
the Provincial Auditor pointed out. But today what do we see? 
Today in this House you stand and say depreciation and capital 
replacement costs don't really count. Mr. Premier, you can't 
have it both ways. 
 
Why did capital replacement costs count back in 1992 but they 
don't count now when those depreciation costs make your 
figures look . . . and the truth really comes out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid that the 
members of the opposition wouldn't know the truth if it hit 
them smack in the face in the middle of daylight. So I don't 
think I need have the member from Moosomin tell this 
government about that aspect of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he says two aspects of this question. First of all, 
what is the accounting procedure? We implemented the Gass 
report which you criticized heavily the time that we did. You 
attacked it. You attacked the personnel; you undermined it. 
Now that report presumably and that person is rehabilitated in 
your eyes and that's acceptable. I say Gass identified the total 
sums of the deficit and the debt accurately. I said it then; I said 
it now. 
 
Now with respect to this special issue, I can only say what has 
been reported in the Leader-Post, which I think summarizes it 
more succinctly than I can do it. And that is as follows: 
 
 Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon says the difference 

is simply an accounting matter. 
 



May 4, 1995 

 
1979 

 "They're both right. It's just whether you want to put the 
capital in or not," she said. 

 
The story continues: 
 
 For his part, Strelioff (referring to the Provincial 

Auditor, the story says) Strelioff says "the complete 
picture is the more appropriate" and he'd like to see that 
information come before the legislative assembly. 

 
That's a question of whether or not it is more appropriate. It is 
not a question of whether or not the numbers have become 
covered up or not. They have not been covered up. That is a 
practice of the Tories and the Liberals; it's not a practice of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that interesting, that the 
member would talk . . . or the Premier would even have the 
audacity to stand up and talk about the complete picture and 
suggest that they are offering the complete picture. 
 
What did the auditor say? He basically said that the budget the 
government is presenting only represents 60 per cent of their 
activities — 60 per cent. I would question, is that the complete 
picture, Mr. Premier? 
 
Mr. Premier, the people don't have to believe me. They don't 
have to believe you. But I believe most people in this province 
would believe the Provincial Auditor. And I would ask you to 
follow the guidelines of the Provincial Auditor and present the 
complete picture. But, Mr. Minister, you continue to give us 
just a partial view of the expenditures. You only tell half the 
truths. Mr. Minister, people want to know where the $30 
million is. They want to know what it's going to cost them. Is it 
going to mean service cuts, bed closures, more hospital 
closures? Is rural health care going to be cut even further? 
 
Mr. Premier, why will you not admit today that you haven't 
been giving the people the total facts? That because you haven't 
been honest with the people of Saskatchewan, people 
throughout Saskatchewan are going to pay for the dishonesty 
that you have brought forward, and that the fact that we do have 
a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the member is 
going a little too far in his language that he uses in this House. 
Order, order. And I ask the member to please refrain from that 
kind of language. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Minister, your new improved system is $30 million in debt and 
that money has to come from somewhere. What further damage 
is this going to do to our health care system and what are you 
going to do to make up for the shortfall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I've already answered 
that question twice so I'm not going to repeat it a third time. The 
member can accept or reject the answer. But I do want to 
respond to two other aspects of the question which he had 
raised. 
 
He talks about cuts. It is his party that is advocating a 5 per cent 
cut, I believe, across the board in government. Tell the health 
boards about that. Tell the health people and the health care 
workers, tell the teachers, tell the trustees, about that. 
 
I believe the Liberal Party had an announcement today about 
what it would do if it gets elected. Amongst other things, it's 
going to implement something called the Texas Performance 
Review, which is scrupulously going to apply the test of 
efficiency to every program; and the words of the Liberals, 
quote: services to Texans were actually improved over this 
time. 
 
Tell that to the teachers, tell that to the health care workers, 
because under the theory of shrinking the size of the 
government she should tell us where those cuts are going to 
take place. She should tell us exactly where they're going to 
take place. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that if there is a question of legitimacy in 
this political process, it is one that the opposition parties have 
raised themselves. You can't cut taxes, you can't increase the 
expenditures, you can't balance the books, all at the same time 
and say that you're going to do it by having less government. 
Everybody says that if you believe that, there are bridges in 
Saskatoon that can be sold very, very cheaply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Board Decision Making 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
problems with district health boards continue, and in Melville 
the North Valley District Board is accused of breaking a legal 
agreement with its affiliate hospital, St. Peter's. The hospital 
board chairperson, Reverend Gaw, wrote the district board, and 
I quote: 
 
 The district has made announcements with no attempt to 

work within the affiliation agreement. The 
fine-sounding emphasis on teamwork and cooperation 
has taken on a hollow and discordant tone. This 
roughshod approach to decision making has created 
what may well be irreparable damage to the ongoing 
relationship between St. Peter's board and the North 
Valley board. 

 
My question to the Minister of Health or his designate, are you 
aware . . . in fact is the government, anyone in government, 
aware that St. Peter's hospital board is considering legal action 
for breaching the terms of their affiliate agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will examine the . . .  



May 4, 1995 

 
1980 

I'm not taking notice of the question except to say that there'll 
be further details into this that the department will examine. 
There's no doubt about this, and I'll ask the minister to do so. 
 
But I want to remind the members of the House that this 
question, coming from the Liberal leader today, needs to be 
looked at very, very carefully before it can be given a complete 
and full answer because yesterday, the Leader of the Liberal 
Party accused all the people of Saskatchewan, in effect 
slandered all the people of Saskatchewan, by saying we had the 
lowest GDP (gross domestic product) per capita of any province 
in the country. 
 
The truth of the matter is, under Statistics Canada and the 
Conference Board of Canada, that is not the case. We are about 
fourth, third or fourth, in the best record ever. An absolutely, 
blatantly, misleading fact. And that's not once only. Anybody 
can make a mistake; I've made my fair share for sure. But this 
happens every day, every day, with the Leader of the Liberal 
Party. You know what I think she should do? I think she should 
apply the Texas Performance Review test to herself before she 
asks a question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, it is precisely this 
unwillingness on the part of this government to take 
responsibility for its actions in health care reform that has Dr. 
Jim Melenchuk, who was president of the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association until Sunday, who is one of the more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have asked members before, 
but the member from Saskatoon Wildwood just thinks that she 
can just yell right across the floor at any time, and I ask her to 
please refrain from doing so. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — I was indicating that the immediate 
past-president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association is now 
running as a nominated candidate for us, and one of the reasons 
why is because of the total unwillingness of this government to 
acknowledge what it's doing to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since July 15 in 1994, St. Peter's Catholic Hospital 
board had a legal, binding agreement which guaranteed them 
specific jurisdiction over the management of their health care 
facilities. The district board has taken action to create new 
administrative positions, cutting funding from St. Peter's and 
other affiliate hospitals to pay for brand-new personnel, and left 
the boards in a position where they are going to have to let 
some of their own personnel, with many, many years of 
experience, to let go of them. 
 
My question to, obviously I guess the Premier: sir, how do you 
justify a health care plan that ignores legal agreements  yet 
again  replaces experienced administrators with untested 
personnel; and thirdly, overrides commitments that guaranteed 
control over administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again we'll have to take  

a careful examination of what the Leader of the Liberal Party 
says in this regard. 
 
But I want to say this, and I wonder whether her candidate — I 
don't know where it is in Saskatoon that he's running — knows 
that you are campaigning on something called the efficiency 
audits. This is what you are going to apply to every district 
health board, are efficiency audits, the Texas performance 
efficiency audits procedure. 
 
But according to your paper, it says, quote: 
 
 . . . the Texas performance review, a team of 102 

auditors who scrupulously examined and re-examined 
195 state programs and agencies . . . And by testing 
every program against the strict demands of efficiency (I 
wonder what the good doctor thinks about that) services 
to Texans were actually improved over this time. 

 
Services to Texans were actually improved over this time. 
Really? Ask the Texans about how their health care system is; 
ask the good doctor that's running for you how his approach to 
the Texas health system is; ask the people of Saskatchewan how 
they support your plan to Americanize the health care system in 
Saskatchewan. And we'll find out in this next election 
campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I can only assume that the 
Premier of this province is not the least bit interested in the 
North Valley District Board that has a $900,000 deficit and is 
hiring more in administration and passing on the costs to the 
Catholic affiliate hospitals. If he doesn't know what's going on 
and isn't concerned, I shall table today the letter from the chair 
of the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the St. Peter's Hospital board is a model of 
community cooperation. For years they've worked together with 
St. Paul's Nursing Home and home care to provide top quality 
service, making physical, spiritual, and emotional well-being of 
staff and patients and families their number one priority. 
They're proud of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier today: since the district board 
decisions will increase, sir — not decrease — will increase 
overall administration, will diminish management experience in 
the hospitals, where it is vital, and will actually contravene legal 
agreement, which we know how much respect you've had for 
that in the past, what, sir, are you going to do about the actions 
of the North Valley District Board who ultimately acts on the 
authority from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. 
member what we will not do. We will not implement the Texas 
Performance Review board to go into North Valley to examine 
how the efficiency and how the agreements run. No, no, the 
Liberal leader shakes her head at me. 
 



May 4, 1995 

 
1981 

This is your campaign platform, right? Efficiency audits. You're 
going to have less government, but you're going to hire 102 
auditors by following the Texas review performance model, and 
presumably you're going to say to the district health program 
and the district health program that we implemented, here you 
go, ladies and gentlemen, here you go North Valley, the Texas 
audit system is going to apply to you. 
 
That's your approach. Or are you rejecting it? I invite you to go 
outside and tell the media that the Texas audit approach isn't 
going to apply to the district health boards of Saskatchewan. If 
it isn't, then why'd you put it out this way? 
 
I say that the district health boards are people who represent the 
areas; they have agreements. We have confidence that they're 
going to be able to work out the relationships required with 
affiliations. We can assist them where we can; we will try to do 
all that we can. 
 
But I tell you what we will not do. We are not going to agree 
with the Liberal approach to Americanize the health care system 
of this province  never, either in Ottawa or in Regina  we 
are going to fight for the preservation of medicare and health 
care in this province, unlike you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

REDA Funding 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
opportunity to make a ministerial statement today. This morning 
I had the pleasure to announce that the government will provide 
additional financial assistance to the province's regional 
economic development authorities. 
 
Specifically, I indicated that we would provide cost-shared 
assistance up to $60,000 per year to each REDA (regional 
economic development authority) for such operational activities 
as the hiring of professional economic development officers, 
the establishment of permanent offices, and the provision of 
critical economic development services. 
 
(1415) 
 
I also announced that the phase 1 start-up funding of $25,000 
per REDA will be extended for another year for the new 
REDAs that are coming on stream in 1995. This funding, which 
was provided for in the 1995-96 budget, represents our 
commitment to grass roots organizations that are building on 
the Saskatchewan strong principle of cooperation and self-help 
 principles that are the heart of the province's Partnership for 
Renewal economic development strategy, of which the REDAs 
are a key component. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funding represents a significant investment of 
around $1.5 million a year in the people infrastructure of 
Saskatchewan, the forging of new partnerships, and the  

encouragement of many new allies in the task of economic 
development and job creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 REDAs are now up and running, and we 
expect another 15 to be established by the of 1995. The existing 
REDAs, which have been operating anywhere from two months 
to just under two years, have provided advice and assistance to 
nearly 80 businesses. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to seeing more good 
work from them in the future as the communities, businesses, 
cooperatives, municipal governments, and aboriginal groups, 
which comprise membership of the REDAs, all pull together for 
the benefit of their regions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
response to the minister's statement, I would just say on behalf 
of the official opposition that we as the opposition are always in 
favour of development in this province, always in favour of 
expanding opportunities, job creation, that kind of thing, here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What strikes us as unusual though is at the same time as a 
meeting was held last evening in North Battleford dealing with 
the PST and ways to reduce taxation in this province . . . which 
really would go to the heart of the job creation development 
here in this province where people believe that there is 
opportunity, if there is lower taxes in this province, for business 
expansion. 
 
That is the kind of development that we would prefer to see 
where the people of this province believe that we will have the 
lowest tax regime, the best opportunities, that kind of way of 
developing our economy rather than an announcement-a-day 
style of governing this province leading into an election 
campaign. Which seems to be the style this government is 
promoting in the last couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, where 
every single day it's an announcement, another announcement, 
another announcement, hoping the people of Saskatchewan will 
forget about the years gone by when the Premier has promised 
in the election campaign to lower taxes, and then jacked them 
up in every single case. 
 
So I would ask . . . and I would say to the minister, if you want 
to take some direction from the people of this province, you 
should have been at the meeting in North Battleford, and the 
Minister of Finance should have been at the meeting in North 
Battleford last night, when they discussed solutions about how 
to lower the taxes in this province rather than increase them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to  



May 4, 1995 

 
1982 

question no. 70 and 71, I would table the answers and move 
that question 72 be converted to motions for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — No. 70 and 71, answers tabled; and 72, 
convert to motion for return debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 61 — An Act 
respecting the University of Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 26 — An Act 
respecting Saskatchewan Assessment Appraisers and to 
enact certain Consequential Amendments to The 
Assessment Management Agency Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 30 — An Act to 
amend The Assessment Management Agency Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 
Superannuation Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to the clause 1, I would ask 
the Associate Minister of Finance to please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Just before we begin to introduce the 
officials, I wonder if there's some confusion about what is 
before the Assembly. I hear the members opposite talking about 
the income tax Bill. If that's what they expected, then we have a 
bit of a problem. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, it's municipal employees' 
superannuation. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Okay, all right. I thought . . . I got a 
false clue. Sitting beside me is someone whose attendance in 
this Assembly has been pretty good actually. I think he'd rank 
with many of the members. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Up there with the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, up there with the chairman of 
the committees, whose attendance is an example for all of us. It 
is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance. Sitting behind Mr. 
Jones is someone who may be a little less familiar to members 
of the Assembly. It's Brian Smith; he's executive director of the 
Public Employees Benefits Agency. With that, we look forward 
to your questions. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials today. Mr. Minister, this Bill provides 
for a change in name from The Municipal Employees' 
Superannuation Act to The Municipal Employees' Pension. We 
can appreciate the government's concern for clear language, but 
I'd like to know how much this name change will cost the 
taxpayers of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The cost of changing this should be 
insignificant. Letterheads, forms, booklets, are going to be 
replaced only when current supplies run out or when materials 
become outdated. Accordingly the cost — I repeat again — the 
cost should be insignificant. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, will not any other Bill 
with references to this particular Act also have to be changed? 
Because I understand it is widely used through a number of 
areas of government. And will that not all have to be changed in 
order to make this applicable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No. A change introduced by a former 
administration actually, which has been much pilloried but 
actually got some things right . . . one of the changes made by a 
former administration was to provide in The Interpretation Act 
that where the name of an Act was changed, the references to 
that Act in other statutes was also automatically changed, so 
none of that is necessary. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I must have missed something, Mr. Minister. 
I don't remember that going through the House under our 
administration . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I'm glad you 
agree. 
 
Mr. Minister, there's some changes in here as far as parental 
leave. I wonder if you might explain those changes in more 
detail and the economic ramifications of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member's question was relatively 
general. Were there some particular sections which you were 
referring to? 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the main stated reason, as  



May 4, 1995 

 
1983 

I read the Bill, is to allow additional parental or educational 
leave. And you're going to two years, so I guess I can ask you 
why two years was arrived at. 
 
But there must be an additional cost to taxpayers as a result of 
this provision. I mean how many people will be affected by the 
change? You know, had the change been in place last year, how 
would that have affected the budget for this year, for instance? 
 
I mean you must have some idea because you've obviously 
arrived at a time frame that is appropriate. There must be some 
costs associated with that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The two years is the length of time 
— I think the member understands this — the two years is the 
length of time you can be absent without the benefits lapsing. I 
think the member understands that. 
 
As well, I would point out that with respect to The Municipal 
Employees' Superannuation Amendment Act, this is one 
pension fund which the taxpayer has no responsibility for and 
which has also got a complete clean bill of health from the 
actuaries and is fully funded. 
 
I assume, without knowing it for certain and perhaps could find 
out, but I assume that they have discussed these changes with 
the actuaries and the actuaries have assured them that the fund 
will continue to be fully funded even after these amendments 
are introduced. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, when an individual leaves for 
two years, I presume you would find a replacement, and you're 
going to have to then employ someone new at either the same 
salary or whatever the bargaining grid is in that particular 
organization. 
 
So you've got the individual on leave. It's not affecting their 
pension. You've got a new individual in who you are paying 
and also who is making pension contributions. That means that 
there's going to be a certain turnover of people in the public 
service. 
 
There has to be some . . . I asked the question, how many 
people would this have applied to last year and how would that 
have affected this year? I mean you've got either increasing or 
decreasing number of people that you're employing. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. This is the municipal 
employees. This is no relation to the provincial government 
employees, and the provincial government has no financial 
responsibility for this. 
 
This Act does not in any way govern under what terms a 
municipal employee might leave his employment or her 
employment — his or her employment. They might be on 
secondment, they might simply be absent for a couple of . . . 
they might retire and come back. There might be any number of  

arrangements under which they might leave, for which the 
provincial government, and accordingly the taxpayer who pays 
money to the provincial government  the taxpayer  has no 
responsibility at all. 
 
There's no way of answering the member's question except to 
say the provincial taxpayer has no responsibility for this at all. It 
is conceivable in some cases there might be a saving of money. 
It's conceivable in some cases when they leave it might cost the 
municipal government some money, but it wouldn't cost the 
provincial taxpayer anything. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, that's simply not true, because so 
many of municipal government finances are affected by direct 
transfers from senior levels of government. I mean the funding 
that they receive in order to be able to maintain an employee 
base often-times is predicated on the amount of money that they 
receive from senior levels of government. They're mandated to 
balance budgets. 
 
And we've seen how they've been affected. I mean there's been 
lots of lay-offs occur at the municipal level because of the 
cut-backs that you've made over the last few years. So yes, you 
are directly funding municipal government and the number of 
employees that they have. And to say otherwise is simply not 
so. You're a large contributor. 
 
And I guess if there are significant numbers of municipal 
employees taking leaves for some reason, that maybe could be a 
further reason for you to cut back the level of funding that you 
put to them because they would have less employees. There's a 
direct relationship between the provincial taxpayer and the 
amount of municipal employees that we have. And to say 
otherwise, I think, would be not necessarily misleading but 
certainly not true, because you affect their levels in a large way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I'm not entirely sure what the 
member's asking. Let me just make the following comments. 
This is not a paid leave of absence. There is nothing in this 
legislation which provides for the employee getting a pension 
while they're gone for two years. Nothing in here provides that. 
 
This simply deals with the eventuality of after having left, 
within two years of coming back — that might have been 
planned, but it might also happen by chance — it's conceivable 
an employee might retire. Both he and the municipality find his 
services were mutually useful, and he may come back. 
 
That might have saved the municipality money because they 
might not have refilled the position while he was gone. They 
might have thought they'd get along without this person and 
found they couldn't. That might have saved the municipality 
money. 
 
This is not a paid leave of absence. It is not done at the expense 
of . . . the employee during the two years is not paid out of the 
pension, and there's no necessary reason why he would be paid 
by the municipality. 
 



May 4, 1995 

 
1984 

This is not a leave of absence in which they necessarily get the 
pension during the two years. This just provides, if they are 
absent for two years, they can come back and the pension 
benefits don't lapse. That's all it does. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, the Bill also talks about 
switching pension plans. The Bill allows contributors to the old 
municipal employees' pension to switch to the new one, if they 
do so by December 31. Could you outline the difference 
between the old and new pension plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Keep in mind in the following 
comments that this is fully funded, none of which has been 
done at the expense of the provincial taxpayer; how the 
provincial taxpayer might wish that all pension funds could 
meet those two qualifications. 
 
Having said that, this is a reversal of everything we've been 
talking about over the last few days. Because the former plan is 
a money purchase plan; the new plan is a defined benefit plan. 
That's the reversal of what's happened in the provincial 
government and elsewhere. 
 
Converting the former plan to the new plan involves purchasing 
service in the new plan with the money the members will have 
in the former plan. The closer the members come to retirement, 
the more expensive it is to purchase new plan service. Therefore 
the sooner the transfer occurs, the more service can be 
purchased. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — How many employees is it anticipated, 
Minister, because of this enabling legislation, will be eligible to 
switch their pension? And have they indicated if there'll be any 
additional cost of allowing the change-over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There is no cost at all to anyone. The 
ever-diligent Mr. Smith here is looking for the number. He 
believes it's about 250, but we'll try to get that confirmed in a 
little more precise fashion. That's just kind of off the top of his 
head. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, the Bill allows for terminally ill 
pensioners to withdraw a larger amount of their . . . on a 
monthly basis from the plan. Would it be correct to assume that 
this would be entirely funded from the individual's pension 
plan? Or are there any implications with terminally ill 
pensioners on the provincial government side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, no implication for the provincial 
government at all. The two plans operate in completely 
separate, watertight compartments. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — There is another area in there on pensions 
that I found curious, and that's that if you're a pensioner without 
a spouse, you get more money than one with a spouse. Usually 
it costs more to run a household with two people in it than one, 
and I'm just wondering why this exists. Why is it necessary to 
impose a 15-year guarantee on pensions of persons without 
spouses? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — This pension, in a sense, operates as 
many people believe pensions should, because what the person 
gets is the value of what you contributed. And the single 
person, because there are no survivor benefits, the pension can 
be larger to the single person than the married person, and still 
have the same value and the same actuarial cost to the 
commission. So that's why the single person's is larger is 
because there are fewer contingent liabilities and therefore a 
lower cost, so it would make the pension larger. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Is this a significant amount of people each 
year, or are we talking about a few dozen here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, it's more than a handful. There 
are about 7,000 people in the plan. It's estimated that about a 
third of them are single; so it's more than a handful. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — What process was gone through, Minister, by 
the organization, to arrive at the requested changes? Was there a 
vote taken across the piece, or were there information 
meetings? What was the process that brought these changes 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Each June there is an assembled 
group of representatives of the various segments. There is 
someone there representing the peace officers, now called 
police officers, and fire-fighters; someone there representing the 
rural municipal administrators; someone representing the 
Association of School Business Officials of Saskatchewan; etc. 
This group comes together; they met in June, they discussed 
this in June; they approved of these changes. As changes were 
put forward to them, this group approved of these changes. 
They brought them to us, and we are bringing them to the 
Assembly really on behalf of this assembled group of municipal 
employees. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Why is it you believe, Minister, that this 
group have been able to maintain this pension fund actuarially 
sound and in this shape, when there is obviously a tremendous 
unfunded liability with provincial government employees? Why 
have these people been able to sort themselves out in this way 
and the province hasn't been able to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's simply the way the thing has been 
structured from the beginning. Employees have always had to 
contribute; the employers have always had to match. And from 
the beginning they've had a policy — I'm not sure if it's written 
into the statute — but from the very beginning I'm told they've 
had a policy of having a fully funded program. 
 
That was not done, as members will know . . . Over a period of 
some 50 years the provincial government . . . through various 
governments of all political stripes, that has not been done. And 
while we're now trying to . . . Well we're now trying to deal 
with those problems. They got off on the right foot and I guess 
the provincial government got off on the wrong foot some 
one-half century ago. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Is there any discussions taking place,  



May 4, 1995 

 
1985 

Minister, vis-a-vis the provincial government employees' 
pension funds, about making some changes that might rectify 
the situation or at least make it easier to make that unfunded 
liability payable sooner than what is anticipated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, we have been giving that matter 
some earnest consideration. The Minister of Finance has 
commented to the effect that we are considering it. It is a 
problem we need to deal with. We have, however, a number of 
problems to deal with and we're trying to priorize them. 
 
So we've had some discussions in the department. I should say 
the appropriate minister has had discussions within the 
department and there's been some consideration given to it. I 
think those discussions have included officials of the union as 
well, the union leadership. But no decisions have been made 
and there's no timetable or anything that definite. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I've excused the officials and they've 
left. I know the Assembly would want to join with me — I 
think I speak on behalf of government and opposition — in 
thanking them for their attendance today. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the opposition, 
we'd like to thank the minister and his officials for their 
involvement and their presence in deliberations this afternoon. 
Thank you. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention on Protection of Children 

and Co-operation in respect of Intercountry Adoption 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
Minister of Social Services to please introduce the officials who 
have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Mr. Chairman, to my right is Neil Yeates, the associate deputy 
minister of Social Services; behind Neil is Dave Hedlund, our 
director of children and family services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the minister 
and his officials, welcome. 
 
As we indicated the other day, Mr. Minister, we certainly don't 
have a lot of opposition, in fact any real opposition, to this Bill. 
I think it's certainly a good Bill, and it enhances an avenue 
whereby many people certainly across this province, and I think 
across the country, have been looking at ways and means of  

reaching out to children in need, and children, especially in 
many countries, that have been displaced because of the ravages 
of war that have taken place. 
 
I believe what this legislation is doing is creating an atmosphere 
and an avenue whereby a more simpler and straightforward 
process of adoption can take place and bring Saskatchewan into 
the . . . or under the umbrella of the Hague Convention, and 
recognizes a number of the conventions, I guess, that have 
come out of the Hague Convention. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would take a moment to provide 
us with a bit more detailed information on the intercountry 
agreement that was signed on April 12, 1994. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, thank you very much. The 
convention, the international convention — and we do very 
much appreciate your support — regulates the international 
adoptions by establishing standards and criteria so that across 
the world, for those countries who are willing to be supportive, 
there will be, I guess, a consistency of practice that always 
focuses on the best interests of the children and the families 
involved. 
 
And so under the convention of course, countries who are not 
able to look after their own children will help determine who 
will be eligible, which children will be eligible. 
 
There will be standardized or regular or sufficient reports 
regarding the suitability of adoptive parents in countries 
wishing to adopt. It will ensure that there are parental consents, 
which is very important. And of course reports will be provided 
outlining the child's background. 
 
Just the agreements will allow for the assurance that everything 
is open, that the countries that want to help and the families 
who are looking to adopt children have the opportunity to do 
that in a way that kind of has an international standard to ensure 
that the best interests of children are maintained. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, were there any other standards or 
criteria established with regard to regulating international 
adoptions, or does the comment you just made just basically 
cover some of the standards, or were there any other standards 
that would have been adopted? 
 
We talked about making it easier and certainly getting support 
from the . . . we'd need support from the country in question 
and certainly from, I guess, natural parents as well if that's 
available. And I would imagine in some situations we may not 
have natural parents that can be contacted regarding adoption, 
but maybe some other standards are basically outlined, if there 
are any other standards and criteria regarding this agreement 
that was signed in '94 over and above what the couple 
comments you made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the attempt here is that . . . and the 
goal and I guess the discussions that we've had too, say with the 
Romanian officials recently, what they want to do, what the  



May 4, 1995 

 
1986 

international convention wants to do, is to make sure that there 
are government-to-government agreements. 
 
And so from our point of view we want to . . . we're setting it 
up so that we believe we're complying with the wishes of the 
convention whereby, through my office, through this office, we 
will be the central authority to sort of regulate and set the 
standards, some other more detailed standards over here that 
would apply, and monitor the progress. And as you know, we 
had a very positive meeting with the Romanian officials 
recently whereby we are hoping to have a government-to-
government agreement. 
 
So that in one part of your question there, if there is no parent 
available over there then the appropriate authorities there in 
their systems . . . and part of the reason for our visit of course, 
was to offer our support in terms of establishing systems as 
well. And I think that . . . you were there, Dave, right? Dave 
was there; Mr. Hedlund was there, along with our deputy 
minister. And that's one of the services that we're offering as 
well, to provide our expertise because actually Saskatchewan is 
recognized as  and I say this as a credit to Saskatchewan 
people over the years  we're recognized as being a real leader 
in the area of adoptions and ensuring that the best interests of 
all the parties are maintained. 
 
So this allows for country-to-country adoptions. We will 
maintain our central role. Of course we work in conjunction in 
Canada with the National Adoption Desk. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, have you a time line set up to deal 
with establishing regulations and imposing these regulations in 
Saskatchewan once the legislation has been passed? Is there a 
specific time line, or is this legislation covering most of the 
regulations that may arise out of the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, as you are aware of course, we have 
our Adoption Act and regulations. And if a conflict arises 
between those regulations and any provisions of this Act, the 
Hague Convention will supersede. We don't believe there will 
be any regulations in conflict, but there may be one or two 
additional regulations that might be required. We're not sure of 
that at this point. We don't think so. 
 
We're really more focusing here on setting procedures in place 
that would allow for the easier facilitation of adoption, so that 
people here can have better access to children who other 
countries identify and priorize as needing an adoption home 
internationally. 
 
So we're really focusing more on the procedural aspects rather 
than new regulations. We don't think they're going to be 
required — any additional ones. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess so basically what you're saying, the 
regulations that are now in place with regards to adoption in 
this province will basically cover most of the regulations that 
might fall under this new agreement in this Act. 
 

Mr. Minister, I've got three questions that basically deal with 
other countries that may be involved, and I'm wondering which 
countries does Saskatchewan currently have adoptions with, 
agreements with. Under the Hague Convention, will the list be 
expanded? Are you presently talking about, with other 
countries, about setting up similar agreements? And as well, 
how many provinces in Canada are requesting that the Hague 
Convention be extended to their jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well at this point in time only Nova 
Scotia has actually passed the legislation, I understand. And as 
you know, we have recently updated our Adoption Act and 
regulations. And so in many ways, we have a lot less work to do 
to endorse the convention. But every province is committed to 
doing this. 
 
With regard to the agreements, we do not have any at this 
moment. But we're well on the way to establishing an 
agreement with Romania, primarily because of the interest 
there. And I think 70 children have been adopted since 1990 
here from Romania. 
 
And we will, I guess, be looking at other countries on a 
case-by-case basis, keeping in mind we're sensitive to the needs 
of other countries and we're working with the National 
Adoption Desk. But the list could very well be expanded, and, I 
assume, likely will. But that's kind of the current situation at 
this point. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, section 6 states that: 
 
 a child adopted in accordance with the convention has, 

to the extent permitted by this or any other Act, a right 
of access to information concerning the child's origin 
that is held in Saskatchewan. 

 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what type of information would 
be held in confidence by the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We would not be holding any files that 
contained information that the parents would not have access 
to. I'm not sure if that answers your question or not. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically what you're saying that, if I 
understand you correctly . . . are you talking the adoptive 
parents or the birth parents? Information that would be 
available . . . that realistically the department will not have any 
further information other than what you've basically . . . worked 
with the parents in contact with another country regarding 
adoption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the adoption is actually legalized in 
the other country. And so this section just ensures that the 
adoption parents get the information that is available there 
when the adoption is confirmed and finalized. That's what it 
really does — ensures consistency, and that we'll work out all 
the procedures beforehand, I assume, before we have signed the  



May 4, 1995 

 
1987 

agreements, to make sure that that will flow smoothly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what kind of fees or charges can be 
associated with gaining access to information in regards to 
adoptions or working it through adoption agreements? 
 
Now I would take it that prospective parents would come to the 
department seeking information regarding intercountry 
adoptions, and are there any fees that would be charged in 
processing claims or even following through? 
 
And I would imagine, I guess . . . or I say I would guess that 
you would contact a country to see if there are prospective 
children that would be available for adoption, and this would 
take some time and effort too. And I'm wondering, do you have 
any fees associated with that process of putting this type of 
information together and putting adoptive parents together with 
children up for adoption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, there will be a fee charged and it 
will be up to a maximum of a thousand dollars, but it may be 
less. And that would be to cover the service to make sure that 
the adoption home study is completed; a minimum of two years 
of post-placement support with reports being sent to the child's 
state of origin as to how things are going. So it would be that 
range. 
 
Other jurisdictions, the cost ranges anywhere from 500 to 
5,000, but we're setting a thousand as a maximum cost there. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Just how would the department then go about 
arranging for adoptions with other governments? 
 
Now first of all, do you have a list of individuals, or do couples 
come to you with regards to asking about the possibility of 
adoption? And then as that information comes forward, do you 
then have a list or file of couples interested in adopting? And 
then what process do you follow from there? Do you then check 
to see what countries do have? 
 
Or first of all, is the request made based on adoption within our 
country and then you proceed to look into an intercountry 
adoption, or do couples specifically come requesting the 
possibility of adopting a child from another country and then 
you proceed from there? 
 
What's the process that's followed? What does your department 
do to enhance the adoption of children either in Canada or 
outside of the country, as we're seeing through this piece of 
legislation we have in front of us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, just to confirm the process as you 
envisage it, where prospective adoptive parents do approach us 
and we do have waiting-lists. 
 
Initially many people approach the department on the basis of 
wanting to adopt an infant. They recognize of course that that is 
increasingly less of an option, and so they may indicate their 
interest in a variety of other options — older children, special  

needs, also international. And so they're willing to be put on a 
waiting-list in those various areas. 
 
Some people approach us on the basis of hearing a news report 
or through their cultural network or family network or so on. 
And they come to us wanting to adopt internationally. And 
we're in touch on a regular basis, and put them in touch with 
central agencies who are trying to help facilitate international 
adoptions. 
 
So that's I think basically how it tends to work. And what we 
want to do is to meet the need internationally for good adoptive 
homes. And by signing these agreements, say with Romania, 
that will speed up the process and facilitate a very smooth 
matching with the support of both jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess one of the most important questions to be 
asked is, are adoptive parents aware of who the birth parents 
were and vice versa, especially when you go into intercountry 
and one kind of agreements are basically signed. Say an 
adoption is agreed to and a child is brought back to live and 
become a member of the family in this country. And then what 
happens if . . . I guess the reason I'm asking, what agreements 
are in place to basically protect the adoptive parents from the 
birth parents determining maybe within a year that they want 
the child back. So we don't have a push and pull and tug, if you 
will, between adoptive and birth parents. 
 
I'm wondering, is there knowledge of who the adoptive parent 
is by the birth parent and vice versa, and what protections are 
there so that the child isn't pushed and pulled between one 
parent or one family or the other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, officially the guardianship  just 
take Romania  would be finalized over there. The transfer 
would be finalized by the courts over there, so that legal 
guarantee transfer would take place there. 
 
Canada Immigration would not allow a child to enter the 
country and be placed on a permanent basis without the legal 
question being clarified and resolved and that would, of course 
. . . so there would be no question of who has legal 
guardianship. 
 
Now as to what future contact there might be, I guess really 
depends on the openness in the country or the province of 
Saskatchewan and on the willingness of, say, the adoptive 
parents as their child is growing older I suppose, and that 
decision that they might make to try to initiate contact. So it's 
really . . . there wouldn't be the potential to interfere, I don't 
think, I suppose any more than there is now. But there would be 
no question about who has the legal guardianship. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that's very 
important, because I just happened to catch via the television 
the last couple of days — and I'm not sure; I don't think it was 
on a Canadian network — but following a couple of cases 
down in the States where there's quite a battle between adoptive 
parents and birth parents now regarding children. I think it  



May 4, 1995 

 
1988 

would be . . . 
 
Once a decision is made, I think for the sake of children and the 
parents involved and especially adoptive parents, it's important 
to have a real understanding of what you mean by that adoption 
agreement having been finalized. And then as a child gets older, 
and if they want to have the ability to become acquainted with 
the birth parents, I believe that provision is here too, based on 
the willingness of both the adoptive and the birthing parents to 
agree to that type of information being released so that these 
adoptive children can then follow up on their birth parents. 
 
So I think that's important. And I believe, as you've indicated 
and as I've looked through the Bill, it's basically . . . it looks to 
be covered fairly clearly in here. So I thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I really don't have any further questions, but I'd 
like to extend my thanks and appreciation to the minister and 
his officials for their responses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much for your important 
questions. Those are very important. I would like to also, Mr. 
Chairman, I move to report this Bill . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . It's a little premature. Sorry, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank my officials for their fine work in this particular 
endeavour, and of course for their help here today. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1515) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention on Protection of Children 

and Co-operation in respect of Intercountry Adoption 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, it's been some time 
since Social Services was here, and perhaps the minister could 
reacquaint us with the officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right, 
deputy minister Con Hnatiuk. Behind Con, Neil Yeates, the 
associate deputy minister of Social Services. Behind me, Bob 
Wihlidal, the director of the budget branch. And to my left, Phil 
Walsh, the director of the income support program. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome, and to your officials today, the Department of Social 
Services. I'll be asking a few questions and then my colleague 
from Moosomin will be back to ask some more. 
 
First of all, I know you didn't have them here last time, but the 
global questions which we have been providing ministers for 
the last three sessions, have you had the opportunity to have 
those prepared for us? The Education minister brought them 
across the other night, so I'm wondering where yours are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — They're not quite ready, but we'll send 
them over as soon as we have them. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — We'd appreciate that, Mr. Minister. It's very 
difficult for us to be able to finish up anyone's estimates 
without those being provided. Because, as you know, a lot of 
the questions we ask in there negate House time, and it's been 
very helpful for us, and I'm sure for you, to not have to stand 
and answer every one of those questions in the House. 
 
There's a couple of areas I'm going to ask about, Minister. I, as 
you are aware, have received concerns from a number of people 
who are employed within the system that you're responsible for. 
And there seems to be a problem that I don't quite understand. 
 
And I appreciate the help the minister gave me with the one 
individual, but there seems to be people who, in the last couple 
of years, continually fall through the cracks. They are laid off 
for one reason or another, or they have medical problems, and 
there seems to be a failure somewhere within the system. And I 
don't know if it's because of the union rules that you have to 
deal with through the Public Service Commission or if there are 
agendas at work inside that seem to prohibit people from 
coming through these things in any reasonable manner. 
 
And there's one that was raised with you last year that's still 
outstanding. It involves a medical disability and an inability for 
this individual to come back through the system. And the name 
is Perry Bhatt, who was employed for 15 years at Valley View, 
had to take a medical disability because of a heart operation,  



May 4, 1995 

 
1989 

and to this day . . . in fact he was in my office yesterday. Has 
talked to me a number of times, went through some 
re-education, all sorts of things, but seems to just continually 
fall through the cracks. 
 
And I'm wondering if you're comfortable with the way that the 
employment, re-employment, system is working, or if you have 
concerns that people aren't being able to either requalify or 
seem to be on the outside looking in because of the current 
union structure that you have to deal with? Is there some reason 
that people seem to have a lot of these problems, particularly in 
the last two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — With regard to the details of this 
particular case that you raise, I'm not familiar with that just off 
the top, but we will look into the details and provide you with 
specific information as soon as we can, if that's okay. 
 
As you know, this is being . . . (inaudible) . . . this is being 
managed by the Public Service Commission, not us. And I say 
that because the process basically is such that the Public Service 
Commission manages a re-employment for individuals who are 
on long-term disability. 
 
You know each case is different. Over the years, generally, 
there's been downsizing in government over many years and 
this could make it a little more awkward for some persons with 
disability to compete. 
 
But I think you raise an important question about the level of 
comfort in this regard. And I guess I would have to reflect on 
this myself and take a look at it on a more broad basis. But 
other than that I'm not sure how to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, your area is a big employer in 
government. And I can appreciate the fact that you, along with 
other people, face downsizing requirements. Your case-load has 
gone up 30 to 40,000 people in the last three and a half years — 
some of your own doing, some on-loaded because of federal 
government changes. So people are under pressure within the 
system to perform more because there isn't the backup 
structures that maybe there were 10 years ago. 
 
So I guess what I'm saying to you is, if the requirements of the 
caseworker, of the people, the family services people, the 
people that do the investigations, all of the things that you have 
to deal with, if that workload is going up, is there a concerted 
effort being made, I guess, to raise the educational levels? 
 
Are you looking for a different kind of individual that you did 
in the past? And if so, if you're looking for a different kind of 
individual to be involved in Social Services in this province, 
what changes are you asking for at the Public Service 
Commission level? And what changes are you asking for 
vis-a-vis some of the bargaining agreements that have been in 
place which obviously dictate certain bumping rights and 
certain requirements to you? 
 
(1530) 

Because your department seems to be one that always comes up 
when people talk about nepotism, when they talk about hiring 
practices within certain areas that people don't feel are as good 
as they would be perhaps in other areas of government. And 
I've heard this complaint in my local area, in Moose Jaw; I've 
heard this complaint in other areas. And your department seems 
to be one that draws all of this ill will, if you will. 
 
And this is bad, because the people that you're charged with 
serving are often those that can least afford to defend 
themselves. We're talking about people that . . . two and three 
generations on social services. Or we're talking about aboriginal 
people that prior to recent changes dealt with the federal 
government, but now deal with your government. 
 
And if there are changes that need to be attended to, I would 
think you would be the first to want to make those changes. If 
you've got lousy union agreements, then you would want to do 
something about it. 
 
The Public Service Commission seems to have their hands tied 
in many cases because their re-employment lists are governed 
by SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) 
contracts, or they're governed by CUPE (Canadian Union of 
Public Employees) contracts, or they're governed by something 
else. 
 
And it seems like you don't have the cream rising to the top, 
Minister, in many cases because of what you are, in many cases, 
handcuffed by. And given the size of your budget, given the 
case-load that we have to deal with in this province — and I 
don't see that case-load changing a whole lot in the next couple 
of years — I would think you'd have some pretty specific ideas 
about the type of individual you would want to see coming up 
through the system in order to provide better service, obviously, 
with budget restrictions. And you must have some thoughts on 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I will attempt to respond to . . . You 
raise so many questions. You were flipping back and forth 
between workers and clients and making a number of 
inferences regarding unions and so on. 
 
Let me say that we do re-employ many individuals who go on 
the re-employment list, who are disabled. And basically in some 
cases . . . I mean it's a heavy workload. In some cases the ability 
of the individuals who are on sick leave and so on sometimes 
prohibits them from coming into certain kinds of positions, and 
so we try and find a way to fit them in that meets their needs as 
well and it's something that they can manage. Certainly we 
operate within a system-wide classification service. And that 
was no different than when you were in power. 
 
And certainly the question you raise about nepotism in our 
department, I find that a little bit offensive actually. I would say 
that if you've got some specific examples of where you believe 
that has occurred, based on what you've said, I would appreciate 
knowing that. You know we've tried very hard   



May 4, 1995 

 
1990 

we've tried very hard  and we've in fact been successful in 
increasing the qualifications required and the training for a 
number of positions where . . . 
 
I mean I'm not going to get into this, but I can certainly provide 
you with some information with regard to previous hiring 
practices where a former minister of Social Services, under your 
administration, took it upon himself to change legislation so 
that he could designate who is a qualified social worker. Now I 
don't think that has ever been done in the history of the 
Commonwealth, where the minister would give himself or 
herself that authority. So I believe that your suggestion that we 
are doing that is inappropriate. 
 
I am very proud of our staff. You indicate that the cream isn't 
rising to the top. I think that's very unfair to say that. That just 
simply isn't correct. And with regard to our hiring practices, we 
were presented, I believe, a special honour by the aboriginal 
community for the degree to which we're committed to 
supporting qualified aboriginal people to work in the 
department, who work with aboriginal people, aboriginal 
families and children and young people. I would hope that you 
would see that as progress. 
 
With regard to the unions, again I'm not sure what your 
question there was. Certainly you made some inferences. I 
would say that our relationship with the unions are constructive 
and positive. There are good processes in place. Certainly we 
believe in collective bargaining, and the system in that regard is 
working well. Unions are supportive to people, to members 
who need their support. So those are some of my responses to 
the points and questions that you raised. 
 
And again, I want to reiterate that under very difficult 
circumstances, not just workload demands but the complexity 
of the challenges today to deal with some of the social 
conditions, I would say that there is very innovative work being 
done on many fronts — on many fronts. 
 
For example, in our youth and family youth program, in our 
child action plan, in the day care field — on many, many fronts, 
there are good examples where our staff are involved with 
communities. West Flats in P.A. (Prince Albert), for example; 
Fort Qu'Appelle; Assiniboia; inner city of Saskatoon where 
we're working in a very integrated way to support communities 
to make their own decisions and be involved through the 
community grants program in ways in which we strengthen 
preventive supports and actual services to families. 
 
So I guess I would disagree with you. I think our staff are doing 
an outstanding job. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, I'm glad to hear that. I think, 
Mr. Chairman, we must be getting close to an election because 
those kind of questions a year ago would not have elicited the 
same type of political responses from the minister. 
 
I wasn't castigating you or the unions or anybody else. I said 
you're under a tremendous amount of pressure; you have a very  

large budget. There are people that say that your system that 
you're forced to work inside is less than perfect and that there 
obviously maybe are changes that need to be made in order for 
the taxpayer to get the best bang for their buck. That's all I was 
saying. 
 
It had no personal inference to you or your immediate 
ministerial staff or anyone else. I simply was passing on 
comments to you that people have made to me who seem to be 
in some degree of difficulty with the way that the structures 
exist within your department vis-a-vis Public Service 
Commission. 
 
And I wasn't taking a shot at the union at all. You have to live 
with what cards you're dealt. And if there are certain things 
there that are prohibiting doing a better job, I would think you 
would want to discuss those in a reasonable manner. 
 
If you think all is perfect, I'll take your word for it, but my 
discussions with people around government are that there are 
some problems. And I understand that there's been a new 
agreement negotiated that will allow more flexibility with 
bringing in, for instance, the more qualified people that you talk 
about — people with better educations, that type of thing. 
 
And I simply wanted you to tell the Assembly and tell the 
taxpayer about some of those initiatives and marry those up, if 
you will, to Fort Qu'Appelle to show us that those initiatives, 
those changes, in fact are starting to bear fruit. Because at the 
end of the day, Minister, it was your department that had to go 
back and get extra funding in order to keep your case-load in 
line. 
 
Very few other departments went back and got more money. 
You obviously were one that had to do that during the past 
budget year. You needed more money to do your job. And if 
you need that extra funding, then legitimately I, representing 
taxpayers, should say to you: okay, you need that extra money; 
what are you doing in order to make sure that those extra 
expenditures are in line, that you're not prepared to sit on the 
status quo, that you're prepared to demand changes in the 
system so that you can come up with better systems in order to 
do your job? 
 
That's all I was asking. And I mean if you find that political and 
offensive, I'm sorry, because that wasn't the intent of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well let me mention four things that we 
are doing that we believe are constructive, positive, and maybe 
designed to address some of your concerns. 
 
We are working a on a new . . . In addition to the agreement, 
we're working on a new social work classification plan, 
negotiating that, with the involvement of all the parties — 
unions, Public Service Commission, and so on. 
 
We've considerably enhanced our automation and have a plan to 
further do that, which enhances accountability and provides 
additional support to the staff to make sure that we're . . . it's  



May 4, 1995 

 
1991 

another tool that we're using. And we of course are . . . have an 
employment equity plan that we believe is constructive, and 
we've worked very hard to better integrate our services with 
other government departments — one of the vehicles being the 
child action plan where there's seven department are working 
together on issues across the piece, whether it's family violence 
or youth issues or so on. 
 
So those are some of the things we are attempting to do. Of 
course we're working very closely in terms of good case-
planning model and accountability with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I'm interested in that, Minister. I was 
chairman of Public Accounts for just about two years, and it 
was an area that came up in the auditor's report consistently. I 
understand that you were going to change the way that the 
computer set-ups within the department . . . you were 
purchasing new equipment, as I understand it; that there was 
going to be more ability to cross-check the flow of funds 
because you spent this. 
 
And could you update us on how much has been spent? You 
were one of the departments, I believe, that spent quite heavily 
in that area in order to meet those auditing requirements that 
were laid out in the auditor's report. Can you tell us what you 
have spent in the last fiscal year on your administration side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — The detail that you asked for with regard 
to the administration on the technical side, we will get that over 
to you as quick as we can, in terms of these standard questions. 
But last year — in fact we initiated it, as the auditor says in his 
report — we initiated a review of a sort of a case-planning 
model. 
 
And we focused on employable clients, and we wanted to 
ensure that the value for money audit . . . And of course I had 
the pleasure, with the deputy minister, of meeting with the 
auditor last week, and he was very complimentary of the fact 
that we initiated this case-plan audit, that we worked very 
closely with his office and have pledged to do that in the future, 
and indicates in his report that the department has adequate 
systems and practices. And I quote: the department has 
adequate systems and practices to develop case plans for 
employable clients. 
 
And so we . . . and he made a couple of suggestions, and we'll 
continue working with him. 
 
And what was heartening is his comments to me that we are 
making good progress and that accountability, for example, in 
the social assistance plan is better than it ever has been. And we 
were very proud of that. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well thank you, Minister. I am going to ask 
you some more questions on this area in awhile. I've got to step 
out of the Assembly for a minute and the member from 
Moosomin is going to. 

But I think it's absolutely crucial that not only on your technical 
side but on your manpower side that there be some changes. I 
don't see, unfortunately, your requirements having to go down 
very much in the near future. And if those requirements are 
going to stay at the current levels, that means that we as 
taxpayers are going to have to be ever diligent in order to 
deliver the services. 
 
I can see, quite frankly, the day coming when you will see 5 and 
10 per cent cuts across government for all sorts of reasons, and 
that'll be irrespective of political party. I honestly believe that. 
And that won't only be in the province of Saskatchewan, that's 
going to be Canada-wide. And with those size of budgetary cuts 
taking place, the ability to manage existing resources will be 
incredible. 
 
So I guess with that parting comment, I'll turn it over to my 
colleague who can ask some questions. I am going to want to 
ask you some specific questions about the workshops that are 
associated with handicapped people and the funding around 
those workshops and its level over the last couple of years. I 
need to understand some things about how they make up 
deficits in their projected operating budgets and how that 
reflects on the client load. So I'll let you think about that for 
another opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I just want to say 
that I think that the ability for the department to continue to 
manage the challenge that exists in Saskatchewan, but across 
Canada, across Canada in spades . . . because as the hon. 
member will know, we have second lowest dependency rate of 
persons on social assistance of any province in Canada. We 
have the second lowest, and the second lowest dependency rate 
as well of individuals receiving unemployment insurance. 
 
And so that reinforces — I mean we are positioning ourselves 
— that reinforces why we're proceeding with the development 
of the need to have better qualified staff, better education and 
training, more culturally sensitive hiring practices where a 
number of our clients for example are from aboriginal 
background; better technology, better computerization, better 
in-service, and so on, so that we . . . Those are the kind of tools 
that we've been developing along the way and is one of the 
reasons why we're making great progress on the financial 
accountability side of the program. 
 
Now I think that it's important to remind the hon. member that 
the only reason that the case-loads have gone up, the only 
reason — and we can demonstrate this — is based on the 
decision by the federal government with respect to the change 
in terms of who's responsible for status Indian people when 
they leave the reserve. The member I think knows that. 
 
And secondly, in the last three federal budgets, and no doubt on 
the next federal budget, because that's already been announced, 
there have been cuts to unemployment insurance benefits. And 
just the last cut alone by the federal government meant that it 
took $40 million in UIC (Unemployment Insurance 
Commission) payments from Saskatchewan low income people.  



May 4, 1995 

 
1992 

That cost us 17 to $20 million for additional people on social 
assistance. 
 
But the important thing here is that the economy is turning 
around. StatsCanada's figures show that there was, I think 
February to February, February '94 to February '95, there were 
9,000 new jobs in the province. About 2,500 or 3,000 have 
been announced since then because there's evidence again that 
the Partnership for Renewal is working — long-term, 
sustainable jobs across Saskatchewan. So that's good news. 
 
And of course in 8 of our 11 offices in Social Services, the 
case-loads are down. In some parts of the province things are 
. . . the economy is very, very tight. Things are booming very 
well. Across the province, in spite of the offloads, our case-load 
numbers are down about 360 this year over last year. So we're 
heading in the right direction on that front as well. 
 
And in the meantime, we have put in place programs like Future 
Skills and JobStart and the opportunities through the New 
Careers Corporation, which are acting as bridges to 
independence for people who are on assistance, to ensure that 
they have a hand up, if you will, to get into the labour market 
and to become competitive and to make sure they can access the 
jobs that are available. 
 
And we've worked very closely with all the departments, but 
certainly with Economic Development, Agriculture, and the 
Department of Education, Training and Employment, to make 
sure that we continue to ensure that young people and 
unemployed people have access to the training that will make 
them competitive for the future jobs that will be created. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
While we continue to debate the numbers of people on 
assistance and while you continue to reflect and suggest that 
most of the problems that you're facing are because of federal 
Liberal policy, I'm not sure . . . I think there are some areas 
where you're going to have to eventually accept responsibility. 
 
You mentioned, I think, that there was a reduced case-load of 
360. I'm not sure if that means that people have found work or 
they just got tired of going to the office and possibly even 
moved out of the province. So we have a reduction of people, 
individuals in the province, because they just felt that the 
government they most likely supported now is letting them 
down as well. 
 
And as my colleague had indicated, we certainly have . . . and I 
don't think any government in the future is going to be just 
handing money out hand over fist. We're all in a situation, a 
position, of having to really maintain restraint even if the 
economic conditions improve. 
 
But I think the Economic minister made a statement about the 
Chili for Children program and that we still have many people 
in this province that need assistance. And I'm not sure what the 
numbers are in the Chili for Children program or how many 
people are looking for or seeking assistance through food aid  

programs. I noticed yesterday in yesterday's Leader-Post city 
. . . I mean food banks still a major component. And I believe 
that that was in the Saskatoon . . . well I think it was in both the 
Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix. 
 
So while on one hand, Mr. Minister, you would imply that we're 
gaining a bit of a hold or managing better, unfortunately the 
headlines don't totally reflect that. They also reflect the fact that 
your comment about the economy turning around . . . I'm not 
exactly sure that the economy is turning around as much as may 
be implied through your comments or the Premier's or the 
Minister of Economic Development. 
 
I talked to individuals out in my constituency, and I can assure 
you of one thing, that while the urban dweller may feel the farm 
community has really got it together, in fact I just saw some 
numbers today which indicate that there has actually been an 
increase in people having to approach the Farm Debt Review 
Board and the farm security boards because of the problems 
they're facing on their farm due to the fact that not everybody 
had a super crop last year. We talk about good prices but prices 
don't mean anything for your commodity if you don't have a 
commodity. 
 
And also, even if you did have a crop and you received a fair 
price for it, the fact is so many producers are still facing some 
very difficult challenges because of the debt load that they're 
carrying. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, we need to take things a little more in 
perspective and I think even what we've seen, just the 
announcements out of the Department of Energy and Mines, the 
land sales certainly have not been anywheres close to where 
they were last year. 
 
Which is also another indication that the economy may not be 
as bright and why it's important that we need to look to the tools 
of small business across this province. And there were a couple 
of announcements in the last two days where smaller businesses 
have expanded because they happen to be right now meeting a 
niche market and are able to expand. 
 
So it's very important that we at least present all the facts. And 
while we're dealing with the social assistance and Social 
Services, I understand that my colleague in the last time the 
department had been before estimates was asking some 
questions. They were directed to our office by constituents. 
 
And questions like . . . individuals like to know, how many 
individuals are currently collecting social assistance in the 
province? And I wonder if you could provide us with the 
up-to-date numbers of individuals and the number of cases. 
And I wonder if you'd also have a breakdown of the ages of 
recipients and how many are single-parent families. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — This is the end of March. The cases are 
41,058. Pardon me. That was last year. Sorry. 40,699. So the 
difference is 359, as I'd indicated. Across the province, 359 
lower than last year. 



May 4, 1995 

 
1993 

And as I said, in many of the 11 offices the case-load is actually 
down. I think it's in Saskatoon, Regina, and P.A. primarily, but 
. . . where it's not down as much as it is in some of the rural 
areas. 
 
Single parent was 28 per cent or 12,036 cases. Those are the 
numbers I think that respond to your question. 
 
I guess I would say that your general outlook of the situation is 
a little bit gloomier than you typically are in here. I think that 
many people want a little bit more sense of optimism and hope, 
and I think that many people are feeling that way across the 
province. And I think we're fairly well aware of the fact that we 
need to continue to work hard to make sure that those people 
who are unemployed get opportunities. 
 
But I might just clarify that there is a net in-migration. I think 
every quarter over the last — about the last six or seven quarters 
for sure — there has been a net in-migration. Now some of 
those people, 500 or so, are coming from Alberta because of the 
massive cuts to social services there, but I think that they see 
opportunities and some hope here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We do not believe in exporting our problems to other provinces. 
We're trying to do things the Saskatchewan way by working 
hard as a government, between departments and with 
communities, to strengthen services and supports to families. 
 
I think that you referred to the article yesterday in the special 
report. I think if you read some of those articles closely — and I 
know you will, if you haven't — you will also see that the social 
groups agreed with some of the comments that I made, that 
we're doing what we can with the hand we were dealt. 
 
We're doing what we can, and we've accepted responsibility for 
that. We're not passing that on to somebody else. But that the 
long-term solutions, the long-term economic development 
strategy, the putting money into education and training and 
employment supports like JobStart, Future Skills, that that is the 
direction to go in. 
 
And in terms of helping people, I stand to be corrected, but I 
think that we may very well be the only provincial government 
in Canada that last year and the year before did not cut social 
services programs. Manitoba, for example, took $10 million 
alone just out of shelter rates. And we did not do that. We 
recognize that in times of need, people sometimes have a 
greater need for . . . to build supports around them. 
 
And we, for example, do not agree with the Reform Party that 
would say that you should have to deplete all of your assets and 
be destitute before you qualify for any social assistance. We 
want to support people to get off more quickly, and that's the 
approach that we're taking here. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, when we look at the 
numbers, you gave me a number of 12,036 of single-parent 
families. And one concern I have, and I know a number of 
people have, and that's the aspect of the fact that a number of  

these single parents . . . and I'm not sure if you'd have numbers 
to indicate it — but how many of these single parents are under 
18? 
 
I think there are some areas of responsibility where parents have 
a responsibility to look after and provide for their siblings. And 
in some cases we may have single parents falling into being 
supported by Social Services that should . . . where individuals 
should still be being supported by their families. And I'm not 
aware of that, but I'm wondering if there are any individuals and 
why we would be basically taking over responsibility that 
should rest with the parents or family members. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I think it's very important to state 
clearly that Saskatchewan families do care for their children and 
take responsibility for them. Of the 40,000 cases that I 
discussed with you — and this is very important — that there 
are only 218 of those 40,000 under the age of 18, and less than 
100 of those are single parents. 
 
So I think that the hon. member will see that that . . . you don't 
have to worry about that one, because that isn't a problem. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, there's a question that has come in 
from a lady from Dalmeny and we haven't really had a chance 
to ask it. And it's been here sitting on our desks, and I guess 
sometimes maybe we get carried away with some of the other 
questions and follow-through, and I think it's important that I 
raise it so that we don't miss it today. 
 
It's coming from a Ms. Attwater from Dalmeny, called with a 
number of concerns regarding social assistance recipients, and 
she brought up some valuable points and suggestions. 
 
It's regarding a problem she has confronted, is individuals on 
assistance moving without notifying the landlord. And while 
this shouldn't be a problem, it does happen, and individuals are 
left in a position where they've been renting out property . . . 
And she's wondering, how can Social Services allow recipients 
to move out without providing notice to the landlord? And I'll 
get into further questions as we discuss this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well the member might recall that this 
question was asked by your colleague, specifically asked by 
your colleague, the last time we met and so I would . . . I may 
have to send the answer out to Ms. Attwater myself because I 
answered this for your colleague about a month ago. 
 
But as was pointed out yesterday by our Minister of Justice, he 
and I met with the landlords association some time ago and we 
agreed there to set up a process whereby through the 
Rentalsman's office coordinating this, all of the interested 
parties in this question would come together, discuss the issue 
from their perspectives, and produce a report. Now we're 
anticipating that report to come any time and when it does we'll  



May 4, 1995 

 
1994 

take a serious look at it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're telling me, Mr. Minister, is that 
basically my colleague did get this question off; that you've 
answered the question of Ms. Attwater, you've answered. I 
believe it has to do with damage deposits and . . . Was that 
asked — about the damage deposit and what takes place and 
how it's taken care of? 
 
And I unfortunately didn't get a chance to chat with an 
individual from Whitewood today, but he was basically 
bringing up the same concern, I think, although his concern 
relates directly to the Bill that will be coming before the House. 
 
So I wonder, you can give me your assurances that we've 
already dealt with these questions with regards to Ms. Attwater; 
and also this question: does Social Services pay for relocation 
expenses when someone moves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, that's right. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Unfortunately, both ears aren't quite operating 
that well. I guess I should have conferred a little bit with my 
former colleague . . . I shouldn't say former colleague, my 
colleague who had raised some of these questions — how far 
he got on a couple of the questions. Because I certainly can get 
off in another area. 
 
But I'm wondering, how many individuals requested moves in 
the last fiscal year? Did you have that question put to you? And 
how many were granted, for what reason, and at what cost? 
And does social assistance . . . or do social assistance recipients 
residing in hotels receive money for utilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I'm not sure that we can answer the 
question with regard to how many moves have there been. But 
let me just say that generally we pay for moves typically if 
someone has a job that they need to relocate to. We negotiate 
some form of reasonable agreement around that and then we 
would cover the cost. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So recipients do receive assistance for utilities 
and other services if they're living in a hotel. Is that what you 
told me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — No, I was referring to your question 
about whether we ever pay for moves. The issue of paying 
utilities for people who live in hotels, I would be pretty sure 
that we don't do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I'm sorry about that, Mr. Minister. There's other 
important details with regards to the operation of this place as 
well that we need to discuss. I got carried away there. Where do 
we go from here? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just pass the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Just pass the Bill? 
 

By the way, Mr. Minister, did you give us the global questions, 
or did my colleague ask for the global questions, when we 
began this afternoon? Did we receive those global questions or 
responses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — They're just about ready. We'll send them 
over as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well if they're not ready yet, Mr. Minister, maybe 
we should bring another department in so we can move on, 
because I'm not sure I'm quite prepared to move and pass the 
Social Services estimates without . . . until we have the global 
questions in front of us. 
 
When can we expect to receive those, the global responses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — A couple of days. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Not the next 10 minutes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I'm sorry. We don't have them quite 
ready yet. Sorry. 
 
Mr. Toth: — It's unfortunate. We were really hoping that we 
could have the global questions in our possession before we 
even considered moving. And I think we would have been more 
than prepared to move through and pass the social assistance 
estimates today if the global responses were in our hands. 
 
And it's going to make it very difficult to just move through and 
pass these estimates without having the global questions, 
because I think we find that having the global questions in our 
possession and in our hands gives us a chance to review some 
questions that we would otherwise just spend time asking in the 
Assembly. 
 
So I think it's important that we have those questions here, and 
you've indicated a couple of days. What do you mean by a 
couple of days? Would Monday, for example, be considered a 
period early enough to get the global questions? Are we talking 
Monday, Tuesday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Sure, very likely Monday. 
 
Mr. Toth: — If a social assistance recipient sells his or her 
assets, for example in a garage sale, and receives money, are 
they allowed to keep the money? And do you have any rules or 
regulations regarding this sort of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Your example where you're talking about 
a garage sale, you're really basically . . . it's converting one asset 
to another asset. They're really not gaining anything there. I 
guess they're converting just to a liquid asset, I guess, for a bit 
of money. So, no. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a case 
that was just brought to my attention the other day and more 
recently is a situation where an individual who managed a store 
for a number of years and then . . . it was a chain store that  



May 4, 1995 

 
1995 

closed its doors in our community. And shortly after the doors 
closed, this individual was also . . . it was diagnosed that the 
individual had cancer and was on cancer treatments for a 
number of months. At the last I talked to her, I think at least the 
prognosis is they feel they've got the situation with cancer under 
control. 
 
She's applied to your office for assistance. To date she's been 
told she doesn't qualify because she still has some assets in the 
fact that she owns a quarter section of land and has been told by 
your office or by the worker that she must dispose of that 
property before she can apply for social assistance. 
 
Now in this case her son is operating the land. Her son isn't 
paying any rental revenue. He's covering the taxes, but by the 
time he covers his expenses, he really has very little left himself 
to live on. 
 
And what I'm wondering is, what criteria does social assistance 
follow in looking at individuals. She has no other source of 
income. The business closed . . . when the business closed 
down, she was contributing toward a pension plan but they 
actually settled on a severance. And most of that, if I'm not 
mistaken, has been basically eaten up. She has a house, she's 
got utilities, she's got taxes. 
 
And her son has basically as well indicated to me that he's more 
than prepared to open up his books for Social Services to look 
at, to see where his income is, to show that it's not that they're 
trying to cover anything. 
 
But certainly his mother is in a situation where she doesn't 
really have a lot of alternatives. She gets a little bit of money 
here or there from scattered jobs that open up in the community. 
 
And I'm wondering, what criteria does your department have in 
dealing with situations like this, rather than saying, well dispose 
of those assets and then when you run out, come and see us. It's 
an avenue whereby if she just . . . in order to dispose of her 
quarter section of land, possibly putting it on the market, takes 
it away from her son, and just leaves him with that much less 
because he's not in a position to buy it as well. 
 
So how do you address situations like this, Mr. Minister? And 
how does a person like that prove to you that they are in a 
situation of need -- versus just looking at it, the rules are such, 
these are the rules; unfortunately you fall under those rules and 
guidelines, therefore we can't do anything. Isn't there some 
room for some compassion and understanding and an ability to 
review a situation, take an overall view, an objective approach 
to it, so that we can address the need out there, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Certainly as the member knows, because 
this hasn't changed from before and this is the way it exists 
across Canada, that the social assistance program is a program 
of last resort. If someone has an asset, for example, a quarter 
section of land, if someone has an asset — I don't know the 
details here — but you're expected to see if you can use that  

asset to generate the income that you need. 
 
Now if the situation is exactly as you describe it, there could be 
a possibility of some assistance here. But when you take one 
individual who has his or her house paid for, so you don't have 
that shelter allowance to factor in, it doesn't take a lot of income 
before you're not eligible. 
 
So I would suggest that if this hasn't occurred, that this resident 
sit down with our staff and figure out some fair value of what 
income that asset could generate, that quarter section of land. 
And the thing to keep in mind always is that any client can 
appeal a decision. Any decision can be appealed. And those 
appeal committees are basically neighbours, community 
representatives who hear the appeal. And I think that is one of 
the safeguards of checks and balances to ensure that we're 
accountable with public funds on the one hand, and secondly, 
that we act and follow our rules and act in a compassionate 
manner on the other. 
 
So if that individual has not sat down with the local staff, I 
would make the commitment to you today that, with the client's 
permission, we would be happy to look into it and make sure 
that it gets resolved as best as possible. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically what you've said, Mr. Minister, is 
you've just told me that the rules are the rules and we don't 
really take into consideration the individual specific needs out 
there; we're not willing to look at really reviewing them. 
 
And the reason I'm suggesting that . . . at least that's what I 
caught from your first few comments. Because, as I indicated 
earlier, the client or the individual who has come seeking 
assistance has pointed out what she has. Her son is willing, 
more than willing to open up his books to show what that asset 
of the quarter section is really deriving for him. 
 
And unfortunately he's not in the position of making an offer to 
purchase. He just doesn't have the financial ability or 
wherewithal to purchase. So that means it disappears out of his 
. . . if she is forced to sell, it disappears out of his operation, 
which makes it more difficult for him. 
 
So I'm asking you again, Mr. Minister, what avenue does this 
person follow, and what does the department do in showing a 
little more compassion and understanding? If an individual is 
willing to just disclose all their income to the department to 
show exactly where they sit . . . and who would I put this 
individual in contact with to basically come before you and lay 
out the problems that they are facing? 
 
Yes, the individual does have a house. But the individual also 
has the costs of the taxes on that property. They face the costs 
of all the utilities that have to be paid upfront. And as I 
indicated earlier, there was a severance, but it won't be . . . that 
severance, I'm not sure whether that severance has now been 
used up in trying to cover the fees and what have you. 



May 4, 1995 

 
1996 

I guess what I'm basically saying is what avenues do individuals 
follow when it seems that yes, the rules are here; here's the 
criteria; unfortunately you fall between the cracks because it 
seems that you're basically sitting on the edge; and those are the 
criteria and we can't do anything unless you're absolutely 
destitute. And that's what it appears to be coming from your 
office, Mr. Minister. That's what they feel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, as I said, I would be happy to have 
our officials look into the situation if you, with the client's 
permission, would send that to me. 
 
Obviously you need rules. You had rules; we have rules. We try 
and apply them fairly. We give our directors and our 
supervisors some level of discretion for professional 
judgements, and the check and the balance here is that the 
individual can appeal it. 
 
Now you've introduced new information on the second question 
that you didn't on the first question. I'm not being critical. All 
I'm saying is that there may be many factors that you and I aren't 
aware of. You said something about a severance. Well 
severance is money, and just because someone discloses — just 
because someone discloses doesn't mean that they're not 
expected to use an asset to generate some income. 
 
But I have confidence that our staff will look into this in a 
sensitive manner and could arrive at some fair resolution of 
this. And if the resident is not happy, then she had the appeal 
mechanism available to her. If that has been exhausted, I mean I 
would be happy to look at that and to see if there's something 
we can do. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sorry you never caught it, 
but when I first mentioned it I mentioned that there was 
severance — at least I believe there was severance. And I might 
be mistaken too, so I'll just throw that in. 
 
But what I will do is I will commit to get the name and a phone 
number and ask that your department follow up and chat with 
this individual and see where they can go. And as I've indicated, 
she's indicated to me she has no problem in releasing whatever 
she has, just disclosing everything, and certainly her son is in 
the same position. So I'll present that to you. 
 
And I guess what you . . . if you wouldn't mind, Mr. Minister, I 
wouldn't mind you at least as well indicating the avenue of 
appeal that is available to her if indeed after your department or 
your officials or one of your staff do call her and you still 
determine that she doesn't qualify, that she has an avenue 
whereby she can disclose and make a request to where she may 
feel that at least she has been heard at the end of the day. And 
that she's got . . . felt that whether she agrees or not or the 
individuals . . . 
 
And I'm sure it's not just this one case that has been brought to 
my attention. I'm sure other people feel at times they're batting 
their head against a wall. And I guess it comes back to the 
number. You talked about a reduction — is it because people  

finally gave up? I don't think we want people to feel that they 
had to give up because they were dealing with Social Services 
and just dealing with individuals that they felt weren't listening. 
 
I think people need to know that they've legitimately been hurt, 
that some understanding and compassion has been part of the 
discussion that has taken place, that the worker has indeed 
understood the situation, and at the end of the day, the reason a 
certain decision was made is because they followed the criteria, 
they followed the guidelines. And unfortunately for these 
reasons — and maybe we need to look at avenues whereby we 
can work within the reasons to see . . . 
 
I guess what I'm trying to say is you may have an asset of a 
house, you may have an asset of a quarter section, but if there's 
no income whatsoever and you're not deriving income . . . In 
this case, and I come back to this, if the son is forced then to 
pay out of his . . . what's left after he has farmed the land and 
sold the produce and then paid all his expenses, then it maybe 
puts the son in a position where maybe they end up coming to 
Social Services for assistance because he's trying to share with 
his mother. 
 
I trust that through your office we can at least come to some 
resolve in this matter, and I will get the name to you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, regarding permanent wards of the minister, who 
determines whether a child should be become a permanent ward 
of the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, that decision is always made and 
finalized by the courts. 
 
Mr. Toth: — How many permanent wards do we have to date, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Approximately 800. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Would it be possible, Mr. Minister, to break this 
number down by age, and please outline what these individuals 
receive in assistance from the government. 
 
Excuse me one second, maybe I'll ask one other question while 
you're putting that together. How are the wards' needs 
determined? And maybe you've got a good answer for that, or 
maybe I should have saved it for a second question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, just to be a little more precise, we'll 
send you over the breakdown of the various ages if that's okay. 
The actual number for January, I said, approximately eight 
hundred and seven forty-eight permanent wards. 
 
And with regard to how their needs are met, basically you 
determine . . . these young people are in foster homes, and some 
have been there for long time. Some are longer term 
arrangements. And the fee paid to foster parents is about $20 a 
day. It varies with the basic needs of the child, but 
approximately an average of about $20 per day paid to the  



May 4, 1995 

 
1997 

foster parent. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what determines whether a person becomes a 
ward of the state? What's the criteria by which you arrive at 
whether an individual becomes a ward of the state? And is that 
determination factor being made by a local worker? Is it made 
on the basis of an individual coming to a worker, having 
problems in a home? Maybe you could just explain that for me, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Every decision that we make in the 
department, whether it's a worker, supervisor, director with 
regard to child welfare, has got to be presented to the court 
because we're held accountable under the Act for our actions. 
We have to demonstrate there was sufficient evidence to take a 
child into care in the first place. 
 
So the court makes the decision based on the evidence 
presented as to whether or not there is enough evidence to 
suggest that the family situation is such that you will never 
improve in terms of neglect or abuse. That's fairly extreme, but 
if the prediction is that it would never improve, then a 
permanent order would be considered. 
 
But many times it could be a temporary order for a period of 
time so that parents could get the additional supports they need, 
or the child is often returned home under a supervision order. 
And so those are three of the options available to the court. 
 
But the permanent order is only granted if there is, in the 
judgement of the court, really no potential for improvement, the 
best interests of the child being always paramount in the 
system. 
 
Mr. Toth: — What steps are in place, Mr. Minister, whereby a 
worker, I guess if you will, must follow before a person is made 
a ward of the state? And as I'm saying that, the reason I'm 
asking that, Mr. Minister, is because of circumstance that took 
place down in our area a couple of years ago where an 
individual was . . . a worker walked into a school because a 
complaint had been raised, and then left the school with a 
student and went to another community without even notifying 
the parents that a complaint had been raised regarding a 
situation in the home, and the feeling that there was reasons for 
Social Services to move in and take control, or take this person 
as an individual, or making them become a ward of the state. 
 
And the feeling I had from all involved was that there should 
have been at least some consultation prior to, because it created 
a lot of anxiety in the home. It also created a lot of anxiety for 
the individual as they were all of a sudden found themselves 
being taken to another community and they didn't really 
understand why. 
 
And I'm wondering, what criteria is there in place regarding 
this, so that we make sure that decisions aren't made before a 
total review of accusations that may be levelled are followed up 
on? 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well basically what occurs is that 
somebody complains, and we're obligated under the Act to 
follow up on that, of course. And what the worker has to do is 
make a judgement, an assessment. 
 
This is why a good level of education and training and 
sensitivity to the circumstance is important. And there has to be 
a belief by the worker in order to apprehend . . . and the 
supervisor, that the child's in need of safety. In other words the 
child's in some sort of jeopardy — physical or emotional abuse 
or whatever. 
 
Now if that decision is made, we don't have the ability to make 
that decision without being held accountable. The department 
has to apply to the courts within seven days to present the 
circumstances under which the child was apprehended, if that's 
the case, and then present the information to ensure that there 
was adequate evidence to have made that decision. 
 
(1630) 
 
Then of course the Act protects the rights of the child and of the 
parent, in that they're both entitled to legal representation 
around that incident. And there's a fine line here too because if 
the circumstances are such that the worker makes the wrong 
assessment and doesn't apprehend the child and there's some 
later review and in the face of the evidence, a trained person 
should have been able to see that there were danger signals, 
then the social worker's potentially in jeopardy as well because 
there's often a fine line there. 
 
And this is why it takes important training and education and 
skill level to make those assessments. Those are taken very 
seriously, and apprehension is a last resort. There are many 
situations where we're called out where we don't apprehend the 
children. But those are signals to everybody that there may be a 
service that the family needs or the child needs. 
 
So we take apprehension very seriously. And I believe — I 
stand to be corrected — the approximate numbers are that we 
only have half as many children in care as the province of 
Manitoba because we spend a lot of money on preventive, 
community-based services. The child action plan is a good part 
of that, and that's how this ties in to support families and keep 
them together. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that. I think at 
the same time though I just would like to reiterate the fact that I 
think it's important that we have some checks and balances 
within the system. And those checks and balances . . . if an 
accusation is brought forward, especially by someone outside of 
the home  and more so, even outside of the home  that 
there is some follow-up and there is, if you will, some time 
spent in review and some form of investigation so that we don't 
end up with a situation such as we've seen in the Martensville 
case. 
 
And I raise that, and certainly there are many people in this 
Assembly that are quite well aware of it. I think, Mr. Minister,  



May 4, 1995 

 
1998 

and I think as the Minister of Justice indicated yesterday, the 
feeling that we've got to consider the children. And I agree 
wholeheartedly in that matter. We must think of the children. 
 
And I raise that because I just had a call this afternoon from an 
individual who basically said to me . . . she had or this 
individual had some concerns. She had levelled an accusation 
against another individual who happened to be her separated 
partner, but her comment was that the authorities didn't really 
want to do anything because they're somewhat paranoid over 
circumstances that have arisen all out of the Martensville case. 
 
And I think it's very important, Mr. Minister, because we want 
to establish some criteria whereby you can sit down and 
determine whether or not accusations that may come from a 
family member or from a child are indeed accurate or whether 
those accusations were made in a fit of anger. And that's 
important. 
 
And it's also important, Mr. Minister . . . and I trust that we do 
not have individuals or workers who are overzealous when an 
accusation like this may come their way, and they're going to 
prove that they're going to make sure that the person that was 
accused is going to pay for their actions, without taking the time 
to sit back and determine . . . do a real review and determine 
whether or not there is a case to proceed. 
 
And I think it's very important that we have some very clear 
guidelines, and we have an understanding . . . we do have some 
checks and balances so that we indeed prevent an abusive 
situation from becoming an overly abusive situation, as you've 
indicated. Because I think it wasn't that long ago we had a 
situation where I believe it was a child or a couple of children 
were actually very seriously injured, if I'm not mistaken . . . may 
have even lost their lives because it was felt that they should 
have been removed from the homes, as more drastic action 
should have been taken. And certainly it hurts a person when 
you see that happen. 
 
But at the same time we . . . Every situation is different. And 
what I'm saying, Mr. Minister, is we do need some checks and 
balances so that you can determine where it's actually important 
that the worker move in and offer protection, and in other cases 
where it may be just a fit of anger where a call is made. And I 
think it's very important that we have those checks and 
balances. And I'm wondering what the department has to 
determine that, whether a worker has the ability to maybe talk 
to someone else in determining . . . making that final move or 
whether it's all left up to a single individual. And certainly in 
the heat of the moment, the wrong decision may be made at the 
same time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well first of all, let me thank you for 
recognizing the tricky balance that you identify that we 
sometimes walk. I think the principle that we attempt to use is 
the principle of least restrictive. We don't want to intervene in 
the family's life and affairs, so we use sort of a least-restrictive 
principle. 
 

And there is an important balance here because you'll remember 
later '80s or early '90s, in that period, where there were a 
number of high-profile cases where young people and children 
died because there was evidence there where we didn't act. And 
so obviously you're always walking that balance, and you try as 
best you can to make good assessments so that you can assess 
as to whether or not a child is in jeopardy of injury. And it is 
sometimes a fine line to walk. Certainly if there is any doubt 
though, I think it would be fair to say that you err on the side of 
protecting the child. 
 
Now the criteria that you were talking about that's necessary  
I agree with you  is outlined in the Act itself. In other words, 
workers have to be thinking when they're in that situation, what 
authority do I have to even make a decision to apprehend? It's 
got to be evidence gathered based on the criteria as identified in 
the Act itself. And then, as I said, that's often a decision not 
made by the worker. It may be in the case of an emergency, but 
there of course is good supervision. We have lots of training 
around the protocols there. 
 
As a matter of fact, we have set up a new procedure, a new unit 
here in Regina whereby we're, I believe, locating police officers 
and social workers together, medical social workers, who will 
do joint assessments to make sure that we learn every day to 
make sure that we just have the best protocols available and 
make the best assessments available. 
 
But still at the end of the day, whatever we do, if we apprehend 
a child, we've got to account for our behaviour and decisions in 
the court system, have to make that application within seven 
days, and we have to have solid evidence that there were 
reasons to make that decision. And that's important because we 
need to maintain our credibility as well. 
 
Now we hear about some of the high-profile cases. But there 
are just dozens and dozens and dozens, if not hundreds over the 
years, that are handled very well and done properly. And I think 
that's the collective experience that is important to have. 
 
We provide a lot of training in addition to the educational 
qualifications. We provide a lot of training to making sure that 
we continue to be at the forefront in the field, to ensure that 
there is good practice occurring. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, are permanent wards able to 
commit themselves to the minister under section 56, and by 
doing this, must they attend school? Is that one criteria? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, this is the section whereby we . . . 
where a 16- or 17-year-old could enter an agreement with the 
department. We had 42 of those across the province, only 42 of 
those, and it is on all occasions based on a plan and usually, I'm 
advised, to allow a young person to just sort of finish and 
complete a school term or sort of finalize the plan that's in 
place. So it's very much related to a specific, in a sense, a 
contract and a commitment, fulfilment of a plan that a young 
person wants to complete. 
 



May 4, 1995 

 
1999 

Mr. Toth: — A couple of questions in regards to that, Mr. 
Minister. What funds are available to the ward in this instance, 
and at what age do permanent wards disassociate themselves 
with the government? Would it be at age 18? Maybe you could 
explain this to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, 18 is the age, and we're talking 
about permanent wards here, and up to 21 if the young person is 
completing a school plan. And most of these are still in foster 
care. Most of these are still in foster care and may have been in 
foster care and they're just sort of completing their plans, or 
there may be some that are in room-and-board situations. 
 
Very few would be on their own. They may be 19, 20, going to 
say, technical school or something like that; I think there are 
one or two of those in Moose Jaw. And that individual then 
would be living on his or her own. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I asked my question based on 
permanent wards. I should ask one other question that 
continually arises and that is: can a person just walk out and 
say, I'm tired of living with mom and dad — at 16 or 17 — and 
come and ask to be placed as a permanent ward of the state? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We have . . . the case you were talking 
about, we have a total of 218 across the province out of the 
40,000 there. But no, someone can't just walk in and do that. 
That wouldn't really be possible. 
 
Basically, these young people come into permanent wardship 
and may enter some sort of agreement that we referred to in the 
earlier question, based on a fairly thorough analysis that the 
home situation is just such that it's not possible to go back there 
and to function and to pursue the goals and plans that the young 
person might have. 
 
So, and this is really based on dysfunction back there, not a 
parent-teen conflict or anything like that, you know, because as 
I said earlier, the parents are responsible for their children. I 
think that the fact that there are only 218 altogether in this 
category indicates that parents are taking responsibility for their 
children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So I take it then, Mr. Minister, if a person just 
walked into an office of a worker and asked for ward status, 
that the worker would take the time to assess the situation and 
determine whether or not they have a legitimate reason to 
become a ward of the state, or would also then take the time to 
counsel them and suggest it's still most important for them to be 
at home. 
 
And I guess if I could ask you what steps would be taken if a 
person does come and request being a permanent ward, does the 
worker not only sit down with the individual, but would the 
worker sit down with the parents to determine why that 
individual may have come and asked to become a ward of the 
state? 
 
And also would the worker try and work out an understanding  

between the individual, the young person, and the parents, as to 
building a better working relationship? Is that what would 
transpire if a person asked, came and asked, to become a ward 
of the state? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well you've describe it exactly right and 
just the only point I would make is if you're over . . . if you're 
16 you can't walk in and do that. Any wardships that extend 
beyond that are really young people who have been wards prior 
to that. So yes, but you describe it accurately in terms of the 
family assessment and so on. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, my colleague has a few questions. I 
think he sent some information, and he would like to ask a few 
questions . . . read this information. But before I allow him to 
proceed, I'd just like to clarify one thing in case his questions 
proceed beyond the normal sitting time. 
 
And that is  I'd asked earlier about the global questions  I'm 
wondering if your department would take the . . . and as soon as 
the global questions are ready, rather than waiting for us to 
come back to the Assembly and to further our discussion, 
would they agree to send over the forms to our caucus office as 
soon as they're ready? We'd really appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We'll do that as soon as they're ready 
rather than waiting until we're back in here to do it, yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
it's fortuitous that I just received this today from a constituent 
since Social Services are on board today. And it deals with a 
Social Services case in my constituency. 
 
I know you have the information there. I'm just wondering if 
this is a normal circumstance, the funding that this person 
would receive. Or what would a person receive, a single person, 
on social assistance? What kind of funding would they receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, just looking quickly here at the 
information you sent over, and I appreciate that, it appears as 
though the individual must own his own home, because there's 
no shelter allowance on here; but has an income of $101, total 
needs of 296, and we're supplementing the difference. 
 
Just by looking at the medical here and thinking that, given our 
policy where we pay actual utilities, we pay actual, so he 
shouldn't . . . We made that decision so people don't have to use 
their food allowance to pay utilities. So he shouldn't have to be 
cutting into his food allowance on that front. 
 
It would appear from the medical, just at first glance, that he 
might have a partial disability, or there might be some disability 
consideration here. If that's the case, then we could provide 
some additional support to him. And also he of course would be 
eligible for supplementary health coverage. Again looking on 
the surface, as a client, he would be. 
 



May 4, 1995 

 
2000 

What I would suggest, if it's okay with you, is that if you could 
provide his number, if this is okay, that we could contact him 
directly. I believe that would be through our Estevan office. I'm 
not sure what community this in, but — Kisbey. That would be 
Estevan, yes. We'd be happy to follow up on it, if you like. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, if you 
would, please. You know as much about this case as I do. As I 
said, it just came in this afternoon so this is all the information I 
have on it also. The fact is I just received it about five minutes 
ago or so. 
 
What would a person under social assistance normally receive 
for a single person? And what would they receive for a shelter 
allowance if they didn't own their own home? If they did own 
their own home, would they receive anything if there was a 
mortgage against that home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — The single person that you referred to, 
for example if employable, would get a shelter rate of 210. If 
the individual was not employable, it could be up to 320 — a 
higher level for those who are unemployable. 
 
The individual would get 195 for food, clothing, and personal 
allowance, and higher if it's a person disabled. A little bit higher 
if the person is disabled. And then, in addition to that, the actual 
utilities. 
 
There is always a special needs provision, which is accessed, 
maybe special food, special diet, and so on, if the person is 
disabled. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What would 
happen in the case of an individual who . . . You mentioned this 
person that looks like he owns his own home. If he owns his 
own home but has a mortgage against it, what happens in that 
particular circumstance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the person has shelter needs; 
therefore we would pay the mortgage up to the shelter 
allowance if they own their own home. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What kind of 
. . . you say that there's additional support in the case of 
disabilities. What kind of additional supports are we talking 
about here and what kind of levels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — The basic allowance rate is $40 generally 
for a disabled person. But there may be transportation needs 
based on medical travel, or special diet, and this sort of thing. 
So those would be the other opportunities where you could 
access special needs. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


