






















































May 11, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 11, 1995 

 

 
2145 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
rise today to present petitions on behalf of the people of the 
province. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Manor, Kenosee Lake, Carlyle, 
Redvers, Moose Jaw, Regina, Leader, Prelate, Sceptre, Cabri 
areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
petitions I would like to present to the Assembly this afternoon. 
I'd like to read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the petitions I present to the House are signed by 
individuals from the Kipling, Moosomin, Windthorst, Wawota, 
Langbank, Kennedy, Whitewood, Milton, Wapella areas of this 
province; certainly you can see it's from across the province. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a few 
pages of petitions to present. And I will just read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing  

 provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are from different areas. Smeaton, I notice 
Smeaton, Tisdale, Shipman, and pretty well across the piece. I 
would like to lay them on the Table now. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
today. I'll just read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from the communities of 
Gravelbourg, Lafleche, Punnichy, Raymore, more people; 
Ponteix, people from all over the province, Mr. Speaker. I wish 
their names laid before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my 
colleagues in reading a similar petition as they continue to pour 
in. And I too would like to read the prayer, which states, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these signees come from basically the Prince 
Albert area, Weldon, Leask, Shell Lake, Prince Albert, 
Preeceville, Mr. Speaker, and I notice even a couple of people 
have signed from Cranbrook, B.C. (British Columbia). 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
that I want to give. The prayer says: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing  



May 11, 1995 

 
2146 

 stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These individuals who have signed come from Smeaton, 
Choiceland, Saskatoon, and various places in the northern part 
of the province; I so submit. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose changes 

to federal firearm legislation. 
 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to examine the 

decision to close St. Paul's labour and delivery and 
post-partum wards in Saskatoon. 

 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Health Districts Act. And I give notice that I shall 
on Monday next move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, it's a privilege for me to 
introduce to you 38 students from Carrot River High School. 
They're in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and it's kind of a 
special privilege for me because Carrot River is a long ways 
from Regina and as you know I don't have visitors that often so 
it's kind of special that they're here today for me. 
 
They're accompanied today by their teachers, Diane Higgins and 
Rhonda Pomeroy, and their chaperons Mike Weisgerber, Cindy 
Trites, and Judy Meachem. I'll be meeting with these students 
after question period in room 255. And I want every member 
here, and you, Mr. Speaker, to help me welcome them to 
Regina. I hope they enjoy Regina and their tour of the 
legislature today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a great 
pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members 
of the Assembly, 13 students sitting in the east gallery. They're 
grade 11 students and they're from the Schell School at 
Holdfast. It is such a pleasure to have Holdfast represented here 
today. In my 17 years as a member there's hardly been a year  

that Holdfast hasn't sent someone in from some of the classes in 
Holdfast and I really appreciate their interest. 
 
They're accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by their teacher, Mr. 
Ledingham, and chaperon Mrs. Cheryl Grund. And I'll be 
meeting with them, I believe it's 2:15 . . . 2:45 to 3:15 for drinks 
and questions and I'm looking forward to having a good visit 
with the students from Holdfast and I ask all members of the 
Assembly to please welcome my students and visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Leader of the Opposition, it's a pleasure for me to welcome 
students from Kindersley, Saskatchewan from Westberry 
School. They are 49 in number seated in your gallery and they 
are grade 7 students, and their teachers today are Mr. Jon 
Yellowlees and Mr. Doug Klassen. The note says, Mr. Speaker, 
that I shouldn't introduce the 16 chaperons that are along with 
them. And I just want to ask the question: does it take that many 
to chaperon 14, or did they all want to come to Regina and see 
what goes on? I would like to have all of the members welcome 
these together with me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and to the other members 
of the Assembly, a very dear friend of mine seated in the west 
gallery, Ms. Gay Jackson. Gay is from the Plunkett-Guernsey 
area of the province. And I've always wanted to say Plunkett in 
the legislature. She's in visiting today to see the goings on in the 
legislature. Unfortunately we're going to be losing Gay and her 
companion Doug, who will be moving to British Columbia, 
taking up new responsibilities with the trade union movement 
there. I'd ask all members to welcome Gay to the Assembly here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, I just noticed a friend of mine in 
the east gallery that probably drove the bus for the students — 
Mr. Klassen from Nipawin — and I'd ask you to welcome him 
here as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Moose Jaw Spa 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when 1,100 Moose Jaw families 
get behind a project, you know that it's a good one. And when 
you get the Premier and the Minister of Economic Development 
to lend their strong left arms to the turning of sod for that 
project, you can be doubly assured. 
 
And both of those things, I'm happy to report, have happened. 
Yesterday in Moose Jaw the member for Wakamow and I  



May 11, 1995 

 
2147 

attended the sod-turning ceremony for the Temple Gardens 
Mineral Spa. Even Al Capone showed up, though he left with 
the Moose Jaw city police in hot pursuit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the spa is the result of hard work, 
perseverance, and home-town support — support by a 
community determined to build on its strengths. One of those 
strengths is an abundant supply of underground geothermal 
mineral water. 
 
Temple Gardens will be one of the largest indoor-outdoor spas 
in Canada, and will include a 44-room hotel, with restaurant, 
convention centre, and therapeutic services utilizing the water. 
 
The dream of Temple Gardens was realized by a combination of 
private and public enterprise, by the investment of 1,100 
families, the city of Moose Jaw, Western Economic 
Diversification, and by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
More than 120 jobs will be created during construction and 
operation, and when the spa is opened next spring, I predict 
tourists will throng to downtown Moose Jaw. 
 
I congratulate spa president, Deb Thorn, the board of directors, 
and all the people of Moose Jaw whose hard work and vision 
have created this jewel for Saskatchewan tourism. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grand Opening of Langenburg Recycling Project 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday, I had 
the pleasure of participating in the grand opening of a paper 
recycling project in Langenburg. This project is the result of a 
cooperative effort between the board of directors of the 
Langenburg and district activity centre, the town of 
Langenburg, the RM (rural municipality) of Langenburg, and 
the towns of Kamsack and Esterhazy. These communities are 
setting a good example of how local residents and organizations 
in rural Saskatchewan can join together in an effort to preserve 
our environment, and at the same time, lessen the burden of our 
landfill sites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many reasons why we must recycle paper 
products. Paper makes up over a third of our municipal garbage 
or about 350,000 tonnes annually in Saskatchewan. Recycling 
one tonne of paper saves 17 trees and 3 cubic metres of landfill 
space. 
 
This project comes at a good time because this week is National 
Forest Week and Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan has been 
designated the Forestry Capital of Canada. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Langenburg and district activity 
centre, the participating communities, and all of the people who 
played a part in organizing this paper recycling project. Their 
actions today are helping to ensure a safe environment for 
future generations. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden's Environmental Education Conference 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had the 
privilege to attend a wonderful conference in Lumsden, a very 
active community in my constituency. Sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan Outdoor and Environmental Educational 
Association, the environmental education partnerships for 
sustainability conference was jam-packed with sessions and 
speakers. 
 
Some of the workshops included renewable energy, backyard 
wildlife, photography, the first nations' Project Wild, and 
recycling. Many of the presentations were focused at young 
people and included situation games, interpretative walks, or 
nature studies. All together there were almost 50 sessions and 
workshops. The conference really had something for everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Saskatchewan Outdoor and 
Environmental Educational Association for their work in 
organizing the conference and their ongoing efforts to educate 
the public. I also wish to thank Buffalo Plains School Division, 
the staff and students at Lumsden High School, the organizing 
committee, and all those from the community who helped to 
make the conference so successful. I was truly glad to be there. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Spa 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join with the member from Moose Jaw Palliser in 
congratulating the folks yesterday on the official sod-turning of 
the spa in Moose Jaw. I unfortunately wasn't able to attend, but 
I do remember well the day that the well was tested when the 
plume of water shot 150 feet into the air, and some of us had 
the protection of firemen's suits that day and some didn't. But 
it's one of those things, Mr. Speaker, that communities have to 
dig down deep when they really want to do something and 
there's people in Moose Jaw have dug down deep and they 
believe in this endeavour. 
 
I'm proud to say that I and every member of my family are 
shareholders in that particular endeavour, and it's something 
that you have to take a risk on once in a while in order to see 
something happen good down the road. And I am glad that the 
government has seen fit to be part of that risk. 
 
I'm sure in the years to come that all of us will enjoy going to 
that spa and taking in the waters. Whether it does any medicinal 
good or not, Mr. Speaker, we'll only let time tell. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Redberry Pelican Project 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to say that  



May 11, 1995 

 
2148 

the Redberry Pelican Project has been given national coverage 
through an article in Western Living, a supplement to The Globe 
and Mail. 
 
The article, Mr. Speaker, details the history of the pelican 
project and the work done by Larry Hawrysh. Originally 
developed as an alternative to a 400-site cottage development, it 
now leads the way in ecotourism. 
 
At the interpretative centre are displays on pelicans and the 
Redberry ecosystem. In spring, solar-powered cameras beam 
back images of the pelicans' nesting rituals. This innovation, 
Mr. Speaker, allows people to study the birds without 
disturbing their habitat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Redberry Pelican Project has captured 
worldwide attention. It won the Governor General's Award for 
Conservation and a British Airways Tourism for Tomorrow 
Award. 
 
Though the pay-off for now has been modest, the popularity of 
the project will see it become a viable and valuable part of the 
Redberry economy. 
 
Once again, I wish to congratulate the Redberry Pelican Project. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Appreciation for Regina's Amenities 
 
Mr. Draper: — Mr. Speaker, sir, I visited the Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner this morning before coming here, and 
had to pass the Scarth Street Mall to get to my parked car. The 
sky was blue, the sun was shining, and there was no wind for a 
change. I had half an hour to spare, so I had a cappuccino at an 
outside table and read the Leader-Post and visited a newly 
opened cheese shop. 
 
My gaze drifted to the park across 12th Avenue and I suddenly 
realized how much Regina has improved since my family 
emigrated to Saskatchewan in December of '66. Now I say 
Saskatchewan, because we came to Saskatchewan specifically. 
 
Don't we have a lovely mall in the Cornwall Centre, Mr. 
Speaker. Aren't the stores and restaurants on Scarth Street 
elegant. Isn't the Saskatchewan Centre terrific. And don't we 
have fine parks here. 
 
We used to fly to Toronto; London, England; Paris; and Bern in 
Switzerland for facilities like these, and now Regina has them. 
Why even the liquor laws have come into the 20th century. 
Please allow me to thank the citizens of Regina for their good 
taste, the businessmen of Regina for their investments, and 
successive councils and mayors for their leadership. 
 
Not long ago they — whoever they were — were looking for a 
motto for the city. I have one for them. Regina: not only the city 
to come from, but the city to come to. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Utility Rate Increases 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Madam Minister, many times in this Assembly and in the media 
you have steadfastly refused to believe that your government's 
utility rate policy amounted to taxation. In fact just last Friday, 
you were quite adamant; you claimed that anybody who thought 
that utility rates were taxes were foolish. 
 
In Hansard, you were quoted saying, utility increases are not 
taxes and cannot be construed as taxes. Madam Minister, I’m 
wondering if you still hold that position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Finance, who is making an appearance on behalf of 
the government to the chamber of commerce at their annual 
convention today in Saskatoon, the general proposition which I 
think one has to subscribe to is in effect what or how to 
characterize a cost of doing business, if I can put it that way. 
 
If a utility is owned by a private corporation, a power 
corporation, and that utility — in the interests of the 
commercial dictates of it and shareholder demands — increases 
its fees, what does the hon. member call that? Does he call that 
a tax, or does he call it a rate increase? 
 
The point that I'm getting at is, that what the members opposite 
are saying is that ownership is somehow central to a definition 
about whether it's a tax increase or a fee increase. What's central 
to the debate is to make sure that the commercial entity is 
operated in viable, efficient terms in the best interests of the 
users of that particular service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I see the 
Premier has put the barricades back up on his closed mind 
because last night he said: I think the public view is that rate 
increases amount to tax increases. That's what you said last 
night, Mr. Premier. 
 
Now that you've established that utility rates are taxes, my next 
question is to you. Mr. Premier, in the fine tradition of the 
Liberal leader, you made another me-too announcement in 
regards to the Crown corporation utility rates. 
 
Mr. Premier, I'm wondering if you could explain how telling the 
public 45 days in advance of a utility rate increase or a tax 
increase is going to increase accountability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I thank the hon. member for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. I think the answer is very obvious. Our 
approach is very different from that of the Conservatives, as  



May 11, 1995 

 
2149 

demonstrated by the fact that the Conservatives in fact 
eliminated the Public Utilities Review Commission. 
 
The idea behind the announcement which I made yesterday to 
about 1,200 business people in Regina and area was as follows: 
if there is to be a utility rate increase, there must be a public 
accountability session by the Crown corporation involved. The 
public accountability session involves input to the corporation 
from the public, without the necessity of lawyers or lobbyists or 
accountants. 
 
The Public Utilities Review Commission, which you advocated, 
and in fact under your administration was established, cost $3 
million, not counting the millions that attached to the various 
other people who wanted to make a comment on utilities. 
 
And I might add that in every instant under your PURC (Public 
Utilities Review Commission), every rate increase which was 
recommended by a Crown was accepted. The one time that 
PURC turned down a rate increase  SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance)  the member from Estevan, the then 
premier of the province of Saskatchewan, did away with PURC, 
just like that. 
 
We think that it's too costly, too cumbersome; it's not efficient. 
What is important is accountability and then a 45-day notice to 
make sure that the public's voice is heard before the decision is 
made, one way or the other, on the proposal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Premier, accountability only 
happens in here under the auspices of the legislature and its 
committees; not in a committee or a review run by the Crown 
corporation that's asking for the utility rate increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, your reaction is only that, 
reactionary. And it falls short of the public's expectations. It's 
like your balanced budget legislation; it has no teeth. Or like 
your pension plan legislation. That's simply not good enough. 
 
Mr. Premier, the public wouldn't be so cynical if you actually 
brought forward meaningful changes. The people might be 
more accepting if you hadn't thrown out this idea just before an 
election call. And I highly doubt that you will react after the 
election on what you're saying today. 
 
If you had listened, you wouldn't have forced the PST 
(provincial sales tax) up by two points. If you had listened, you 
wouldn't have closed 52 hospitals. What makes you think that 
the public is going to believe you this time, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the public 
chooses to accept of course will be in the domain of the public 
in due course, in the next few months or the next few years or 
several months. That'll be the decision of the public. And I 
make no comment on that other than to say that I respect the 
decision of the public and always have in my years of public 
life. And the member being a rookie, I hope that he too accepts  

that approach and I'm sure that he will. 
 
You say it falls far short. I don't agree with you. You say the 
balanced budget legislation falls far short. I don't agree with 
you. You know the taxpayers' association says it falls far short. 
Ms. Moira Wright, who worked for the minister of Finance in 
the Tory administration, Mr. Lorne Hepworth, in the Tory 
administration that racked up the huge deficits and debts, 
described our proposal as being immoral. But for two years she 
drew down $26,000 a year and apparently the cat took her 
tongue because she didn't have the courage to say it was 
immoral all the time that your administration racked up the 
deficit that was there. 
 
We don't need lectures from Tories like Ms. Moira Wright 
about what to do. What we need are apologies for what they've 
done to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Premier, if 
you listened to the people of Saskatchewan you would have 
responded to the plebiscites that were taking place in the last 
election. The cabinet is the only one who makes the 
determination on these bills, on the utility rate increases; and, 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not even sure that it's the cabinet; it's Jack 
Messer. 
 
Mr. Premier, your answers simply aren't good enough. We've 
been working on trying to get you to move on this issue for 
more than two years. And now we see you come up with a 
half-baked idea just on the eve of an election that basically does 
nothing but give the taxpayers a few weeks of notice before you 
go ahead with your rate increases. 
 
If you really want action on this issue, why not use the MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) of this Assembly to 
review and approve your proposed tax increases at little or no 
cost to the public? You could have an all-party committee doing 
this, Mr. Speaker, that are represented in this Assembly. This is 
supported by 80 per cent of the people in your own polling, Mr. 
Premier. We have a Bill before this Assembly that will do just 
that. 
 
Will you agree to move into second reading on this Bill and 
give the people of Saskatchewan what they really want? Will 
you do that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the question asks 
whether I would agree to allowing the members of the 
Assembly to talk second reading on a particular Bill that the 
Tories have tabled. This is the decision of the House and 
whatever the House decides is fine by me. And I'll accept it. 
 
But I do want to say again, coming back to the Public Utilities 
Review Commission . . . and this notion that the Conservatives 
themselves are, with the greatest of respect, very confused  



May 11, 1995 

 
2150 

about this too because it was you people who started out with 
PURC; now you move from PURC to LURC (legislative 
utilities review commission), the legislative review committee. 
Now you argue the legislative review committee is no extra 
cost. Why would it be extra costs for the Crown corporations? 
If the cost is extra for us by virtue of setting up accountability 
sessions as MLAs, same costs only for the Crown corporations. 
 
And the member opposite from his seat says well the Crowns 
will do whatever they want to do. Well the answer is not true. 
There is a minister responsible for every Crown. You may not 
like our answers but we have to answer to you all the time. And 
the idea of this whole operation is for the Crowns to get out 
there to listen to the people. 
 
I think there can be a useful two-way exchange, advising, 
informing on both ways, what it takes to operate a commercially 
viable Crown corporation. 
 
And by the way, I find it passingly strange that this also comes 
from the member whose party sought to do away with all of the 
Crowns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ontario Adoption Decision 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, yesterday 
the Ontario Provincial Court ruled that homosexual couples 
cannot be prevented from adopting children under the Canadian 
charter of rights. This ruling now stands as a legal precedent in 
Canada and is very likely to impact on other provinces. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us what steps you are taking to deal 
with this situation? Are you prepared to allow homosexual 
couples to adopt children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have seen the 
article in The Globe and it's not a decision that we have at hand. 
We're going to have to get a copy of the decision and consider 
its implications in Saskatchewan. 
 
The matter is not a big issue in this province and has not been 
litigated, has not been taken to the courts. Indeed I think that we 
have no legislation similar to the Ontario legislation that I'm 
aware of. Although I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I haven't 
had the opportunity to review the Ontario legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, this decision is going to have 
an impact all across Canada, and Saskatchewan people want to 
know how you are planning to deal with it. An Ontario Crown 
lawyer who has been dealing with homosexual cases says that 
while politicians are treating the issue like a hot potato, gays 
and lesbians are winning court victories that could turn up the 
pressure on federal and provincial governments. 
 

Mr. Minister, when this issue came up during the debate on Bill 
38 two years ago, you did in fact treat it like a hot potato. You 
avoided the issue. You said that existing legislation would 
allow homosexuals to adopt if they received the approval of the 
court. And that's what you said in Hansard, June 18, 1993. 
 
Is this your position today, Mr. Minister? Are you going to 
allow homosexual couples to adopt children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's not up to me to 
allow or not to allow anything of that nature to take place. As I 
said a couple of years ago, and say again today, this is a matter 
which in Saskatchewan is administered by judgement of the 
courts. And I of course don't have any power over judges nor 
any power to dictate to them. 
 
As far as I'm concerned, I believe that the system in 
Saskatchewan is working very well — has been working well 
for years and years and years. And I don't know what the 
member's problem is. I must say that I haven't received any 
representations on this score since we went through the flurry of 
activity with respect to Bill 38. As far as I'm concerned, it's just 
not an issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm afraid the decision that 
was rendered yesterday may just encourage and speed up the 
process. Mr. Minister, you did offer a solution recently 
regarding gun registry. You suggested Saskatchewan have an 
opt-out clause and I think that may be a pretty good solution to 
this problem. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, it would be appropriate if we reviewed the 
matter and were ahead on the game rather than falling in 
behind. Would you be prepared to use the notwithstanding 
clause to override the charter and prevent homosexuals 
adopting in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well this is no time of course in 
question period for any kind of a legal lecture or lecture on the 
charter, but you use the notwithstanding provision in order to 
protect your own legislation which may offend the charter. 
 
I'm not certain what the member is referring to. I'm not sure 
what piece of provincial legislation he thinks needs this 
particular kind of protection. 
 
The law in Saskatchewan is based upon the best interests of the 
child and that judgement is made by an impartial court, indeed a 
court that the province has no part in appointing. 
 
So I think that I'm not surprised to get the question from the 
hon. member, remembering as I do the debate that took place 
around Bill 38, but I don't see what relevance it has to our 
situation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 11, 1995 

 
2151 

Sask Water Pipeline Proposal 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Sask Water is proposing that a water pipeline be 
constructed connecting various towns between Wakaw and 
Humboldt. This pipeline will cost the various communities 
millions of dollars. 
 
In Humboldt, an independent engineering firm was hired to find 
out if the pipeline was the most cost-effective option and they 
found that the Sask Water proposal was going to cost the town 
of Humboldt $22 million more than allowing private companies 
to upgrade the town's current system. 
 
My question this afternoon is for the Premier. Sir, why would a 
Crown corporation be promoting a project that will take 
business away from private companies and end up costing local 
taxpayers more? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'll have to be absolutely 
certain of the Leader of the Liberal Party's facts again on this 
case, as I have to, unfortunately, on most of the questions that 
she asks. And I will accordingly ask the minister in charge of 
the Sask Water Corporation about the full statement of facts. 
 
But keep in mind the general proposition is that Sask Water 
Corporation is there as a facilitator and sometimes partner in 
projects which communities would desire. 
 
In this kind of a circumstance, there has been much favourable 
talk for the particular pipeline that you're discussing. Like in 
any operation of this nature, there will be those who detract. As 
for the actual circumstances of the case which you set out, 
please forgive me, but I'll take some advice from the officials 
and try to have the minister or myself in the next few days give 
you some further information to determine if your facts are 
accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — It's most interesting, Mr. Speaker, when 
we examine this government's record, because this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government appears dead set against private 
enterprise and small business in this province. We've seen 
prison labour produce goods to compete with local businesses. 
We've seen SaskTel compete with a Yorkton computer firm. 
And now we have Sask Water in direct competition with private 
engineering companies. 
 
My question to the Premier: what makes you think that 
government can do things better, smarter, or cheaper, than the 
skilled professionals in the private sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course the  

general proposition that the Leader of the Liberal Party 
advances and attempts to ascribe to us, I don't accept. I do not 
believe that government can do many things better than the 
private sector — full stop, period. 
 
I think that in this society we're trying to build a cooperative 
enterprise of economic development. There is room for public 
sector development; there is room for cooperative sector; and 
there's room for private. And if you allege this to me then I 
think I have every right to turn the tables on you, and to ask 
what makes you think that the cooperative sector can't operate 
in a very efficient and productive way? What makes you think 
that the civil service is inefficient? Well, mind you, I know that 
you think that it's inefficient because you're going to apply 
Texas-style methods to medicare, to the nurses, to the teachers, 
to the education system. 
 
The auditors are going to come out, under your administration, 
if you should get elected, and they're going to come out with big 
machetes, because you don't think they can do anything that is 
going to be very productive. Well I don't happen to agree with 
that. 
 
I think we all strive for efficiency. This government is the most 
efficient government in any government in Canada and we 
believe in a methodology of economic development which 
involves private sector, cooperative sector, and public sector, in 
cooperation — that's the Saskatchewan way. It may not be the 
Texas way and it may not be the Liberal way, but it's the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can 
understand why this particular Premier is most afraid of the 
Provincial Auditor and private sector audits in the province of 
Saskatchewan. He has the largest political staff of any Premier 
in the entire country and more than the Prime Minister of 
Canada. I'm sure he's very concerned about the kind of waste 
that they would find and the efficiencies that they could find. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sask Water's proposal is simply not competitive, 
even though they were given — and get this — $5 million of 
taxpayers' money as an interest-free loan to assist in this project. 
 
Mr. Premier, when is your government going to stop using 
taxpayers' money to set government up in direct competition 
against small businesses in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting that 
the Leader of the Liberal Party takes this point of view, because 
she accordingly would be against the Moose Jaw mineral spa 
where we've invested $700,000 by way of equity into that 
operation. Are you against that? 
 
I guess the Leader of the Liberal Party will be against the  



May 11, 1995 

 
2152 

specialized tax benefits, which at one time she advocated, for 
the manufacturing and processing people which allow Cargill to 
come in, which allow our announcements with respect to Millar 
Western, Thomson Meats announcements and the like today in 
Melfort. Are you against that? That's taxpayers' money. 
 
I think you're for the Texas-style approach. Yes, that's what you 
say in your document, and that means hack and slash and deny 
everything that goes. I repeat again: that may be the Liberal way 
and it may be the Texas way; it is not the Saskatchewan way 
and I want to tell the Liberal leader, she's in for a very rude 
surprise if she thinks Saskatchewan people are going to agree to 
that kind of an approach to this province — a very rude 
awakening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it is going to be 
this government and this Premier who are going to be in for the 
very, very big surprise — the people of this province want 
smaller government; they want more efficient government; they 
want lower taxes; and they want more jobs and they know it's 
the private sector that really are the job creators of this 
province. 
 
They do not appreciate a government coming along and going 
in direct competition with local businesses, costing people jobs 
and costing taxpayers money. 
 
Given the criteria for the NDP Crown Tendering Agreement, 
this project, Mr. Speaker, smacks of an ulterior motive. Mr. 
Premier, will this be a union preference contract under the new 
Crown tendering agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I'd like to take the question. The 
Minister of Labour was going to answer the question about 
Crown tendering, and he was going to say what I wanted to say, 
that she clearly does not understand the Crown tendering 
process. It does not apply; it does not apply to Crown tendering 
because this involves a municipal project. And so this is an 
absolutely mistaken approach and that's what the Minister of 
Labour was going to say. 
 
Why I wanted to get in and speak on behalf of the Minister of 
Labour is, why it is that the Leader of the Liberal Party persists 
— persists  in ignoring the basic fact that the per capita 
delivery costs of operating government in Saskatchewan are 
lower than Alberta, lower than Manitoba. According to the 
Investment Dealers Association of Canada . . . don't take my 
view; I can show you the document; I'll show you the 
document. That was last year's figure. This year's figure we’re 
the lowest in all of Canada. And you say . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon me, what did you say? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I said we can show you the document 
too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — They'll show us the document too. 
What document will you show us? Because if you show us the  

Texas-style document . . . and note what you're committed to. 
Note what you're committed to. Note what you are committed 
to. You are committed to reducing a government which is the 
lowest-operating government in all of Canada now by applying 
the Texas-style approach. And I say to you, you have a duty to 
tell the nurses and the teachers and the doctors and the elderly 
people where it is that you're going to take it out of their hides. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Taxation of Status Indians 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, yesterday in question 
period you said, and I quote: 
 
 . . . we have (continuous) discussions on an ongoing 

basis with the . . . new leadership of the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) about the 
whole package of tax issues as they affect first nations 
people. 

 
This morning on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
radio, Chief Blaine Favel said that no such discussions are 
taking place and that he is not prepared to discuss any form of 
taxation of status Indians. This completely contradicts your 
statement, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, who's not telling the truth, you or Chief 
Favel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated 
already to the hon. member, who must be seeing a mirage, the 
Minister of Finance is in Saskatoon on a chamber of commerce 
annual meeting. So I'll answer on behalf of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members of the House, 
and the member from Rosthern in particular, I believe that 
within 48 hours of announcing your new policy on taxation, of 
PST as it relates to status Indians, you pulled a flip-flop almost 
as big, if not as big, as the flip-flops of the Liberal leader in the 
province of Saskatchewan. All of a sudden now it isn't what 
you said it was; it's something different. This is a moving target, 
your approach is. So I look forward to the next flip-flop that 
you articulate in this particular area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is that taxation needs to be looked at 
as a whole package. And in this particular area, taxation needs 
to take into consideration the issues of treaty rights and the 
constitutional positions taken with respect to the first nations 
people. 
 
Taxation obviously has got to be looked at in this context. We 
believe in cooperation and partnership and discussion with 
people, whether they're first nations people, or whether they're 
ordinary Saskatchewan people other than first nations, in 
devising that kind of a fair taxation policy. That's the fair thing 
to do. 
 



May 11, 1995 

 
2153 

You're the one who's talking about fairness in taxation, and you 
didn't even have it in your hearts to have the fairness to notify 
the first nations leadership about your policy, which you have 
flip-flopped on since. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 
Minister of Finance should stay away more often and then we 
could get the Premier on his feet to answer some of the 
questions surrounding his government. You didn't answer the 
question, sir; you didn't answer it at all. 
 
Finance minister says there's ongoing negotiations. The chief 
says there's none on the table at all. He says your Finance 
minister didn't tell the truth here yesterday. That's what he said 
this morning. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, you know full well that today's status 
Indians are paying your provincial sales tax, on gas tax, alcohol 
tax, tobacco tax. Chief Favel referred to each of these taxes as 
ongoing battles. And he referred to a group of chiefs that are 
getting a trust fund together to launch legal action against your 
government for collecting some of these taxes. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, is that correct? Is it your understanding that 
there will be a legal challenge to some of the taxes that you 
currently charge status Indians off reservations? And what will 
be your response, sir, to that challenge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will say to 
the hon. former leader of the opposition, with respect, that I try 
hard, although I eventually succumb sometimes, to avoid 
responding to hypothetical questions. 
 
I don't know what our response will be if there should be a 
lawsuit, if the suit should go before a court case  if, if, if, if, 
if. I said yesterday in response to the Liberal leader, if is the 
biggest word in the English language. I don't know if, if, if. 
We'll deal with it once it happens. 
 
Now Chief Favel said the following: that before him, Chief 
Crowe and the provincial government had on the table a 
number of issues and negotiations pertaining to taxation. Since 
the election, which has only taken place a few months ago, 
under the new regime — if I may put it that way — under the 
new chief's policy, he takes the view that they're not on the table 
any longer. He did not say that there were no negotiations. That 
is the situation. 
 
The last point I want to make is he argues there's going to be a 
battle. Well if he wants to battle, that is his position, to take his 
cause in the best way that he can do it. That's negotiation. 
There's going to be a battle from anybody's side if you've got 
strongly held views. We believe in honest, open negotiations. 
We believe in fairly arrived at agreements with people acting 
honourably. That's our position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Thomson Meats Expansion 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, this morning my colleague, 
the Hon. Dwain Lingenfelter, and I had the pleasure to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member, I think, is 
aware you can't use the name of the individual. Use the name of 
his title. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker. This morning, my 
colleague, the Minister of Economic Development, and I had 
the pleasure to participate in a sod-turning for a $4 million 
expansion of Thomson Meats Ltd, the Melfort meat processing 
plant. 
 
The company is adding 25,000 square feet to existing plant. The 
work will be completed in three phases by the fall of 1996 and 
will involve the addition of new blast freezers, coolers, 
production equipment, and production area. Thomson Meats 
officials expect to double their workforce, which stands now at 
70, and also double their annual sales, which now stand around 
$13 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this expansion announcement is welcome news, 
not only for the people of Melfort but for the entire province. 
Food processing is one of the largest components of our 
manufacturing and processing sector. Food processing 
businesses like Thomson Meats are the growth business in our 
economy along with agricultural biotechnology companies and 
other enterprises which add value to agriculture. 
 
Thomson Meats is also a successful exporter, and we all know 
how important trade is to Saskatchewan. We're a province of 
traders, and in the area of food processing, we apparently have 
more food processing companies which export than does 
neighbouring Alberta, according to a recent survey by the 
Saskatchewan Food Processors Association. One of Thomson 
Meats' main markets is Japan. It's been in this market for only 
two years, but already sales to Japan account for one-quarter of 
its production and obviously play a big role in the company's 
announcement this morning. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, Thomson Meats is an example of an 
excellent company, a company that has been honoured with the 
ABEX (Awards for Business Excellence) Business of the Year 
Award. The company is not content to rest on those laurels 
though. It continues to grow, continues to innovate, and 
continues to seek new opportunities. By doing so, it provides a 
model for other Saskatchewan businesses to follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all members of this Assembly will join 
with me in wishing CEO (chief executive officer) Lorne 
Thomson, board chairman Rusty Thomson, and general 
manager Henry Sawatsky, every success as they expand their 
company and gear up for the challenges and the opportunities 
of the century ahead. Thank you. 
 



May 11, 1995 

 
2154 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 
opposition would like to join with the minister from Melfort in 
congratulating the Thomson family and their employees as they 
move down the road in expanding their business. Certainly all 
of us are pleased when a Saskatchewan company forges ahead 
into new market-places, and the initiatives that have begun with 
the cattle industry, with the beef export people — Mr. Neil 
Yanke and others who have worked with Thomson Meats and 
other people like them — to build that market-place, really 
speaks for the integration of the meat business in this province 
and how well it can do. 
 
I think all of us realize, Mr. Speaker, what a potential is out 
there if we could simply get the government of the day dealing 
with issues of fairness in taxation. The Thomsons today 
compete with the load of this government of their back, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan is the highest taxed jurisdiction in 
western Canada, and because of that, because of that, our 
opportunities are limited. 
 
Just think, Mr. Speaker, what opportunities would avail 
Saskatchewan processors, marketing people, employees, if the 
tax load that this government has imposed upon them were 
lessened so that people could use those natural entrepreneurial 
talents that they obviously have displayed, and how much more 
successful they would be. 
 
And if that were the case, Mr. Speaker, we would not be a 
thousand jobs short today of when these people took office in 
1991 — a thousand jobs short today of where we were four 
years ago. And the only reason is because the entrepreneurs, the 
people that know how to make it happen, like the Thomsons 
and others, have had to carry the load of taxation, the labour 
regulations, all of the things that prohibit Saskatchewan people 
from being the kind of entrepreneurs that they know they can 
be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let's hope, as the days go by, that this government wakes up 
and starts to take the monkey off of the back of the 
entrepreneurs of this province and goes to fair taxation, so that 
we can all enjoy the benefits of the entrepreneurship 
demonstrated by the Thomson family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, and pursuant to 
section 222(1) of The Election Act, I wish to table the annual 
fiscal returns of registered political parties for the fiscal year 
1994. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Convert. 

The Speaker: — The question 79 is converted to debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Assessment 
Appraisers and to enact certain Consequential Amendments 

to The Assessment Management Agency Act 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
Minister of Municipal Government to please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right I 
have John Edwards, director of municipal policy and legislative 
services for the department. And behind me I have Darcy 
McGovern, who is Crown counsel from Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to your 
officials, Minister. The government has already passed 
legislation to allow municipalities to opt out of having to use 
the services of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency). Now they can look to the private market to contract 
for these services, and this would be an obvious benefit to 
taxpayers. 
 
Bill 26 sets up a Saskatchewan Assessors' Association to 
license assessors both in and out of SAMA. 
 
The idea of licensing is not unpalatable to current assessors; 
however they believe some of the criteria is unnecessary. Some 
who are certified under the International Association of 
Assessing Officers, because of certain arcane requirements, 
would not be immediately eligible for licensing under this new 
Saskatchewan association. The same applies for accredited 
members of the Appraisal Institute of Canada. 
 
The transition clause in Bill 26 leaves some of these members 
out. Could the minister explain why this is so? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, obviously educational 
requirements are extremely important. The requirements will be 
set by regulation and the regulations will be developed after 
broad consultation. No one has been excluded. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Are you saying then that a comprehensive 
exam would decide on certification? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — What we intend to do is set out a criteria 
that will recognize both experience and expertise, and we will 
be doing our consultations around that area. So the entrance 
requirements at this point in time have not been decided, but 
that will be one aspect of the consultations that we'll look at. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. Wouldn't it just be 
better though to utilize a comprehensive exam alone to decide  



May 11, 1995 

 
2155 

on certification, and level the playing-field? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Obviously that is one option, but I think 
it's best to do the consultations with all the groups and let them 
have their input, rather than the government unilaterally making 
that decision. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. By coming up with 
your own arbitrary rules for licensing, won't this leave 
Saskatchewan out of step with other jurisdictions, and limit the 
options of municipalities, of who they can hire? 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — We have no arbitrary rules at this point. 
We are going to develop our regulations after consultation, so I 
think you are into the process far ahead of us. We intend to do 
this after consultation with all of the stakeholders; the 
appraisers and the assessors who are now working in that area. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Minister. These were some of 
the concerns raised with us, and it's encouraging to understand 
that the consultation process and the setting of standards isn't 
set in stone by the legislation. And I thank you for answering 
the questions that we were asking on behalf of some of the 
people. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 48 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Assessment 
Management Agency Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to ask the 
minister for the reasons behind the reduction from 10 to 3 years 
on reassessments; who was consulted and why that decision 
was made; and what kind of cost will be associated with that 
decision? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, in regard to the change 
from the 10-year cycle to the three, there has been broad 
consultation and all the groups that we have talked to have 
agreed to this — those include the chamber of commerce, the 
Saskatchewan association of urban municipalities, SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), and SAMA. 
 
The reason that we moved from a 10-year cycle to a three-year 
cycle is so there wasn't so much lag time and so that evaluations 
would be kept current. 
 
And in regard to the cost, we aren't able to right now predict 
what that cost might be, but obviously there is a huge cost. If 
you’re 10 years behind, you have to do a comprehensive  

re-evaluation and that is very costly as well. By doing 
re-evaluations on a three-year cycle, it probably will be less 
costly than doing the broad re-evaluations after 10 years. So 
there's a trade-off there, but we can't predict right now with any 
accuracy exactly what that might be. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, I guess the major question out 
there is why we haven't been able to design a policy that would 
just be an ongoing format that would be followed. And if a 
property is . . . say a property has a new building on or 
renovations are done that would change the value of that 
property and then would affect the assessment . . . But what I'm 
saying is why can't we just have some standard rules that you 
could work with rather than every . . . now you're saying we're 
moving from 10 to 3 years. You're going to have a total review 
of assessment in the province that would fall into place because 
of the fact that what this does is it's a cost that every RM . . . or 
every municipality, urban or rural, has to work with and to 
address the issue of improvements on property. And it would 
seem to me that if we just had a standard format to follow — 
every RM knew what it was, every business person, every 
private individual knew that if you improved your property, 
your assessment might change. If you had just some sort of 
directives, we wouldn't have to go through this total review on 
an annual basis or a tri-annual as we're going to see here. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — There is some distinction we have to 
make about the re-evaluations and the rules. The methodology 
that we have in place right now is based on 1965 values, and 
there is a lot of discussion that's been taking place over the last 
five, six years, about that methodology. And the process we're 
going through now is develop a new methodology in order to 
establish the rules around which evaluation can take place. 
 
So the rules, hopefully, that we'll be bringing in by 1997 will be 
fairly constant after that. There may be small changes in the 
rules, but the broad methodology, once it's been updated, will 
be kept current and all we are doing after that is reinspecting the 
property to value it against the methodology that is in place. 
 
There won't be constant change, as you predict. I think what we 
have now is much more continuity and much more satisfaction 
with the assessment system than what we've had in the past. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well while we're reviewing and coming up with 
the new methodology, why not come up with a methodology 
that would just continually work year after year rather than 
having a total assessment on . . . in this case, every three years, 
municipalities have to deal with the cost of another assessment 
review. Why not bring that into place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — At the present time, you will recall that 
our values now are based on 1965. And what we're moving, 
from 1965 to 1994 values, so we're bringing them up to date. 
What will occur after that is making sure that from 1994, and 
every three years thereafter, those debt values are updated. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I understand that, Madam Minister. But 
what I'm suggesting, once we've brought it up to '94 values, it  



May 11, 1995 

 
2156 

would seem to me that if we just had some regulations or 
directives in place from here on in, the increased value of 
property could just be added in on an annual basis. Property 
owners knew exactly how assessments would be raised if they 
upgrade, if they clear — let's say for a farmer — clear 30 acres 
off of a quarter section. That property has more value, or land 
values. 
 
Or even if you construct — add to your house or add some 
buildings on a farm property or even in town — that then 
increases values. And if you had some directives, as a 
landowner, as a property owner, you would know as soon as 
you made those changes that your assessment is going to 
change somewhat. You'd have a better understanding rather 
than waiting three years down the road and we'll determine 
what the new assessment will be. 
 
Wouldn't that be an appropriate way to address it, and everyone 
knows where they are rather than waiting for three years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well what you are talking about are the 
reinspections, and reinspections occur every year as there are 
additions on to property improvement or there are changes on 
agricultural land. Those properties should be reinspected and 
added to the assessment roll every year. 
 
That is not what we're talking about when we're talking about 
re-evaluation. If you move up to, say, a market-driven model, 
then you have to have a time in which you do that evaluation if 
you're moving with the market. 
 
They have proposed a market-driven model, and they obviously 
— the people who have examined this, including SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 
— have looked at it and they feel that a three-year cycle is best 
in order for them to make a determination about how these 
values change over time. 
 
I want you to make a distinction between the reinspections, 
which should occur all the time . . . and those taking into 
account the changes in the property whether you're clearing 
some land or whether you're adding a new building on to your 
property — that's reinspection. 
 
Re-evaluation is a determination of the value of the property as 
it relates to the current market forces, and you need some kind 
of a time frame in there that gives you the ability to make that 
analysis. And a one-year roll-over is a bit difficult to make that 
constantly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I guess maybe I'm 
following where you're going, but the question I really would 
like to get to is this: while you're determining what the actual or 
the real market value is going to be — we know that markets 
can go up and down — we're going to have these cycles. Why 
not just put a real value in there as to what the real productive 
value of that property is and then that just goes on for time in 
eternity, if you will. 
 

So what you're saying right now, if we're going by that real 
market value, so the price of property goes up tomorrow, you 
raise it. It drops off three years down the road; you lower it. 
And as a property owner, you're always in this state of flux. The 
reality is, once you've raised it, RMs do not decrease the tax 
revenue that they draw from it. And so SARM and SUMA 
would say, well okay, it's just like any commodity you might be 
moving through the market-place. 
 
And I think at the end of the day, if you just had an actual, real 
value that was progressively there over the long term rather than 
going on whatever the market may bear, it would be something 
that most property owners would understand, and I think that 
SARM and SUMA could certainly set their revenues and their 
fees based on that. It would be a lot easier to follow. And I don't 
know why we can't do that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The property assessment system is fairly 
complex, and it takes into the account the various categories or 
the various classifications of property. And commercial 
property may be going up while residential property is going 
down or agricultural property is changing. 
 
So I believe the recommendations that we have in place now 
that says we should work on three-year cycles is really the best. 
We have done this after consultations with SUMA and SARM. 
They are comfortable with this. They believe that it's consistent 
with the need to make sure that the properties and the property 
owners are provided a fair and equitable valuation system. 
 
I can only tell you that the people who use the system believe 
that a three-year cycle is the best way in which we can provide 
equitable . . . and fairness to the property owners of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I'll move on from that 
area, but I think the points I was bringing — and certainly 
you've raised some points as well — that as far as property 
owners . . . simplify it in the long run would make a lot more 
people happy. 
 
It is our understanding that the fees for the new assessment are 
set with SAMA and that the municipalities will have no 
opportunity to negotiate the assessment costs with private 
assessors. Is this the case? If so, why? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Well as you will recall, in the 
amendments we put into the SAMA Act last year, a 
municipality could, if they choose, find an alternative way of 
doing their assessment. And they had the right to go to the 
market-place, if they chose, to find an assessor to do their 
assessment roll for them. 
 
And so they aren't stuck with the requisitions from SAMA. If 
they choose to opt out and go to field services that are provided 
by the private sector, they have the right to do so. 
 
(1445) 
 



May 11, 1995 

 
2157 

Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying is that municipalities will 
be able to negotiate with private assessors to carry out this 
triennial reassessment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The municipalities will have the right to 
negotiate with private sector assessors if they choose. But this is 
not triannual. This is something that must take place and occur 
every year. An assessor who is qualified must sign off the 
assessment roll. And so whomever is doing the assessment 
services for the municipality will have to provide that service on 
an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, you mentioned in the second 
reading that the legislation brings with it a faster appeals 
process. But clearly this is not spelled out in this Bill. Is this to 
be in the regulations or in another Bill? Could you explain how 
this new appeal process will be faster and more efficient than 
the previous process? Will it also be as fair? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know where the 
member opposite got the idea about a faster appeal process. We 
haven't talked about it. If you could help me with perhaps where 
you got that idea, we would try to find an explanation for it. 
 
But we're not talking about the appeal process. What we're 
talking about though is providing a fair and equitable 
assessment system so that appeals will not be generated to the 
degree they are now. Obviously our assessment system now is 
very much out of date, and there is a lot of questions about 
fairness and equity. 
 
That has generated a lot of appeals, and so there is a backlog. 
What we believe will happen with a new assessment system is 
that those appeals will no longer be necessary because people 
will have current valuations applied to their properties. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I can't point that out to 
you directly. I'll have to do some research on that and get back 
to you on it. 
 
But I do have a question before we move on, and that's 
regarding the appeal process. And I've come to you with a 
concern raised by a business person in the community of 
Whitewood. When they moved to the community, there wasn't 
housing available, and they found a nice house on a quarter 
section of land that was available, so they purchased it. Failing 
that, okay, we're out in the country. We've got some land. It's a 
good place to raise our kids. Taxes should be a little better, and 
quite happy. 
 
They realized that the small acreage would be somewhat higher 
than just strictly agricultural acreage. Unfortunately, Madam 
Minister, what they're facing is a higher taxation rate than they 
would if they would have bought a house in the community. 
 
I'm wondering if we're going to establish some guidelines 
whereby water, sewer, and access to gas . . . and all of these 
properties . . . street clearing and all that is not available on an  

acreage — is not available on a quarter section; it's at your own 
cost — if those will be taken into consideration. And while on 
one hand you may have a higher level than you would if that 
were strictly agriculture, but in regard to property within a local 
community, it is substantially less taking in those costs. Is that 
going to be part . . . and considered in the process of assessing 
property in rural communities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you for that question. I know it is 
a problem for people who are living on small acreages or on 
low-assessed land out in the RMs when they receive tax bills 
that are really based on assessed value of their house, and they 
had expected that, by moving into the rural area, that they 
would have lower taxes. 
 
I will point out to you, with due respect, that the issue that 
you're talking about was an amendment that your government 
brought into the RM Act in 1989, and it was a consequence of 
that Act that we find people now who are paying what they 
believe are taxes . . . or having a value placed on their property 
that is higher than the people who are living in the area who 
have farming as their main occupation. 
 
You may recall the amendment in 1989 that was introduced to 
The Rural Municipality Act. The issue of taxation and services 
is an issue that is a responsibility of the rural municipality, and 
obviously it's not our role or place to make comment on that. 
 
If SAMA, in consultation with SARM, wishes to take into 
account the issue of how we can have people who are living on 
small acreages in rural Saskatchewan given a more fair or a 
better system of taxation, then they will have to think that 
through on their own. It's not the government's place, I don't 
believe, to apply those rules. 
 
This is a system that is driven by the municipalities. If they 
want that system changed to encourage people who are living in 
rural municipalities to have lower taxes on their houses, then 
certainly they have the option to make those discussions and 
bring those point forward, but it's not going to be something 
that is initiated by the provincial government. That is their role 
and their responsibility, and if they want that change, they can 
initiate it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, I'm not familiar with the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Cline: — I'd like to ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the 
member from Moosomin for allowing this introduction. With us 
today in the Speaker's gallery are a group of senior citizens from 
West Portal Mennonite Brethren Church, which is located  



May 11, 1995 

 
2158 

in my constituency in Saskatoon. And these seniors from 
Saskatoon are on a tour, including a tour of the Legislative 
Building here in Regina. 
 
And I'll be meeting with them, and I'd ask members to join with 
me in welcoming these people here this afternoon and wishing 
them a very enjoyable tour, and also a pleasant day and a safe 
trip back to Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 30 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I too 
would like to extend a welcome to our seniors who have joined 
us this afternoon for this debate, and we certainly appreciate the 
time you take to come and possibly maybe give us some 
pointers on how this place could operate more efficiently. We'll 
have to chat with the member about that. 
 
Madam Minister, the one question . . . first of all I'd like to 
know what that amendment was, because I'm not familiar with 
it, how it would have allowed such outrageous tax increases on 
private property that wouldn't even compare to property in a 
small urban community. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — The amendment that I'm referring to is 
section 3(13) of The Rural Municipality Act . . . or 3(31), 
pardon me, 3(31) of The Rural Municipality Act. And it offsets 
a value of the property against the value of the land. And in 
instances where the land value is lower than the value of the 
house, the assessed value of the land is subtracted from the 
house and you pay taxes on the house. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
I'm considering the problem that that has created. Why don't 
you initiate a change to the legislation then that would correct 
that? That certainly addresses a concern that property, whether 
it's a quarter section or a small acreage, isn't just based . . . 
assessment isn't just based on the land but also has the value of 
the house. 
 
In consideration of the fact that that house is not . . . doesn't 
have all the services and that the landowner has to provide a lot 
of services that the person would get in the urban community, 
I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you would give some 
serious thought — your department — to addressing that and 
bringing that up with SARM and SUMA so that we do have . . . 
And like I say, the individuals that I've talked to, the individuals 
I've worked with even on council, were not saying we're asking 
for a break so that we're just living on property at the base of 
the . . . at the cost of just the property value, but we're willing to 
pay a little more. But we're not quite prepared to accept the fact 
that we're charged more than the community . . . a house,  

similar house on a lot in a community with all the other 
services. 
 
I'm wondering if you'd give that consideration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, thank you. Actually we have talked 
to the SARM about it, and I too have had a number of requests 
from rural residents asking that we look at this. I think it is a 
concern, especially if we want people to continue to live outside 
our cities and towns and to enjoy the rural life. 
 
We are actively considering it. We will do it after consultation 
with SARM. And if there is a solution to the problem, then it 
will have to be one that is arrived at jointly with the 
municipalities and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 
members opposite for their cooperation and for their questions. 
And I would like to thank my official who has now left. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, if I could as well certainly express 
our thanks to the minister and her officials for their responses to 
the questions regarding to the two Bills we've passed this 
afternoon. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Assessment 
Appraisers and to enact certain Consequential Amendments 

to The Assessment Management Agency Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Assessment 
Management Agency Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(1500) 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 16 



May 11, 1995 

 
2159 

The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, I would ask that 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation please introduce 
the officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left is 
Mr. Bernie Churko, ADM (assistant deputy minister) of policy 
and programs. Immediately behind him is Lynn Tulloch, 
director of finance and administration. And directly behind me 
is Mr. Don Metz, the ADM of operations. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister . . . and 
first of all welcome to the minister and his officials. There are a 
number of questions that my colleagues and I — and I'm not 
sure if the third party has any, but we'll find out in a few 
minutes — would like to raise. 
 
I've got some specific questions that have come from 
constituents, first of all, that I would like to address before I 
forget about them and forget to raise them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe it was last year I brought to your 
attention the fact there is a spring just north of Whitewood on 
Highway No. 9 in the Qu'Appelle Valley. Basically it's under 
the responsibility of Environment and Resource Management, 
but over the years Highways has maintained access to that 
spring and has hauled gravel into that spring area, so it doesn't 
get real sloppy and messy and try and maintain at least a good 
landscape around it. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate to us 
whether your department is going to continue that process of 
maintaining gravel and access, grading that access into that 
spring on an ongoing basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the 
member opposite — we will certainly continue to maintain that. 
It's an important part of that area, and we will continue to 
maintain it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — What you're saying by continuing to maintain, 
you will make sure there is sufficient gravel and that it's graded 
down to the bottom, to the spring. I'm not sure if it's your 
department that would be looking after the well or the casing 
that's been put around the spring so water can be collected 
much more easily. But I would certainly recommend that 
Highways, considering the fact that you're running up and down 
maintaining the road, may continue the process of maintaining 
that area. 
 
As you know and I'm sure many of your officials know, it's 
become an area where people from a wide area certainly do get 
their drinking water. So I would certainly encourage your 
department to continue that process. 
 
I've got another question, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, does your 
department administer vehicle safety, do the vehicle safety 
checks on vehicles coming into the province or on vehicles that  

have been damaged and are repaired under insurance? Who 
guarantees the roadworthiness of vehicles after they have been 
put through and adjusted and have been re-equipped to become 
roadworthy again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. The 
roadworthiness is the responsibility of SGI, Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance. We do inspect vehicles. We have safety 
inspections on highway traffic. And you will see, as you go by a 
weigh scale at some point in time, traffic officers pulling in 
large trucks, for an example, and inspecting those vehicles for 
safety. But roadworthiness is the responsibility of SGI. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, if a vehicle is damaged . . . and 
in this case, I'm going to use the incident of a vehicle in our 
area. A large truck, as a matter of fact a gravel truck, that had a 
pup trailer behind it, and the driver pulling over ended up 
getting a little too close to the shoulder. And his truck sunk in 
the side of the road, and he actually had substantial damage. 
The vehicle wasn't written off however. They were able to 
repair it, but there were a number of things the driver noticed. 
And the unfortunate part was he wasn't given an assurance of a 
clean bill of health before his vehicle left the shop. 
 
His understanding was when the vehicle left the shop, SGI had 
finished. The claims were followed up on. All the major repairs 
had been done, and he certainly had a lot of questions as to the 
type of repairs. He was afraid that if he drove his vehicle out 
there without demanding some changes . . . And for an example 
. . . here's a good example. They were going to re-roll some 
springs — and a couple of them were actually cracked and 
broken — re-roll them and put them back on the vehicle. 
 
What would have happened to that individual if he'd have been 
on the highway? Just say drove out of the shop. He had . . . all 
these repairs had been done. SGI said, okay, it's ready to go. 
He'd have driven down the road, and an inspector from the 
Department of Highways would have pulled him over. Would 
the inspector have declared that vehicle roadworthy? 
 
What assurances can individuals have that when adjustments 
are made, when corrections are made, when vehicles are 
basically put through a shop and brought up to speed, that they 
will have, when they leave that shop, they will not fall into a 
contravention of the safety division? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, it's quite speculative, and I certainly would like to 
know the details of the particular incidents that you're talking 
about. But if a highway traffic officer stopped a vehicle or 
pulled over a vehicle and did a safety inspection, they would 
look at the safety of that vehicle and then determine at that time 
whether the vehicle was safe or not. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess that's the problem this individual had. In 
one case  say  he actually left the shop, didn't even get a 
mile out of town, and a wheel came off. And he didn't even 
have . . . put it on. And he was asking, so who's responsible? 
 



May 11, 1995 

 
2160 

So if he leaves the shop and if he leaves the premises of the 
body shop where they've done all the work or the wheel 
alignment and rebrake repair — wherever his vehicle may be 
repaired — if he leaves that premises, gets on the road, runs 
into a problem, highway safety board says this vehicle needs 
some work on it, who's responsible for the repairs? Or does the 
Traffic Board at least have some guidelines whereby they would 
inspect a vehicle? 
 
It would seem to me appropriate, Mr. Minister, for highway 
safety or inspection service to make sure that they inspect 
vehicles before they leave a shop or repair shop, rather than just 
thinking SGI has said this is what needs to be done. But does 
SGI fall within the guidelines of the safety requirements of 
vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Certainly it would be SGI's 
responsibility in this case. And I would think that you would 
want to bring that matter up with either the minister in charge or 
in fact with SGI directly. 
 
Certainly our traffic officers have a job to do, and that's 
inspecting vehicles, if in fact they do pull a vehicle over and 
inspect that vehicle for safety concerns. But with the particular 
instance you're talking about, I can't comment any further than 
that on that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess the reason I bring it 
up with you is because you may be aware of the fact that SGI is 
a Crown Corporation, and we really don't get . . . If we try to 
raise the question with the minister responsible, the comment 
always is, well bring that question up when you get down to . . . 
when Crown corporations meets, and you can raise the 
question. And the unfortunate part is our questions are basically 
limited to the year under review which sometimes can be two 
years behind. 
 
But what I'm going to ask of you, Mr. Minister, is that . . . at 
least the safety division of the Department of Highways work in 
or set up a policy with SGI so that if a vehicle, especially 
whether it's a private vehicle or whether it's a construction 
vehicle such in this case, a gravel truck . . . before a vehicle is 
allowed to leave a premises after it's been repaired, that there is 
a clear inspection and a clear bill of health on that vehicle so 
that an owner would not . . . after he leaves . . . Like you had 
indicated, okay, if you leave the premises, SGI has basically 
said it's fine and dandy. 
 
Then what happens if there's a mechanical problem that arises 
shortly after the repairs have been done? The owner is left with 
no alternative but then to go back and try and get it out of SGI. 
And dealing with a Crown corporation, a public entity, an 
insurance company of any kind of firm, as a matter of fact, is 
not always that easy. 
 
So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if your department and your 
safety division would at least establish a policy whereby there is 
an inspection that would follow after reconstruction of a vehicle 
is in place so that an individual feels, once they pull out  

of a shop, that their vehicle is going to get a roadworthy 
certificate or has it applied to it, and they have no fear that that 
vehicle has been declared safe to be on the highways. Would 
you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. 
Certainly if you would give me the particulars of that instance 
 and certainly you know where my office is, or you could 
meet me behind the bar at some point in time  and if you 
could give me that, I would certainly discuss that with 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'll move off of that one. And 
if we have any further complaints down the road, we'll have to 
come back and revisit this and ask why we don't have a good 
working relationship. Hopefully this just draws the fact the 
department should be at least acknowledging that there is a 
working relationship cross-reference so that people don't fall 
into this. 
 
Regarding highway construction across this province. Mr. 
Minister, one would ask when would we see any highway 
construction down in my area. Now I'm not exactly sure if your 
government's looking at trying to win that seat or not. I haven't 
seen any stakes out there, so they must mean that we're not 
going to see any highway construction in the near future. What 
kind of budget is the department looking at this year? 
 
And actually in some ways I feel sorry for you, Mr. Minister, as 
I see your budget being reduced on a yearly basis when you've 
got responsibility for highways and roads right across this 
province, and the dollars that you're getting on a yearly basis, 
the reduction certainly doesn't help in maintaining 
roadworthiness. 
 
But what kind of construction program do we have in place at 
the present time? What is the department anticipating to end up 
with as far as costs of reconstruction of roads that have been 
damaged because of the type of spring we've had, especially on 
the eastern and the north-eastern corner of this province? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite for 
his question. Certainly we do not believe in staking for the sake 
of staking. And you know, we do what we can with the 
financial situation that we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it's good to see that turn around. 
 
But I want to tell you that we're going to spend $34 million in 
capital construction this year and $102 million in preservation 
and maintenance. And the reason why we're spending more in 
preservation and maintenance is because we do have an $8 
billion infrastructure in the province already, and it makes a lot 
more sense to us to preserve and maintain that infrastructure 
than to continue to add to it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, welcome today to yourself and your officials. I  



May 11, 1995 

 
2161 

certainly agree with you that it makes a lot more sense to 
maintain the infrastructure that we already have in place rather 
than going out and simply adding on new highways where they 
may not necessarily be warranted. And because of that I want to 
talk to you today about maintaining some of that infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Minister, just outside of Regina here on Highway 33 you 
built, I believe, 32 kilometres improved highway. I was 
wondering if you could give me the rate counts on that road for 
vehicular traffic, the accident rates, and the justification for 
improving that particular stretch of road. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite for 
the question. The traffic count just outside of the city of Regina 
in 1992 were 1,340 vehicles; that's the average daily traffic 
count. I do not have the accident rates here, but I certainly will 
be prepared to get those for you. And it was basically 
preservation. As you know there was some four-laning done 
within the urban centre, and then it was widened, and there was 
some preservation work done on the remainder of the highway 
near Regina. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you're 
making a determination as to which particular piece of road you 
will rejuvenate, what kind of a formula do you use for that? I 
know that the traffic count plays a part in it. I believe that the 
accident rate plays a part of it. Does the surface condition of the 
highway play a part in that, and if so, what? Can you explain 
how you make the determination as to which particular pieces 
of the highway system would be rejuvenated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you for the question. To the 
member opposite, certainly maintenance costs are a part of it, 
and the condition of the road is a large part of our 
decision-making process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How would all 
the factors within determination be weighed? How heavy of an 
emphasis does the traffic count play? How heavy of an 
emphasis does the accident rate play, the maintenance costs, the 
condition of the road? And how do you evaluate that road 
condition? 
 
On that particular stretch of highway I drive back and forth 
every week, coming from my constituency to Regina, and the 
road condition in comparison to a number of the other 
highways that I've driven in this province seem to be in not too 
bad of condition. So how do you evaluate all those factors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you for the question. 
Certainly we have engineers on staff, and we have some great 
engineers on staff. And you made mention of, it seemed to be 
okay. Now often when I look at a highway, it seems to be okay, 
but often there are cracks in the surface and will allow moisture 
into that surface, and therefore that particular piece of road has 
to be fixed in order to preserve it for the future. So it's very hard 
to determine even as you drive over it. 
 
But certainly if you have any questions ever again on a  

particular road, do not hesitate to contact the department and 
ask them because they will certainly make you aware of their 
concerns. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now how do 
you weigh that though? Within your formula structure . . . and I 
assume you have a formula; you haven't confirmed whether or 
not you have a formula. But how do you weigh the condition of 
the road? Do you have a scale that you use, or how do you 
weigh that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — In regards to a rehab, what you do is, the 
surface distress . . . I mean it's a matter of looking at the 
situation and whether the highway is going to collapse or not. 
And then you priorize those in the province. And that's how you 
basically make your decision on rehab. There's no set formula 
that you could take magic numbers from somewhere and put 
them there. We have engineers there to look at the condition 
and to make the best judgement. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well most 
of the people who would have driven over 33 highway from 
here to Kronau would have thought that piece of road was in 
reasonably good condition. Now perhaps your engineers have 
some evidence that it was not, and if so, I'd like you to identify 
that. 
 
But I can think of a very large number of highways around this 
province that . . . you use the word distress. I think those 
highways have gone beyond the word distress. So I want you to 
give me an evaluation of this particular piece of highway out 
here, Highway 33, from here to Kronau, as to why that 
particular piece of highway needed to be rehabilitated, needed 
to be upgraded, widened, as compared to some other highway 
in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I think there's two things that we're 
talking about here, to the member opposite. There's 
rehabilitation or preservation, and then there's upgrade. And I 
think what you're moving to is asking why this particular road 
was preserved rather than perhaps another highway  perhaps 
in your constituency  that isn't reconstructed. And I think 
maybe that's what you're moving to. 
 
But what the department is prepared to do is give you an 
analysis on 33, if that would be suitable to you, so that you can 
see the analysis that was done. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister, that 
would be fine if it lays out the criteria that were looked at and 
the weight given to that various criteria to come up with the 
determination. 
 
Because I looked at a number of the different highways — not 
only in my constituency but across the province — that are in, 
to use your words, significant distress. I'd like to know, though, 
how heavy a factor the traffic count is on those roads, how 
heavy that is weighed in the determination of either 
rehabilitation and prevention or upgrading, and how heavy a  



May 11, 1995 

 
2162 

weight you put on the accident rates on a particular stretch of 
road to determine whether or not there should be something 
done to that particular stretch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Okay, as I mentioned earlier to the 
member opposite, we have a budget of $102 million in 
preservation, and that's to protect the existing system. 
 
We have a $34 million construction grant . . . or budget where 
the upgrade would fall under. Okay. And the upgrade is where 
the traffic counts and the accident rates are used primarily to 
priorize which highways that you are going to upgrade. The 
preservation is to preserve so that highways don't fall into the 
state of a highway that would then need an upgrade. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, there are a number 
of highways across this province that have fallen into that state 
where they needed upgrade. 
 
I'd like to talk a little bit about the Highway No. 13 from 
Stoughton to Forget. And that's not in my constituency, but I do 
have to drive over that particular stretch of road, and it's one of 
those pieces of road that is in distress. 
 
With the changes to the Crow rate and the grain hauling 
patterns that have already taken place — particularly in 
Stoughton where Forget no longer has an elevator, and you 
receive a significant amount of heavy traffic coming from that 
area to the delivery point in Stoughton — we've seen a major 
impact on that particular stretch of road. And it certainly hasn't 
been to its benefit. What kind of a traffic count do we have on 
that particular stretch of road, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member. I certainly 
agree with you that No. 13 in the Stoughton-Arcola area is in 
need of upgrade. And as the province turns around, certainly 
we'd be able to reassess that into the future. There about 800 
vehicles per day, based on 1992 figures, in that area. 
 
So we know the need, and that is one particular area that we 
certainly realize the need. And we will continue to maintain it 
as best we can until such a time that we can actually upgrade 
that highway. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for 
recognizing that indeed that particular stretch of road is in 
serious trouble. 
 
I have a map from your department and it calls that particular 
stretch from Stoughton to Forget a TMS (thin membrane 
surface). I wonder if you could explain to me what a TMS is. It 
must be some . . . because it says here that one type is 
pavement, one is gravel, and the other is TMS. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — A TMS is a thin membrane surface, and 
we have a lot of highways in the province that have that type of 
surface and when a lot of those highways were put in, that was 
adequate. We had smaller trucks and grain traffic; as you 
mentioned a little while ago, has certainly changed in the last  

few years. 
 
So many of these roads — the thin membrane surface — is 
going under extreme pressure with the changing transportation, 
and so those problems have to be addressed. But as you know, 
we're just coming out of a really bad financial situation and it's 
impossible to address all the thin membrane surfaces at one 
time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope 
you're addressing some of them because we certainly have a 
significant number that are in trouble, and it seems a good 
portion of those are in my constituency or surrounding areas. 
 
One of the things that's happened in our area is with the oil 
activity. It's put a heavy amount of traffic over those roads, and 
that traffic, in a lot of cases, is very heavy trucking and it has 
really been to the detriment of the highway system. And yet that 
same oil traffic and industry has generated a very, very 
substantial amount of income for the province, which in turn is 
not returned to that area. 
 
In fact I was down at another community in the Estevan 
constituency where, on Highway 361 west of Lampman, there 
had been a motor vehicle accident involving a school bus with 
children on it. Where because of the highway there being so full 
of huge potholes — not little ones like you find in the cities, but 
these are potholes that are six, eight feet across — that a vehicle 
bounced across the road and hit an oncoming school bus. 
Luckily, no one was injured in it, but it still is an example of the 
very serious problems that are happening to a number of the 
highways in that area because of the heavy traffic on them. The 
income is being generated there, but it's not being returned there 
to make up for the impact that that economic activity is having. 
 
(1530) 
 
And that's another area, Mr. Minister, that needs to have a very 
serious look at; 361 is the highway that receives a large amount 
of heavy traffic. It's thin membrane in the most part. Some of it 
is gravel, and those parts that are the thin membrane especially 
are in a great deal of difficulty. The gravel parts are, in some 
cases, very little gravel and mostly rock. It does make for a very 
solid surface, but it also causes a few problems with driving and 
with conditions of vehicles, Mr. Minister. 
 
No. 8 Highway is also another one that is a similar situation, 
which is receiving a large amount of heavy traffic on it, in 
particular with the grain movement and with the oil movement. 
It leads down to the customs port at Sherwood. 
 
There is a large amount of heavy traffic hauling grain south 
across the border, particularly in the winter months, that have a 
serious impact on that road. There's also a large amount of oil 
traffic going both across the border and just right in that local 
area that travels back and forth up and down that road. The 
traffic counts on that road have been increasing significantly 
over time. I see here from 1985 to 1993 that the counts have  



May 11, 1995 

 
2163 

gone from 165-175 to almost 400 in 1993, and I would suggest, 
Mr. Minister, that those counts will be even higher. 
 
Now when we're trying to get tourism to come into this 
province, when we have roads such as that particular stretch of 
road, it does not encourage people to use that road to come up 
here. And in fact I have petitions here from the area that I wish 
to table today that address that. And I would read what's written 
on it. These are not official petitions that can be presented to 
the legislature in the normal sense that we would do it here, but 
it still expresses the idea that the public wishes to convey to 
you. 
 
And the question asked on this petition is: Would you like to 
see upgrading on No. 8 Highway from No. 18 Highway at 
Carievale to the Carievale-Sherwood port of entry? Would you 
like to see a 24-hour port of entry for tourism and industrial 
trucking, sports, cultural, recreation, trade with the U.S. (United 
States), not to mention safety reasons? If you would like to see 
this happen, please sign your name. 
 
And I have a significant number of names here, Mr. Minister, 
and they come from all over that area on both sides of the 
border  both in North Dakota and in Saskatchewan  places 
like Sherwood, and Bismarck, Mohall; Carievale, Carnduff, 
Saskatchewan; Gainsborough. Some of these places I don't even 
know where they're at in North Dakota, Mr. Minister. But 
they're right across the whole northern . . . north-western section 
of North Dakota and across the south-east corner of 
Saskatchewan. I would like to present them today, if I can have 
one of the pages please and table these. 
 
Also a number of the business interests in the area, Mr. 
Minister, have written letters to you, to me, and also to the 
federal MP (Member of Parliament) requesting that some 
consideration be given to upgrading this particular piece of 
road. And it doesn't matter what kind of industry you're 
involved in there, Mr. Minister, you want to see something 
happen to improve that particular piece of road. 
 
The letter I'm holding comes from a company called Wolcott 
Gas Processors. This particular industry sells propane mainly, 
and perhaps some liquefied natural gas, I'm not sure about that, 
but propane across the border into the U.S. They have trucks, at 
least one truck every day, sometimes two trucks a day, coming 
up from the Minot area to pick up propane. That's just one of 
the examples, Mr. Minister. 
 
So have you given any consideration to providing some support 
to this particular stretch of road? Those communities along 
there are involved in the north central . . . Central North 
American trade corridor which runs from the tip of Mexico up 
through Canada, through the U.S., Canada, and on to Alaska. 
And these people are particularly interested in trying to develop 
a trade corridor along this route to take advantage of the North 
American Free Trade Agreement. And they can't do that without 
having proper transportation systems. And that particular 
stretch of highway between the border and Carievale is a 
serious impediment to that particular area gaining the benefits 
of that. 

Once you hit No. 18 Highway, you have a good highway. It's a 
good, heavy-duty highway. But when you look across the 
border, you also have an excellent highway system. The road 
coming up to Sherwood, North Dakota, is the heaviest along 
that whole stretch in North Dakota between Westhope and the 
North Dakota border. They have 5 inches of pavement on that 
compared to as little as 2 inches on some of the other of the five 
crossings along the western side of North Dakota. So the best 
highway in North Dakota is coming up to Sherwood and we 
have almost our worst highway taking traffic from the border 
and bringing it into Saskatchewan. And this is one of the areas, 
Mr. Minister, that needs a serious look at and I wonder if you'd 
mind commenting on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well I think if it was . . . if I had a lot of 
money and it was . . . I think I would like to have a beautiful 
port entry at every one. I know I get calls from the people that 
are near Highway No. 4. I get calls from people that live near 
Highway No. 6 and No. 37 and of course No. 8 and 35. And all 
would like a good entry into the United States. 
 
But of course you realize and I realize that that's not possible. I 
mean we do have an $8 billion road infrastructure in the 
province and we are just coming out of some financial 
difficulties, as you're quite aware. We have to pay $870 million 
in interest this year. That would probably improve a lot of those 
port roads. But we just can't cry over spilt milk and we have to 
continue to work with what we have. 
 
So we work within the financial ability of the province. And we 
have to understand too that No. 8 Highway is fairly close to No. 
9 and as well the port of North Portal, Highway 39. And so we 
have entries there. And I know it would be nice to have a 
fantastic highway at all of those points. But we just can't do it 
all at once. And we continue to monitor and continue to 
maintain until such a time that we can look at those particular 
roads. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You say 
you have $34 million available for capital construction upgrade 
this year. How do you allocate that then? What's the priority? 
Can you give me the priority of construction that you have 
established to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Okay, I will be able to send the member 
opposite the priorized list. We do not have it here today. But 
basically the 34 million, as mentioned earlier, would be based 
on an analysis of cost versus need, and that gets into your traffic 
counts and gets into your accidents and gets into your 
maintenance costs and that sort of thing. 
 
Some of that $34 million, as a matter of fact, is going into 
Highway No. 16 or the Yellowhead, a continuation of the 
Yellowhead from Saskatoon to North Battleford, the twinning 
project. And there we have traffic counts of 3,500 vehicles per 
day and higher accident rates and there is a great need there. 
 
There is also federal monies, 50-cent dollars, on that particular 
project. So some of our monies are going into that project, as an  



May 11, 1995 

 
2164 

example. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. How 
much will be going into all of the infrastructure programing that 
would be in conjunction with the federal government? How 
much of the entire 34 million capital budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member opposite 
for his question. Under the infrastructure program, there are I 
believe three projects, and I would get that information to you 
as well. But the projects that I can think of just off hand is the 
Cumberland bridge and the Melfort airport and Grandmother's 
Bay road. And the total of those projects in Highways' 
expenditures would be about $3 million. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Does not the Yellowhead highway, No. 
16, include part of that infrastructure money? I believe that's 
what you mentioned earlier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — To the member opposite, that's a 
different program. Highway 16 is under the SHIP program 
which is the strategic highway improvement program, which 
was signed between the federal government and the provincial 
government in 1992. And it's a cost-sharing program and 
involves, I believe, $70 million. So that's 35 million from the 
federal government and 35 from the provincial government. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Is there any other money out of the SHIP 
program being spent around Saskatchewan? I believe that 
perhaps it was in '92 or '93 there were some bridges built on 13 
Highway at various locations across the province. What other 
projects are taking place in Saskatchewan for this upcoming 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — What I have here is a map of SHIP 
projects, as well as a list, and I would send that to you if that 
would be okay. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if, on 
that list, you can just indicate whether or not the funding is also 
on those lists as what the costs are. Is that included there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Yes, it is. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I 
believe that covers my questions dealing with my local issues. 
 
We do need to take a very serious look at some of . . . or a lot of 
the roads across this province and particularly those areas that 
are having a significant economic development where the road 
usage is increasing. 
 
The map that I have available that was sent to me by your 
department — and I thank you for that — shows that the 
numbers are increasing in some areas and particularly in those 
roads that are in distress. And I believe that we need to do some 
serious considerations as to improving those particular roads 
because of the economic activities that are being generated 
there. 

It's my suspicion, Mr. Minister — because I don't have any 
numbers after 1993 — that some of those road counts would 
indeed be increasing and therefore warrant more considerations 
to be upgraded. 
 
(1545) 
 
You've given me a couple of . . . three programs there for the 
infrastructure, for the SHIP programs. Now when you come to 
make those determinations on the SHIP programs, how do they 
fit into your priority list for around the province? Do most of 
the roads that are being upgraded now fall into that area of 
being under the SHIP program; or are there other roads that are 
being built, such as 33 Highway out here, when it was done last 
year? Was it under the SHIP program or did it fall under some 
other category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Funding under the SHIP program was 
restricted to the national highways network. And there are 
certain highways that are under the national highways network, 
and that would be . . . No. 1 is an example, No. 16 is an 
example, No. 7, No. 11 — there are certain highways in 
Saskatchewan that are classed as the national highways 
network. And the SHIP money has to be used for either 
reconstruction or rehabilitation or maintenance on those 
particular roads. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. All of 
those highways that you've mentioned, none of them touch my 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Minister, we've received your globals and we'd like to thank 
you for that. However there are some of the areas that were not 
perhaps as complete as we would have liked. Rather than taking 
up the time in the Assembly to deal with those, I wonder if we 
could get a commitment from you to answer those further 
questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — You have a commitment that I will 
certainly look at your request. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, your 
officials. A couple of things I want to touch on with you today, 
and hopefully you'll have the answers. 
 
I asked a number of questions of the Minister of Finance a few 
weeks ago, dealing with the announcement made by the Premier 
at Kamsack, dealing with the east side of the province and the 
flooding vis-a-vis roads, what not. 
 
There are a lot of people, particularly in those RMs that might 
be outside of that area that have suffered significant gravel loss, 
are wondering about your ability to deal with their problems, 
given that there's been a very serious commitment made, with 
you as the lead minister, we are told by your colleagues, to 
come up with the money. And the Premier said this $6 million 
was simply a kick-start to further monies. And having analysed 
your departmental budget, I'm wondering if you could tell us 
where you initially see that money coming from, and where else  



May 11, 1995 

 
2165 

the Premier might expect to find monies for what is obviously a 
very serious situation for a lot of people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you for the questions of the hon. 
member opposite. Certainly it is a serious problem. The 
department of course is dealing with SARM at this very 
moment in regards to the program, or the policy, and are also 
working with the rural municipalities in investigating the 
damage. And they are talking with most municipalities at this 
very moment. 
 
We are going to find the money internally, and it's going to be 
tough but we believe that we can do it. 
 
And certainly the RMs need the help. There is damage out 
there; there's a loss of gravel. And certainly I was pleased that 
our government was able to answer in some way to try and help 
the rural municipalities out of the situation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, that is a fairly good 
chunk of money. And given the pressure that's going to be . . . I 
mean we all know the pressure. My colleagues have been 
asking you . . . we've had petitions in this House almost from 
the day it opened. I brought in petitions with hundreds of names 
on; the member from Maple Creek has done. I mean there isn't a 
highway in this province, Minister, that isn't under some 
significant pressure. And we have RMs all over the whole area 
. . . The Regina clay — they tell me that their gravel loss this 
winter was as bad in winter and spring as it's ever been. 
 
And they're not going to be able to access monies as they have 
in the past, so I think you need to indicate to us  at least so 
that those people have some satisfaction that they aren't going 
to get cut back even worse  where you're going to get the 
money from, where in your budget you foresee the ability to 
come up with some very serious money, particularly if that's 
only a kick-start. And I think it's incumbent upon you to bring 
that forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member opposite. 
Indeed, as I mentioned earlier, there is quite a number of rural 
municipalities that have more damage than normal this year. 
And internally we will look for efficiencies in our preservation 
budgets. In all areas of the Department of Highways we will 
certainly look internally for as many efficiencies as we can. 
 
You also have to remember that Municipal Government is 
allowing the rural municipalities to move some of their grant 
structure from conditional to unconditional, and also there will 
be some money put into futures. 
 
And so I think the program will be good and SARM and the 
department are working on the details. It's not easy to come up 
with an additional $6 million, but we will find it somehow 
because we realize that the rural municipalities need the help in 
this extreme circumstance. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're telling the Assembly today is, 
as we go through your estimates, Minister of Highways  pass  

my budget and trust me. I mean this announcement is made; 
dire circumstances. But when I hear the Premier of the 
province, in the weeks just leading up to an election campaign, 
out there teasing the folks in Kamsack about this just being the 
kick-start, and you're the guy that's supposed to deliver, then I 
think I have a right to ask some serious questions. Because your 
budget is under extreme pressure, Minister, absolutely extreme 
pressure. 
 
And all of a sudden you're going to come up with a bunch more 
money. And I'm just wondering where you're going to . . . you 
must have . . . before you were designated as the lead minister 
on this, you must have consulted with your departmental staff 
and been prepared to bring forward to cabinet some ideas about 
where you're going to get the dough from. 
 
And I think you should give us some clear understanding of 
where those efficiencies are going to occur, so that others in 
this province don't find out later on, once you've gone out and 
maybe won the next election campaign, that they're all of a 
sudden on the short end of the stick. Because rural 
Saskatchewan, Minister, under your government, has been 
getting that short end for the last three years and people are 
getting sick and tired of it. So you should be able to give us 
some indication about where you're prepared to achieve those 
efficiencies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member opposite. 
We've had good discussions with RMs, and we've talked to 
them and they're going to be, I believe, as reasonable as 
possible because they know the financial stress that the 
government is under, and we're just moving ahead and turning 
the corner. 
 
And certainly they understand that and they're going to be as 
reasonable as they can with their situations. And we will, 
through efficiencies within the department, try and find as much 
monies as we can there in order to help the rural municipalities. 
 
It would be nice if I could wiggle my nose and say no more 
snow and no more rain and the flood wouldn't be there, but 
we've got to live with those circumstances. They've happened. It 
just doesn't happen every year, but this year it happened. And so 
we're going to have to try and find as much money internally as 
we can in order to help the rural municipalities out of this 
situation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying to me is, today, that 
I'm not prepared to tell you, on behalf of the taxpayers of this 
province, one thing. Not one indication of where I'm going to 
come up with a very large sum of money. That it isn't this area, 
isn't this area, that . . . I wish you could wiggle your nose, 
Minister. I think there'd be more chance of you wiggling your 
nose than some of those RMs seeing some gravel this year. That 
might be possible. 
 
But obviously there's a very strong and big commitment been 
given out there and there's extreme pressure in a lot of areas.  



May 11, 1995 

 
2166 

And I would think we would want to understand in this 
Assembly, where you're going to spend the taxpayers' money 
that you've maintained all along, as Highways minister, that you 
didn't have enough to fix all the problems. You didn't have 
enough to do regravelling. 
 
So, Minister, you're now going to have to come up with another 
4 or 5 or 6 million bucks. And you must have some idea. I mean 
just give me one example of where you're going to get the 
money from and maybe we can get on with considering giving 
you a budget to work with. I don't know why you would want to 
be so hesitant. What are you hiding? Or was the Premier just 
blowing smoke in Kamsack? 
 
I mean give us some indication of where you're going to 
achieve the efficiencies. What departmental areas can you cut to 
make this happen in a reasonable way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite for 
his question. Certainly I mentioned earlier that we'll look for 
efficiencies wherever we can. If in fact we have to delay 
construction of a certain project . . . and I know your next 
question will be, well which project is that going to be? Well I 
don't know that. 
 
But if we have to delay a construction of a particular project, 
and/or if we have to delay some preservation in some area to 
help the rural municipalities in a time that they really need it, I 
think that's important that we do that. And the rural 
municipalities agree. 
 
I think it's a little premature to say how much the damage is 
going to be. I mean we're sort of saying, you know, 4 million. 
But it could be 1 million, it could be 2, it could be . . . we don't 
know that figure yet. We're doing the analysis now. But 
certainly we will find it within our budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, you were prepared, prior to the end 
of the budget year, to spend 20 million bucks from the previous 
budget year on a bunch of programs. And because you wouldn't 
change your union-only tendering policy, that didn't happen. 
Plain and simple. Contractors said we'd rather live without it 
than be put underneath the thumb of that particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
But that money was there. You ran a very large surplus. And I 
would remind you where that surplus came from, Minister. You 
represent a rural area of this province that's under extreme 
pressure now because of flooding. Some people up there are 
going to miss their third crop in a row. And I would think after 
all the campaigning you did up there to get that nomination, that 
you would want, Minister, you would want to represent those 
people. And that means that rural Saskatchewan, Minister, can't 
afford to have and bear the brunt any more. 
 
I mean you took all their GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) money; you balanced your budget; you had a large 
surplus. And now I see the Premier trotting in that same area 
again and making promises again before an election. He's going  

to be a helper. But you know darn well that those rail lines and 
those roads and those culverts and those bridges, I mean all that 
stuff's been done. 
 
You're putting in infrastructure as we speak in here. There were 
roads cut day after day to let that water through. And you're 
fixing that stuff. So those costs are mounting. You've got to be 
finding the money somewhere. And I don't understand why 
you're so hesitant, why you're so hesitant to say to this 
Assembly, well in my budget we think we can achieve X here, 
here, here, and here. Because we don't put a priority on those 
areas. 
 
Then it would seem only fair, Minister, that before this House 
rises we'd have a clear understanding of where you're going. I 
can't get you back here in July and August and September. I 
can't get you back here. You're out there free-wheeling. So it's 
important when we do estimates that we understand what you're 
doing, why, and how you're going to spend your budget. 
 
And you now have extra monies tacked on top of that budgetary 
process that you went to Treasury Board with. Where are you 
going to get that money from? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well I'll try and mention it one more 
time. I guess our government is not in the . . . does not want to 
create deficits. I mean we want to balance the budget, and this 
is what we ran on and this is what we're going to continue to 
do. 
 
So what we have to do is find monies, for a situation that 
happened this year, within the existing budget. So we're going 
to monitor the damage in the rural municipalities. Municipal 
Government have put up $2 million into futures. They are 
allowing the municipalities to move their grants from 
conditional to non-conditional to allow them to do more 
gravelling and to . . . maybe more maintenance. 
 
And we are going to look for $4 million within the Department 
of Highways, if this is in fact the amount we need. And we may 
have to look at a construction project or we may have to look at 
a preservation project in order to find this money, and look for 
other efficiencies within the department. 
 
But I want to tell the member opposite that we . . . our 
government is determined to run the province on a balanced 
budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I can appreciate that, Minister, that's 
why I don't understand why you, particularly you of all 
departments, would want to have any truck with that union-only 
tendering policy that cost you that 20 million bucks. 
 
I mean you would have had that available to shift and move 
around. A lot of those contractors, Mr. Minister, could have 
been very valuable to you in this crisis, and money. Instead you 
would not change to go along with all the people you have to  



May 11, 1995 

 
2167 

work with. 
 
Now the question is, Minister, why you would want to adhere 
to that particular policy in the face of a crisis, when if you ever 
wanted to have low-cost delivery of a service it would be today, 
you know. Low-cost delivery is the only way you're ever going 
to come anywhere close to fixing all those roads and culverts 
and replacing that gravel. 
 
And you say no, I'd rather give up the money rather than change 
my ways. And how in the world can people in rural 
Saskatchewan accept that kind of a philosophy? That's why I 
have to ask these questions, because it seems that you would 
rather on one hand, give it up to the unions rather than spend it 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, once again, are you prepared, are you 
prepared to go back to the Finance minister on behalf of the 
whole east side of this province and a whole lot more that 
obviously have a very serious situation  because if rural 
people don't have transportation, they don't have much, 
Minister, and you're in charge of that  are you prepared to go 
back to the Minister of Finance and say: Madam Minister, we 
have a crisis on our hands; we're prepared to do some things to 
help these folks out. Are you prepared to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — As I said to the member opposite earlier, 
through Mr. Chairman, is that we will find the money within 
our budget, whether it be a construction project that has to go, if 
it has to go, or preservation project. But I think it's premature to 
say that we can't find the money. If in fact at some point in time 
there is no money, I certainly will go to the Finance minister, 
because she's very understanding. 
 
But I want to tell you one thing: that the budget will be 
balanced, and that's a priority with this government. Because we 
know what happened when you don't balance the budget — the 
debt increases and the interest increases on the debt, and this 
year we're going to pay $870 million in interest. And boy, could 
we do a lot of highways work with $870 million. We can't let 
that happen again. 
 
And like I said earlier, it's no use to cry over spilt milk, and we 
will not. So we will work within out budget, and we'll find the 
money to the best of our ability. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well there's going to be $110 million of spilt 
milk after you let your friends in CIC (Crown Investment 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) carry on — and your Minister of 
Labour here — carry on with that goofy policy. 
 
Do you know how much road you could do for 110 million 
bucks, Minister? How much gravel you could fix? How many 
bridges you could build? How many people in rural 
Saskatchewan would have a decent road to drive on? Hundred 
and ten million dollars of spilt milk, that's what it's going to cost 
you with your union-only tendering. You know, you already 
spilt 20 million of it yourself. So I don't understand for the life 
of me why you would talk to us about spilt milk when  

you're spilling it all over the place. 
 
It's no wonder you didn't want to run in the Melfort 
constituency because of that pipeline there they call a sprinkler 
system; I wouldn't want to run there either. I mean how could 
you walk down a street in Melfort and hold your head up with 
that thing spewing water out all over the place? That's a prime 
example, Minister, of what we're talking about. I know that you 
don't like to hear those things, but that's the truth. I'd have run 
off and run in Carrot River too. 
 
Mr. Minister, one more time. There's a $6 million pledge on the 
table. There's community after community; why in the world 
you will not give us some indication . . . and we represent 
taxpayers just like you do. And in my part of the world, they are 
sitting down here in the Regina clay, and there's no gravel on 
their roads. And they're saying, you know what? You know 
what? We're never going to be represented by a New Democrat 
in the Legislative Assembly. There isn't a snowball's chance, 
Minister. 
 
So you're probably going to take our gravel, the money, and 
you're going to fill the Premier's election promises up in places 
like Carrot River. And yet you won't tell the good folks out 
there exactly where you're going to get the money from. They're 
just supposed to trust you. Well rural Saskatchewan is tired of 
trusting New Democrats because it's just pillage and burn all the 
time. 
 
Minister, you have the obligation to tell people where you're 
going to get that money from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite for 
his question. And as I told him earlier, we will look for 
efficiencies within the department. We will look at our 
construction budget. And if indeed some has to be taken from 
there and the preservation portion of the budget, if some has to 
be taken from there . . . and we will help rural municipalities 
over this time of crisis. 
 
The SURM . . . or SARM, pardon me, is very favourable about 
some help, and so are we because this doesn't happen every 
year, and so we will try and help them out of this crisis. And 
they're certainly appreciative of the efforts that we are making. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1994-95 
General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 16 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 



May 11, 1995 

 
2168 

The Chair: — If the minister would like to thank his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would, first 
of all, like to thank the members of the opposition for their 
questions, and I certainly would like to thank my officials 
today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank the 
minister and his officials for taking the time to come and 
address a number of questions that were raised today. 
 
Certainly we could have raised a lot more. But for expediency, 
we'll take it easy on the minister and hope next year he's got 
more to offer, or his colleagues feel sorry and give him more 
money in Highways. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you to the members of the committee. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Chair: — As the last time the department was before the 
committee was April 3, I'll ask the minister to reintroduce his 
officials to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Beside me is Brent Cotter who is the deputy minister of the 
department. To Mr. Cotter's left is Kathy Hillman-Weir, who is 
the executive assistant to Mr. Cotter. Behind me is Ron Hewitt, 
who is the assistant deputy minister of the registry services 
division. And next to Ron is Keith Laxdal, who is the associate 
deputy minister of finance and administration division. And to 
Mr. Laxdal's left is Janet Sullivan, the administrative assistant 
with administrative services. To my right, Mr. Chairman, is 
Doug Moen, who is the executive director of public law and 
policy. Also in the Assembly, Mr. Chairman, and seated spread 
out across the back are Darryl Bogdasavich, who is the 
executive director of the civil law division; Richard Quinney, 
who is the executive director of prosecutions division; Dick 
Till, the executive director of corrections; John Baker, the 
executive director of law enforcement services; and Betty Ann 
Pottruff, director of policy planning and evaluation. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — I was just going to say, as always, Mr. Chairman, 
I guess you'll have to rely on my colleague and I for some 
questions. I'm not exactly sure if the minister really wanted to 
face us this afternoon, but we look forward to addressing a 
number of concerns with the minister and his officials and 
thank them for coming. Was that two weeks ago? Anyway . . . 
 
A global question I'd like to ask, Mr. Minister, regarding 
lawsuits . . . and last year our office asked for information on 
any lawsuits in which the government was currently engaged. 
And we asked this with different departments, but basically 
they didn't provide the information and suggested that where it 
should be coming from was from your office, Mr. Minister. 

And we're wondering if you will submit information to our 
office on behalf of all of the government departments, Crowns, 
agencies, and boards, providing detailed information including 
who the plaintiffs were, the defendants, complaints, 
government lawyers, and costs to governments of any lawsuit 
that may be entered into or brought forward by any department 
or a complaint against the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, we'll provide that 
information to the member as he requested. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. Also, Mr. Minister, are 
you able to forward global responses to us today? All the global 
questions, were they forwarded to us? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, I have those with me, Mr. 
Chairman, and I'll send them across by page. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, a few general questions. Firstly, 
dealing with maintenance enforcement, how many are currently 
registered with maintenance enforcement? How many cases are 
currently delinquent? What does the average payment owe in 
total? I'm going to give you three or four of these rather than 
just short questions and short answers. If I'm going too fast, just 
let me know. 
 
How many of the clients registered with maintenance 
enforcement are subsisting on welfare? How much money has 
been collected on behalf of custodial parents through the 
maintenance enforcement office in the last fiscal year? And 
then I've got two or three other questions I'd like to ask. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, I'm able to answer most 
of the member's questions. 
 
The total number of applications which we have received 
during the life of the program — that would be from March 1, 
1986 to March 31, 1995 — are 17,684 applications. In the 
fiscal year just ended, April 1, 1994 to March 31, 1995, we had 
received 1,881 applications. Those applications come in at the 
rate of approximately 40 per week. 
 
The payments that have been processed by the office from the 
beginning of the program in March '86 up to March '95 has 
been almost $103 million. The payment processed in the last 
fiscal year . . . I shouldn't say . . . I mean the fiscal year before 
last. I'm going to give you the last two years. April 1, '93 to 
March 31, '94 was 17.9 million. And the payments processed in 
the last fiscal year was 20 million. 
 
Of those amounts, let me break out the welfare payments that 
were in the welfare stream, if I can use that word. In the last 
fiscal year  that is April 1, '94 to March 31, '95  there was 
$1.85 million; and in the previous fiscal year, April 1, '93 to 
March 31, '94, that was $1.7 million. 
 
We do not have the information respecting custodial parents. 



May 11, 1995 

 
2169 

Mr. Toth: — That's a substantial sum of money, and I guess it 
shocks me to see 40 complaints a week. I'm not even sure . . . 
I'm not sure what that's indicating about our society, but there's 
certainly going to be a lot of hurting kids out there and 
disturbed families when you have 50 complaints a week or 50 
cases a week coming to your office. 
 
Since this maintenance enforcement . . . And also last year, I 
believe it was last year we brought forward legislation that 
allows for a mediation process. I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, 
since that has been implemented, how has that program worked, 
and how many of these cases would have been worked through 
mediations versus ending up going to courts to address 
maintenance with regards to custodial parents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — What the office receives are court 
orders in effect. Court orders are sent to them, and by that time 
the court has already made its judgement. The mediation system 
that we put in place last year will affect the process which leads 
to those orders being made, but that system just went into place 
on January 1 of this year. It took an implementation period, so 
we're not beginning to see the results of it yet. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically what you're saying then, the numbers 
that we have before us really are strictly reflecting court 
proceedings. And the mediation processes will not have had a 
drastic effect on these numbers, or indeed that won't really be 
showing up in the numbers that you've given to me at the 
present time. 
 
Mr. Minister, what has Saskatchewan done in the area of 
maintenance enforcement? Specifically, have been there any 
funding increases for this area, staffing increases? Have there 
been any new measures implemented to ensure that 
maintenance payments get into the hands of the custodial 
parent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We're quite satisfied with the 
performance of the office. Let me give the numbers that the 
member asked for. In '94-95, the fiscal year just ended, the 
office had 31 full-time equivalents. And in the current budget 
year, the '95-96 year, the number of full-time equivalents will 
be 30.6 — slightly less.  
 
The budgetary expenditures for '94-95 were $1.098 million, and 
in the current year they are projected to be $1.049 million, so 
we're quite satisfied with that. If you recall the numbers I just 
gave you a few moments ago, we're actually able to do more 
with less resources  both for the people who are . . . on whose 
behalf we're collecting money and for the consolidated revenue, 
as far as the social welfare stream is concerned. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So if I understood you correctly, Mr. Minister, 
you're indicating that you actually had a drop of three and a half 
positions from '93-94. Did I get that correct? Were . . . '93-94 
numbers or were you giving me '94-95 firstly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I should . . . it's actually less. It was 31. 
It's now 30.6, so there's a drop of 0.4. 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I understand a number of measures 
have been undertaken in Manitoba, for example, suspending 
and refusing drivers' licences and motor vehicle registration; 
reporting delinquent payers to credit bureaus; seizing monies 
owed by the payer and other people, such as jointly-owned bank 
accounts; increasing maximum jail term from 30 to 90 days; 
and raising the maximum fine to 1,000 from 500 for wilfully 
avoiding payments. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, as far as this province is concerned 
. . . and the enforcement of maintenance . . . does your 
department find that we're lagging behind, that you find it 
difficult at times, or is there a feeling that maybe we have to 
implement other measures, such as Manitoba has, to enforce 
maintenance? And if the feeling is there that we're not really 
meeting the needs of the custodial parent out there, what is the 
department doing to address these concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We feel, on the whole, that our 
legislation is one of the strongest of its kind in Canada. We are 
very much aware of the Manitoba development that the member 
has referred to. There are also provisions that have been 
introduced in Alberta that are of some interest to us, and we've 
done a fair amount of work on this. And what we've decided to 
do is to watch how those measures affect the situation, what 
kind of results they're getting from it, before we consider doing 
it in Saskatchewan. 
 
But as the member observed earlier, we improved the collection 
procedures quite a bit; that has had a pay-off in terms of the 
effectiveness of the office. And we're watching what's 
happening in other provinces very carefully. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, has the government ever looked at 
other methods of helping custodial parents, such as percentage 
standard of support whereby the court grants custodial parents 
support based on certain percentage of the non-custodial 
parent's wage, whereby any changes in wages would 
automatically take effect? 
 
I think what we're looking at here . . . and certainly I think we 
raised this question last year as well, the fact that there are 
situations where non-custodial parents may find that their 
income has decreased, and yet they've been requested by the 
court to maintain a certain level of support. And I guess what 
the custodial parent is suggesting, maybe if it was flexible, then 
it would . . . basically if it was flexible they could address the 
changes in wages. 
 
Maybe you could respond to that, Mr. Minister, if I can stop this 
time clock. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, that was a really a very 
interesting question. The member may be aware that there has 
been a lot of work done on this precise question that he raises, 
over the last couple of years  last four years I'm told  
between the federal government and all the provinces really. 
We've been actively involved in that. 
 



May 11, 1995 

 
2170 

And following the Justice ministers' meeting in Victoria in 
January, we released a major study on it. And that's been 
circulated across Canada, and there will be considerable 
reaction to it. That report proposed the kind of formula for 
calculating support payments that the member referred to. And 
built into that formula is the kind of flexibility that the member 
was referring to. 
 
So if the income of the non-custodial spouse changes, drops, 
the process is available to adjust the amount of support in light 
of that development. And similarly if the income rises, the court 
will be able to move quickly on application in order to adjust 
that. So it's a flexible kind of approach that the member's 
question suggested. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, would there be a maximum and a 
minimum amount that may be brought forward, or is it strictly, 
if that's applied on a percentage basis, irregardless of what the 
income of the non-custodial parent may be. You could have a 
substantial increase in wages and lose that in a few months, or 
if it drops to a certain level on the bottom end, it may be hardly 
worth making payments. So I'm wondering is there a minimum 
and a maximum that would apply in this circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The formula that is included in the 
support deals with income levels between 7,000 a year at the 
low end and 150,000 a year at the high end; and then beyond 
that you're outside the formula. It's a question then for the 
courts to determine, I suppose, the way they deal with those 
questions now. So that's the band that will be affected by the 
formula. 
 
The whole question is also dependent upon the final outcome of 
the tax question raised by the Thibodeau case, which is out 
there for determination now and which will have a great deal of 
effect on the way in which the formula operates. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I have a few questions that have 
been brought to my attention by individuals who are really 
concerned about the Justice system and how it's affecting them. 
 
And I'm not going to use first names, but certainly it's people 
who have called. I'll just say an individual by . . . Mr. Harre 
from Regina has a problem in view of the fact that his wife and 
some aunts — and it comes around to maybe a case that's even 
before us, regarding pyramids; I'm not sure if that would have a 
direct effect — but they attended a candle party and 
subsequently ordered $150 worth in candles. The product was 
never delivered so they were therefore swindled out of 150. 
They contacted the Better Business Bureau, who informed them 
that they must contact the city police. They were then told by 
the city police that they would not do anything about it because 
the crime was not over $500. 
 
I guess their frustration is, in other words they've lost $150 but 
because it wasn't over $500 there wouldn't be any action taken. 
They're wondering, Mr. Minister, how you can legitimize an  

activity such as this. They feel a wrong was committed. And 
because their loss was underneath $500 they feel that what they 
basically were told: well I guess it's tough, your loss was under 
$500, we're not going to take any actions, therefore there's 
nothing we can do. 
 
Can you inform the Harres of what actions or how they would 
then proceed to receive compensation for a . . . I guess they 
would consider this a fraudulent matter that was imposed by 
them and a loss that was incurred. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, I've consulted with the 
department about the situation that the member raises, and we 
are not aware of the situation. 
 
We have heard that there are such thresholds that are being 
applied by some of the municipal police forces. The member 
raised the case in Regina; we've heard that they have a dollar 
threshold. It's not any kind of instruction they get from us, nor 
do they tell us about this in a direct way, so we're not certain 
that that is their policy. But we have no reason to argue with the 
member. And we will indeed discuss this with them following 
our exchange in the House this afternoon. 
 
The person or persons who sold the candles to them or entered 
into that transaction are very likely registered under The Direct 
Sellers Act, and if that's the case, there will be a bond involved. 
And it may well be that the people who wrote to you could get 
access to that bond and get their satisfaction in that way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I'd certainly be 
prepared to and more than willing to discuss this and get some 
further details so that we can have a follow-up on it. I guess the 
question that arose, as was related to us, was the fact that unless 
it's $500 or more, it's insignificant and basically saying we 
really don't have time to follow up on all these trivial matters 
that seem to be addressed with us 
 
In view of the fact, Mr. Minister, that . . . I believe it was just 
last week. I'm not sure. It was an individual from the criminal 
crime division was on the radio and in the newspapers warning 
people of other types of programs that are available, and you get 
a call through the mail, and you've won all these prizes if you 
just send us X number of dollars, and to be wary of these types 
of sales persons. So I'm not sure how we combat it all, other 
than buyer or public beware. But I think I'd appreciate if we 
took the time to follow up on this. This might have an avenue 
where it could be pursued. 
 
Another question that arose from an individual from Prince 
Albert, regarding a matter of child abuse . . . This individual 
called our office to put forward comments on Saskatchewan 
justice system, which they indicated they have lost total faith in 
the system. And the reason they feel they've lost faith in the 
system is because they were told by police in Prince Albert that 
they were reluctant to proceed with an investigation into child 
abuse because of the Martensville situation. 
 
And it seems to me a sad day, Mr. Minister, when individuals  



May 11, 1995 

 
2171 

feel that they really can't go to the police any more because 
there's a reluctance to really investigate suggestions of child 
abuse . . . or are discouraged to proceed with any charges 
because of what may or may not have happened at Martensville. 
 
What would you be saying or what do we say, to individuals 
raising and bringing these concerns to our attention? And here 
again, Mr. Minister, I can certainly give you the name privately 
afterwards to maybe do a follow-up. 
 
I think you're well aware of the fact that in our discussions, both 
recently and in the past, I think we must be very cognizant of 
the fact that we . . . justice should be allowed to operate and we 
should be able to believe that at the end of the day, if a 
complaint is laid and an investigation is completed, that after 
that investigation is completed, that investigation should be 
allowed to proceed in a matter that doesn't drag people into the 
public or public eye or out into the open or focus of public 
attention until it can be proven that their actual circumstances . . 
. that would indicate that certainly this is something that should 
be followed up on. But at the same time we don't want people 
to feel that they are just sloughed off because there's a fear to 
proceed with an allegation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I am really concerned about that 
information. We have given a lot of emphasis to child abuse 
cases and to following up on them. And the member will know 
some of the measures that we've taken to better deal with the 
evidence of young children who are the subject of sexual abuse. 
 
We have learned a lot about the handling of that evidence, the 
gathering of it, and maintaining it in such a way that its integrity 
is intact and it gets before a jury without being discounted or 
otherwise have its integrity lessened. 
 
I will be following up with the member to obtain the name and 
we will check into the situation in Prince Albert. There is very 
simply no basis for any police officer saying they should be 
reluctant because of what happened in Martensville. Their 
obligation is clear when a situation like this is reported to them 
 to investigate it and investigate it according to the 
procedures that police follow in such cases. 
 
So I'm very interested in following this up with the member. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I'm going to come back to some 
questions on that in just a moment, but I'd like to move on to 
another question that arose from a conversation with an 
individual from this community, and they're more than prepared 
to pass over information as well. 
 
But basically, the first question that arised and then a 
subsequent question that came . . . or was brought to my 
attention today. An individual was basically charged with 
having committed an insurance fraud, was then — if I'm not 
mistaken here — convicted, sent to prison for six months. The 
conviction was then subsequently overturned and then after the 
Crown was allowed to appeal. But at the end of the day, an  

appeal wasn't brought forward, and the person's been facing 
somewhat a position of hassle for the past number of years 
arising out of this conviction. 
 
His first question was: if a person's been charged, tried, and 
found innocent, why should they be forced to pay for the costs 
to prove their innocence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well in any criminal prosecution, the 
person who is charged is presumed to be innocent and the onus 
is on the Crown, on the prosecutors, to prove that they're guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt. That applies in whatever court 
you're in — if it's in Provincial Court or in Queen's Bench, 
before a judge alone or before a judge and a jury. So that the 
situation is, in reverse, is the opposite of the way in which it 
was reported to the member's office. He's simply not in the 
situation of having to prove he's innocent — the Crown's in a 
position of having to prove that this person is guilty. 
 
Now in any event, it has never been the law of this country, nor 
of England, from whom we inherited our criminal procedures, 
that the state would pay the costs of anyone who was acquitted 
or convicted — the state is simply administering the law laid 
down by parliament as to what conduct is criminal. 
 
(1645) 
 
The presumption of innocence operates, as I indicated earlier, 
and the Crown does what it does. It objectively puts the facts 
before the tribunal — whether it's a judge or a judge and jury 
and the system works in the way that the member is familiar 
with. 
 
And there have never been costs awarded in connection with 
that process. 
 
On rare occasions in the history of the common law, persons in 
that position are able to show that the prosecution has been 
malicious, that something has gone wrong with the system and 
someone has acted in a completely improper manner and has 
been motivated by malice. And in those circumstances a court 
may find, by way of damages, that the person is entitled to 
recover their costs plus other damages for their loss. But that 
rarely, rarely happens and it's certainly not part of the allegation 
of this person as I understood your question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically what . . . as I understand, Mr. 
Minister, if a person happens to have a charge laid against them 
and would seek legal counsel, goes to court, and at the end of 
the day the person is found to be innocent  the charges aren't 
valid  but in the meantime that legal counsel has cost money. 
So the person has had to hire counsel to go and defend them in 
court and they're left with that . . . that can become a fairly 
substantial cost. 
 
So what you're saying then is that legal counsel, that cost to that 
individual, if they're found innocent, is their . . . I guess what 
you're just saying, well it's tough. That's the way our justice 
system operates. I'm not exactly sure if that's quite how it  



May 11, 1995 

 
2172 

should operate, Mr. Minister. I think there should be some 
accountability from the Crown and from our police officers, 
from the whole justice system, as how justice is applied when it 
comes to the fact that if you're charged then all that cost, and it 
can . . . we know that court cases can drag out for a long period 
of time and it can become a fairly substantial cost. 
 
How does a person then, when their innocence is proven, go 
about trying to recover some of the losses that they have 
incurred in having to proceed through trial and having to pay 
legal counsel to defend them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well you know, you got to consider 
what is the public interest. Parliament passes criminal laws 
which are simply laws that define what conduct is such a 
departure from the norm as to be considered by our society to 
be fit to be labelled a crime and treated as a crime and punished 
as a crime if the person is found guilty. And we make those 
decisions in assemblies like this. 
 
In Canada we do it in Ottawa because of their constitutional 
responsibility. In the United States they do it in accordance with 
slightly different constitutional arrangements but we all do it. 
And we do it in order to maintain order in our society, a system 
of social control over behaviour to deal with situations where 
individuals engage in conduct which is such a departure from 
the norm that they are considered to have committed a crime. 
 
Now the whole system is conscious of the fact that those people 
are presumed innocent until they're proven guilty beyond a 
reasonable doubt. And so the police in their investigation know 
that they have to accumulate evidence to that standard so that if 
that evidence goes before a court and if it's believed, the person 
will be found guilty. 
 
The prosecutions people, which in this province is done through 
this department, also has an obligation to look at the evidence 
and to determine whether or not there is a reasonable prospect, 
a reasonable likelihood, of conviction. Those words are 
important — a reasonable likelihood of conviction. And it is the 
professional responsibility of all of our prosecutors to make that 
judgement. 
 
So it's gone through two screens to that point. And if the 
judgement is that that threshold has been met, then the matter is 
taken to court. The Crown puts in its evidence. That evidence is 
tested by counsel acting for the accused. And they try to deal 
with the evidence in the way that lawyers do. They 
cross-examine and they introduce other evidence and try to 
establish for the court that their client has not been proven 
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
And it's important for all of us to remember that that is the 
standard that the court is applying. Court is not determining, in 
any civil sense, innocence or guilt. They're not trying to find out 
whether a person is probably guilty or probably innocent. 
They're answering the question: has that accused been proven 
guilty of this offence beyond a reasonable doubt?. If so, they're  

found guilty; if not so, they're found not guilty. Now the 
question of are you or are you not innocent on this balancing act 
that I mentioned earlier just never comes up in a criminal 
prosecution. 
 
Now the point I'm trying to get to — the member will forgive 
me for being a little lengthy in my answer, but it's a very 
important point — there is an enormous public interest in the 
justice system being able to operate on the basis of evidence 
that has been gathered by an independent police force, then 
assessed by an independent prosecutorial service, each acting 
independently of any kind of influence from the outside, but 
doing their own jobs as they've been trained to do. And then 
they decide whether something goes to court or not. 
 
It's an enormously important point that that be allowed to 
continue and continue untrammelled in order that we are able, 
as a society, to deal with people who care so little about the way 
in which our society operates, that they're prepared to engage in 
activities that are such serious departures from the norm, in 
other words that they have engaged in activity which we call a 
crime. 
 
That has to go through without the police or the prosecutors 
being worried about if they miss the mark — if they're 
somehow not able to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, 
that there would be consequences attaching to the system 
whereby you might have to pay somebody's big legal bill, pay 
for their hiring of lawyers and the like. 
 
So we, meaning the system generally, over hundreds of years, 
has never allowed that to creep in. And I think it would be a 
tragic mistake to do that because we would then contaminate 
our system by economic considerations and allow that to 
influence our judgement about whether or not this alleged 
misconduct can be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
I think that requirement itself, the necessity of proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt, gives the accused people a great deal of 
protection. The charter cuts in also with a great deal of 
protection for accused people. And it provides, in a democratic 
country, I think, sufficient safeguard without even considering 
for a moment having some kind of economic element injected 
into the piece. 
 
Now the member will forgive me for carrying on at such length, 
but it's really a very, very fundamental question that he asks, 
and it underlies so much of the issues that we faced in this 
province over the last few years. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, coming back to this and a 
couple more questions . . . but I want to just make one 
comment. On the front page of the paper today, we've got a 
headline about an arrest made regarding the individual that was 
found murdered, the lady. That was about a month ago. And it 
was interesting to note, Mr. Minister, the comment made by the 
mother of this individual who lost her life was, well it's nice to 
say that an arrest has been made. But then the next sentence 
was, I hope they have the right person. 



May 11, 1995 

 
2173 

And I think there is . . . basically what that individual is saying 
at the end of the day is while they're looking for . . . they 
certainly want to see that someone is held accountable for the 
travesty that happened to their daughter, it may be a reflection 
on our system as well and the fact that of all the investigative 
procedures and what's taken place over the last little while, that 
even the victims are saying, we hope we've got the right person. 
 
Now in this situation here we have a letter that went from the 
senior Crown prosecutor in '93 to this individual and said: 
we've now had an opportunity to review this matter and have 
decided not to proceed with the new trial in young offenders' 
court. Consequently, we now consider this matter to be at an 
end. 
 
And the individual thought, well okay, this is at an end; we've 
been through the system. Till he went to start a business up, 
went to apply for a licence, and unfortunately, apparently some 
information that was supposed to have gotten . . . I don't know 
exactly where that goes, regarding charges that may . . . held 
against you  didn't get there. And they saw on his record that 
this charge was still held there even though it had been thrown 
out. 
 
And then a further letter says: we've now got this straightened 
out. 
 
And I'm going to send this information over and see if we can 
have a follow-up. Because we now have a letter, this individual 
just received a letter, just the other day from SGI, and SGI is 
still coming after the individual for the . . . based on the fraud 
charge, even though it's . . . I don't know, it seems to be a real 
mixed-up affair. And being not a legal person, I guess I'm at 
wit's end, having difficulty trying to figure out what to do. 
 
But I find a young individual who's very concerned with the 
system and how they've been treated. And I'm more than 
prepared — I've talked to the individual — I'm more than 
prepared to send all this information over to you to have your 
office follow up and see what redress . . . or what could have 
been done or what maybe has transpired here that has left so 
many unanswered questions and where the individual proceeds. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I'll have one of the pages take this and copy it 
and send it over to you. And I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, if 
you'll seriously take the time to review this — I don't know if 
it's come to your department before — and see what kind of 
redress . . . or how we can address this concern to the 
individual. Would you mind doing that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We'll be glad to take a look at that. It 
doesn't ring a bell over here; we don't recall the incident. And 
the system is not supposed to work like that. The system is 
supposed to work much more efficiently and effectively. So 
we'll take a look at it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, I'd 
appreciate if as well you filled me in on it at the end as to where 
we are, what's up, the process that would be followed. 

Mr. Minister, for the past while  and it still continues  
coming to the Martensville case, we see the headlines of: 
Martensville inquiry please; Hindsight on Martensville easy — I 
think that came from the minister in a debate we had in this 
Assembly — and we see a group are encouraged by your 
remarks regarding a possible task force. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd like to pursue the fact of you've continually 
stood inside, said inside and outside the Assembly at a number 
of occasions, that you would not call for or allow a public 
inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the Martensville 
case. And we've gone through this a number of times, but I'd 
like to give you the opportunity to maybe suggest that you've 
had . . . reviewed the matter and maybe are willing to look at an 
avenue whereby we could get to the bottom of what happened 
here. 
 
Because as you said in this Assembly, that certainly a lot of 
people have been victimized, a lot of children. We need to take 
into account what happened to the children. We need to take in 
account what happened to the families. And then we come to 
the question that I just raised a moment ago about an individual 
who faced a situation where they felt they had a legitimate 
complaint and were basically brushed off because of the fear 
even by the police officers now themselves that they don't want 
to get involved in any type of circumstance of this nature 
because of the complications that arise. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, why will you not allow for a full 
public . . . full inquiry? 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a sense of 
having answered this before several dozen times. Maybe we're 
getting up into the hundreds by now, but I welcome the 
opportunity to take another look at this. So let me begin. 
 
As the member has noted, the calls for an inquiry have come 
from many different directions, and the question that I have 
always had, that I continue to have today, is what would be the 
purpose of that inquiry? What are we trying to get at? And no 
one has . . . Let me put it this way, there is not . . . there isn't 
clarity of thought. There isn't unanimity of thought among those 
who ask for an inquiry. 
 
It is clear to me that different people are asking for an inquiry 
for different purposes. Some have publicly said that they want 
to inquire of those children just what it is that they . . . yes, the 
member shakes his head that that's not right. I have heard 
people say, I have heard people say that the end result that they 
would like to achieve from a board of inquiry is that the 
children were not telling the truth and therefore the accused 
people should be cleared. 
 
Well I am not going to put those children through another trial. 
And in this respect a board of inquiry would be another trial. As 
far as I'm concerned, I am not going to cause those kids to take 
the stand one more time to recount the evidence that they have  



May 11, 1995 

 
2174 

offered in the past. And I am not going to see them 
cross-examined one more time on these issues. I just simply 
won't do it. I'd much prefer to go to my grave with all the 
doubts swirling around than I would to put those kids through it 
once again. So that's one aspect of it. 
 
Others have raised the question of the kind of investigation that 
was held. And there's been a lot of treatment of that subject, as I 
have told the member over and over again, specifically during 
the jury trial. And it was my clear impression that the main 
issue day after day, week after week, during that trial was the 
quality of the investigation; who did what, who interviewed 
what witnesses, what questions were asked, what answers were 
given, how did that compare with a subsequent interview, you 
know, and it just went on and on and on and on and on. 
 
And I have the clear impression that there is just no questions 
left to ask anybody about the investigation. I think that's just 
received the most thorough kind of an airing. And it's all there. 
If we ever took the time to sit down with the transcripts and 
read it, it's all there. I'm not going to do it, but, here's been a lot 
of reporting on it. Even though the trial couldn't be reported day 
by day, there are rather well-done reporting pieces on that part 
of the trial. And any of us, and including the media, could 
plough through that evidence and see what went wrong and 
what went right during the investigation. 
 
So the point is simply this: if I called a public inquiry with 
respect to the investigation, I would be doing nothing more than 
ploughing ground that had already been ploughed. 
 
And all that we can learn from that evidence, that investigation, 
is already there for us to read and consider and learn from. And 
I think I speak on behalf of all parts of the department, that we 
learned a lot. We learned a lot of lessons about the evidence of 
young children in sexual abuse cases and the necessity of 
preserving its integrity and all these things that I've spoken to in 
the past. So that's the investigation part of it. 
 
Now the department itself, under the direction of Mr. Quinney 
and his prosecutors, picked up the cases when they became 
involved in the case and handled those prosecutions that 
required a large number of decisions on their part. All of that is 
documented in the files of the department and all of that is 
reviewed by the department in the normal course of the 
business of the department. 
 
I have not heard anybody suggest that the prosecutors handled 
the case badly, or mishandled it, or were guilty of any kind of 
misconduct. If those allegations are out there, they haven't come 
to my attention. I have not heard anybody suggest that the 
inquiry should focus on the way in which our prosecutions 
people handled the case. 
 
As far as I'm concerned, they handled it entirely appropriately 
and in accordance with their duty as prosecutors of criminal 
cases. So that's the third possible area of inquiry. 
 
Now there's a fourth possibility, I suppose, in a notional sense,  

would be the way in which the court conducted the trial, but we 
don't hold public inquiries to review that. There are processes 
available for dealing with that question and they're by way of 
appeal. If a judge has in some way misconducted the trial, if the 
jury has in some way misconducted themselves or otherwise 
have gotten out of line, you'd just take that up to the Court of 
Appeal and get that straightened out. And if you're not happy 
with that, you have an opportunity in many circumstances to go 
above that to the Supreme Court. So that is not a proper area of 
public inquiry. So at the end of the day I ask myself, what is 
there that we should inquire into? And you get different 
answers from different people. 
 
But I must say, and I say this in all sincerity to the member, I 
don't know what it is that we are expected to inquire into; and to 
the extent that I do know it, I am unable to accept it. 
 
Now let me end on this note. I was . . . I met with Carol Dalton 
and the group, Cry Out for the Children. I met them in 
Saskatoon last . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
Yes, I met them in Saskatoon last Friday and it was . . . she had 
with her other members of her group and three parents of 
children who have gone through the justice system as 
complainants — as persons in respect of whom charges had 
been laid against alleged abusers. And it was a very emotional 
meeting and a difficult one. Although it was conducted in a 
good atmosphere, none the less it was very emotional. 
 
In that meeting, a proposal was put on the table early that we 
have what they called a public task force to look into the whole 
bundle of issues that surround children who have been sexually 
abused. There wasn't much detail about it; there was no 
proposed mandate or that sort of thing. But what was proposed 
is that it would . . . the task force would have representation 
from the public on it. And I invited the group to specifically 
propose what it is they have in mind, and that requires them to 
flesh out the proposal to put some terms of reference into it. 
That seemed to me to be a very constructive suggestion. 
 
It will not satisfy those who would somehow like to put those 
kids back up there on the stand and hammer away at them to 
find out just what did happen. And it won't satisfy those who 
want to nail the investigating officers to the wall. But it will 
give us an opportunity to learn from that whole experience that 
we call Martensville and draw from it all of the lessons we can. 
The proposal was not confined to Martensville. Martensville 
would just be one example of where kids have been sexually 
abused. But it would cover all of the other situations, criminal 
and non-criminal, where kids are abused, and try and bring 
some light to that group of issues. I think we as a society have 
not done well with respect to those kids and I think a task force 
holds some promise. So I responded favourably to them. 
 
Now it will . . . we of course don't have a proposal yet or a 
fleshed-out paper on it, but we look forward to doing that and 
we are in quite a positive frame of mine about the whole 
suggestion. 
 



May 11, 1995 

 
2175 

Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, you're quite right, the 
headline on Monday, May 8 is: "Jury still out on reliability of 
testimony from children". And I can understand where Carol, 
and I met with Ray Lamarche as well, were coming from. And 
in that regard, Mr. Minister, their suggestion of a task force may 
have some validity as to how situations like this are held in the 
future. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I'm going to throw a curve ball at you 
in suggesting that my view of an inquiry has nothing to do with 
a retrial. I believe, Mr. Minister, just in the last . . . it wasn't that 
long ago that you chose to step aside from your position as 
minister over a comment that had been made on a local paper. 
And at that time the government appointed an independent 
person, totally removed from this province, to review the 
circumstances and come back with a report. 
 
And the report certainly indicated . . . and a couple of questions 
were put by Mr. McIntyre, and the questions were: is the 
evidence sufficient to justify a prosecution? In other words, is it 
sufficient to raise a reasonable prospect of conviction? 
Assuming, as here, that it does, does the public interest require 
a prosecution to proceed? 
 
And the comments were, in this case the first question would of 
course be answered in the affirmative. There was no doubt an 
offence occurred. 
 
The second question however is in this case decisive. It is clear 
in all the circumstances that no public interests will be served 
by prosecution of the minister. 
 
And the interesting thing I note is we've got, not in the public 
interest, here. We have, not in the public interest, regarding 
Phoenix and Mr. Koskie and we're still waiting for that report, 
and I'd like to know when that's coming down. 
 
Mr. Minister, my view of the world as it takes shape with 
regards to Martensville is not a commission made up of 
individuals basically out of the legal field, out of the 
prosecutors’ office, or out of the police offices. My view is that, 
from day one to where we are today, there's all kinds of 
evidence that's been gathered. There's been . . . I understand 
there's been taping of interviews. 
 
It would seem to me that if we're really going to determine what 
happened in Martensville . . . I'm not calling for a retrial; no 
one's asking for a retrial. No one wants to go and interview 
families; no one wants to go and interview children. 
 
Mr. Minister, if indeed this proceeded in the appropriate 
manner; if indeed the manner that was followed up was 
followed judiciously; if indeed there's nothing to hide, there'd 
be no reason why we couldn't appoint maybe someone from 
outside the province. And a couple . . . one person from the 
legal field; an individual from outside the legal field to go 
through the transcripts — and not just transcripts, I'm talking of 
tapes — because what's on paper doesn't have anything to do 
with maybe the emotion or maybe the insinuations that may  

have . . . may be implied through voice reflection. Even the 
taping of how interviews are conducted. 
 
And I think that's the only way, Mr. Minister, we would really 
arrive at whether or not the Martensville case was conducted 
appropriately, and whether or not children may have even been 
the victimized, through the investigation versus what happened 
prior to. 
 
And what I'm asking of you, Mr. Minister, is why couldn't we 
. . . as was done in the case when you stepped aside. At that 
time we had a private individual outside of the province do a 
review and the individual, as I understand it, was given the 
information. He didn't go and then talk to a lot of people. He 
was given the transcripts; was given all that information that 
was used at the time, and asked to come up with a 
recommendation. 
 
Mr. Minister, would that not be appropriate? Would that not 
work? Would that not address a lot of these concerns by just 
having a totally independent group of individuals? And 
basically what you've done is removed the prosecutors’ office, 
the police, from having any involvement whereby it might be 
perceived that they might sway the way a review is undertaken. 
Would that not be . . . be a valid argument, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Just a word on my own situation. That 
was referred to outside counsel of course, because I was the 
minister. I mean I was, in a notional sense at least, their boss. 
So that was referred outside because of that factor. And I know 
the member understands that, so I won't dwell on it. 
 
Of course one could do something like the member is 
suggesting. Again you'd have to be very clear about what parts 
of this whole day-one-till-today scenario you want them to look 
at, because you have to direct their mind. And I am not at all 
clear what I would say to any person or any group of people 
that I retained for that purpose. But I just can't tell them to go in 
there and have a look around, and if they see anything come 
back and tell me about it. And I've got to focus their mind on 
some clear questions. And in that respect I have already taken 
too much of the member's time in my previous answer by going 
through the various things that could be looked at. 
 
The other thing that I want to say is that everything — all of the 
interviews, all of the tapes, all the documents — everything was 
disclosed to the defence lawyers. They just came in and looked 
at our files. Looked at . . . you know, they saw everything. 
 
So there was nothing hidden, you know; it was all up there on 
the top of the table. And there is . . . and all of those tapes were 
played at the trial, and everybody heard the inflections and 
heard the questions and heard the tone of voice and did it all, 
you know. 
 
So while you could do what the member suggests, you'd have to 
be very clear about why you were doing it. If it was a  



May 11, 1995 

 
2176 

question of how the prosecutors handled the case, we have just 
reviewed that ad nauseam in the department, to ensure that the 
prosecutors did their job properly and we're satisfied of that. 
You know you don't always win. 
 
The reason why you don't win is that while you make an 
assessment of the evidence and say that it meets the 
prosecutorial test, if that evidence, put before the court, has a 
reasonable probability of resulting in a conviction . . . But it 
doesn't take into . . . you can't know what sorts of things are 
going to develop during the cross-examination of the witnesses 
that are offered and in other evidence that may come from the 
defence. So those are the unknowns in any criminal 
prosecution. And it happens that you have acquittals. 
 
But what was so very difficult about the Martensville case, is 
how would you expect a police officer or a prosecutor to make 
a judgement about whether that evidence would hold up in 
court? The kids give their evidence, make their statement, tell 
their story. Your obligation is to put it before a judge because 
you know that if that evidence is believed it will probably result 
in a conviction. And sometimes it does and sometimes it 
doesn't. 
 
But it doesn't mean that the world has ended or that anything 
has gone wrong with the system just because convictions were 
not obtained in all cases. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I didn't have the privilege of 
sitting in on any of the trial regarding the Martensville case. But 
would it not be true that the prosecution and the police would 
bring into court what they felt was the relevant evidence that 
would indicate that they would have a case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Sure. And that's exactly right. Yes, 
that's the answer. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess what I'm coming to, Mr. Minister, then is 
even the tapes and the taping that was used would have been 
selectively brought forward out of all of the debate that 
would've taken place at that time over the investigative period. 
And I'm not sure whether it's a child, whether it's an adult, 
whether it's a young offender, in an interrogation process I'm 
sure that there's a process whereby a prosecutor and a police 
officer would determine over a period of time . . .  
 
I haven't heard of one yet where a decision is made based on 
maybe a 15-minute interview. It's a lengthy period of 
interviews. And how many interviews? How many tapings? 
How much time would've been taken and then selective 
information is removed and taken before a court of law to try 
and prove the case? 
 
And that's why I'm suggesting, Mr. Minister, that if you had 
someone who was outside, had no real knowledge or 
information, and went through it from point one, day one, from 
every tape, from the moment it started until the moment it 
ended, would give a better idea whether or not we arrived at the 
proper procedure. And especially when we hear there's a  

hundred-page document that the police have in their hands that 
Mr. Popowich is calling for, where as I understand it  brought 
forward in the papers back in January  where there were even 
recommendations that charges should never have been laid. 
One has to ask, why were charges laid if recommendations or 
suggestions were made that charges shouldn't be laid? As a 
result, the Crown is now facing a lawsuit and it's not just Mr. 
Popowich, but a number of other individuals. 
 
And that's why I feel, Mr. Minister, it has to be removed from 
the individuals who were involved, having access to all the 
information right through the trial process, to see what went 
wrong so that we do not have the same scenario arise in the 
future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The reality is, as I mentioned, that all of 
our evidence that had been accumulated by the police was 
disclosed. All that was made available to the defence counsel, 
and that includes the criminal prosecution of Popowich; all that 
stuff was made public, all the things that we had. 
 
And putting the evidence in, the Crown put the kids on the 
stand and let them tell their story, give their evidence, and then 
the counsel for the accused could conduct their case as they 
wished. And the way that they chose to do it was to put in all of 
the previous interviews and the tapes of the interviews. And 
that's how that got before the court. We could have done it that 
way, but we put the kids up there instead — tell your story. 
 
But we had made available to the accused all of that material 
and they were entitled, quite properly, to use it in the defence of 
the accused people. 
 
Now with respect to the Popowich matter, I am very seriously 
constrained about what I can say because he has a civil action 
going against the Saskatoon city police and against the 
department in respect to this prosecution. 
 
I can say, though, that there was full disclosure of all the 
material that we had on the criminal trial and all that 
information is available to him on his civil trial. I believe that 
the reports, or whatever it is that he's trying to get now, are in 
the hands of someone else, not the Crown. So we're not able . . . 
or at least don't take any position on that. That will be 
determined by the court in the ordinary course. But I don't want 
to say anything more about that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess, Mr. Minister, that question arises — if all 
that information was available prior to, then one would have to 
ask why Mr. Popowich is now having to go to court to receive 
more information in his suit. And I can appreciate the restraints 
that you may have, but I think at the end of the day when it 
comes to a situation like this, Mr. Minister, or any other 
circumstance, whether it was a Martensville or whether it's 
another community at the . . . (inaudible) . . . I guess, if you 
will. 
 
What we have to date is, I believe, one conviction that was 
upheld by the court the other day — one conviction of nine  



May 11, 1995 

 
2177 

individuals. 
 
And someone made a comment to me the other day about 
another circumstance that had arisen that was very close to one 
of my colleagues, and it had to do with sexual assault as well. 
And after the court case there was . . . in fact the complainants 
actually confessed to the fact that they had made up the 
allegations because they had been mad at a teacher and the case 
was thrown out. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Minister, while we are supposedly living 
in a society that says you're innocent until proven guilty . . . and 
we have just a case out in Lumsden of an individual who's 
already been on the front pages as having been charged with 
having . . . sexual assault. 
 
Now whenever that individual may end up before the courts and 
whatever transpires is irrelevant because the public in general 
have basically made up their mind as to the guilt or innocence. 
Because when it comes to whether it's wife-battery or 
accusations against women, of assault, or whether it's child 
accusations, Mr. Minister, society does not — will not — 
accept that that is a common, or a practice that is acceptable. 
 
And I guess the concern I have, Mr. Minister — and I feel very 
strongly — that whatever the circumstance was, whatever the 
case . . . And it's obvious through the Martensville case. As 
you're suggesting, all that evidence was presented to the 
defence. 
 
At the end of the day, they obviously felt . . . and I can't 
remember if it was the judge specifically or the jury . . . a lot of 
recommendations, decisions, came down as to guilt or 
innocence and a number of appeals arose out of it. 
 
But it would seem to me that if there is any shred of evidence 
that might show to a prosecutor or policeman that their 
evidence is very slim and that it may not really stand in court, 
then it would appear that charges should not be forthcoming 
until you've got all the evidence that you would need that would 
certainly affirm that there is indeed a charge; that there is 
indeed evidence to show that this charge would stand for the 
simple reason that as soon as it comes before the floor, it hits 
the front pages. And I'm afraid, Mr. Minister that many people 
in our society, even tomorrow, are going to be affected by this. 
 
And I don't know how we do it — whether you just hold 
everything back until court date or what, if you will. Even that's 
not good enough because the court process takes a period of 
time and the guilt or innocence is not revealed until a decision 
is made by either a judge or a jury and the case is closed. 
 
And so how do we address these, how do we address these 
concerns? And how do we make people feel comfortable in 
coming forward with complaints? And how do we leave 
prosecutors, or even policemen, in a position of feeling 
comfortable and addressing, as the one case I raised a little 
earlier, coming before them with a request to investigate the 
possibility of a child abuse case and make sure that we are  

indeed investigating legitimate complaints. 
 
And at the same time, basically prosecuting individuals who 
should indeed be prosecuted without dragging a lot of people 
through the mill. And as I indicated earlier, having them to seek 
legal counsel, expending enormous amounts of money to prove 
their innocence. 
 
How do we address that? 
 
(1730) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The question is a very good one. I just 
want to say, on the way to answering that question, that I've 
mentioned earlier this afternoon that the test applied by the 
prosecutors in making a decision as to whether to proceed with 
the prosecution is a reasonable likelihood of conviction. And 
that this is a test that's applied in almost all jurisdictions in 
Canada, and it's applied by independent prosecutors whose 
profession it is to make these kind of judgements. 
 
And we have an obligation by virtue of law that has come from 
the Supreme Court to disclose the evidence on which . . . well 
we disclose everything we have, in effect, practically everything 
we have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, there are some 
exceptions, but they're not relevant for our discussion this 
afternoon. So you have to lay out all you've got. 
 
The defence does not have to lay out their case; they don't have 
to lay out any evidence that they have. Sometimes they do, 
sometimes they don't. 
 
Now, the broader question though raised by the member is a 
very interesting one, and that is that all of the publicity that goes 
with some of the crimes that occur and how this results in 
people being almost found guilty in the public mind before they 
can get to a trial. And I have no answer. 
 
I personally believe that the public has a right to know all sorts 
of things, as much as possible, and that we, for example, in 
government should not keep from the public anything except 
where there is a compelling reason for keeping it from them. 
 
And so it is in the way in which the whole society works. The 
media is active everywhere, inquiring; the courthouse is an 
open place, people can go in and look at records -- the media 
routinely goes in and looks at records to see what's new. These 
charges are a matter of public record and I think that's 
appropriate; I think it has to be that way. So the media picks up 
on that. Then eventually the police get to the point where they 
announce, they issue a press release that such and such a charge 
has been laid. 
 
And I realize that that can create problems in some cases. But it 
seems to me that in a democratic society that that's just one of 
those things. What I think is required and necessary is that the 
public be reminded over and over again that the fact that a 
charge is laid doesn't mean that the person is guilty. It means 
only that the Crown intends to attempt to prove that person  



May 11, 1995 

 
2178 

guilty. But until they're proven guilty, they are not guilty. They 
are innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 
And a lot of people seem to forget that; they lose track of that in 
their day-to-day lives and tend to jump to conclusions. And I 
think it's unfortunate. I agree with the member in that respect. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can only add then, we've 
had numerous calls regarding circumstances that have affected 
our caucus, and there's a number of individuals who feel that as 
soon as names hit the media, you're held accountable. And the 
unfortunate part is, when you see a comment at the bottom of 
the page that further charges may be pending, you know, people 
let themselves . . . have to ask themselves, where are we going 
and where are we heading in situations like this? 
 
And the other thing I bring up is — I had it here — it bothers 
me when on the Star-Phoenix, and I just can't picture the date 
up here . . . but there's an individual who admitted after a trial 
had proceeded that he also indicated . . . told Saskatoon police 
and an Inuvik RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer 
that he lied at a case. He said, the RCMP officer said it was 
better to have an innocent man in jail than a guilty one go free. 
 
I think that's very unfortunate, Mr. Minister, and I guess what 
that does, is certainly . . . there again, it brings forward the 
doubt in people's minds as to whether or not justice is enforced 
and administered fairly and equitably to all individuals. And I'm 
not exactly sure whether this was said in spite, or the reasons 
for it by the individual, in suggesting that he had lied, and then 
the comment by the RCMP officer. 
 
But indeed if we have any innocent individual end up . . . 
because of the evidence and it's revealed later on, that person 
has been victimized. And I find that it . . . I really find that 
somewhat offensive, to have a comment that an innocent man 
in jail is better than a guilty one free, because the guilty person 
is still on the street, obviously, from that type of a comment. 
 
So I think what we have here is a number of questions that 
continually rise about our whole judicial system. And I just 
want to bring another one to your attention. Saturday, March 
18: "Four-year-old given subpoena". The father was really 
annoyed — I believe it's right here in Regina — when police 
came and handed a subpoena, and his comment was: "It's 
ridiculous; she can't even read this". 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, there are insensitivities, I guess if 
you will, and I'm not sure how we handle situations like this as 
well. How do you subpoena a four-year-old who can't even 
read? There's got to be some accountability and some 
reasonableness that enters into our judicial system, rather than 
running into incidents like this. And I don't know, how do we 
respond to this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The member raised a number of points. 
I want to . . . the first one I want to address was the idea that 
better that the innocent person be jailed, than a guilty person go 
free. I disagree with that just totally. 

I think that the opposite is true. I believe that far better that a 
guilty person go free than that an innocent person be jailed. 
And I think that's one that always impressed me as being one of 
the logical underpinnings of our justice system, is that the 
presumption of innocence and the requirement that a person be 
proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt is sound, even though 
it may result in guilty people being acquitted. 
 
It is, day after day, year after year, decade after decade, as good 
a certainty as we can possibly have that no innocent person will 
be convicted. It happens, but very rarely, and usually only in 
whether it's some perjury or something like that around that 
results in a conviction of an innocent person. So I'm glad that 
the member raised that. It gave me the opportunity to say that I 
disagree. And I think I agree with the member. 
 
The bigger your case . . . (inaudible) . . . with respect to which 
that comment was made, it's still before the Court of Appeal, so 
I couldn't get into any of the details of that. 
 
I am very displeased with the remarks in newspaper columns 
indicating that further charges will be laid in any situation, 
including the one that the member mentions. I know nothing of 
that. But I remember the comment and I think that is 
inappropriate. 
 
Finally I just want to deal with the question of the four-year-old 
witness. Certainly the situation was not sensitively handled. The 
other side of the story, however, is this: that the four-year-old 
was a witness who was required to give evidence in a criminal 
proceeding. 
 
In those circumstances, the prosecution has very little choice 
but to issue a subpoena, because if the witness doesn't show up 
and you haven't subpoenaed the witness, then you're likely to 
lose right there. The court's likely to dismiss the case right out 
of hand. 
 
If you've subpoenaed the witness and the witness doesn't show, 
then you can handle it in other ways. You know, the court can 
authorize that the person be arrested and brought into court or 
you might be able to obtain an adjournment on the basis of the 
failure to appear. But you have to have subpoenaed. So it is 
almost automatic that all witnesses are served with a subpoena. 
 
Now you get into the absurd where someone who is four years 
old and can't read the subpoena is subpoenaed, but that is the 
other side of the story. But I acknowledge that there is an 
element of insensitivity here that just rises up and hits you in 
the eye. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess that's kind 
of what hit the parent of this child in the eye. And it's 
something that comes back to even what we alluded to much 
earlier, about how you conduct and how you handle 
circumstances such as this so that the appearance isn't a high or 
a heavy hand coming down, but dealing with . . . In this case 
too, when you're someone that young, it can almost . . . it's 
traumatic enough for an adult, I would think, let alone a child,  



May 11, 1995 

 
2179 

to have to face a situation like that, where you're handed a piece 
of paper and you're trying to figure what . . . coming from an 
individual who you're taught from very young to respect as 
being a person that you can trust. 
 
Mr. Minister, a number of questions were raised regarding the 
Martensville case by an individual. And I need to get these 
questions brought to your attention. 
 
The town of Martensville just received 75,000 allotment from 
the government to assist with costs incurred by the sexual abuse 
trial in that community. Where's the money coming from and 
could you provide us with any details on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The town of Martensville is in dire 
financial straits as a result of some of the problems that have 
occurred with their police department — while they had one — 
and the Martensville situation was . . . the case we've been 
discussing is certainly a part of that. And they've got some 
settlements to deal with as a result of former employees taking 
action against them. These are a local responsibility and so fall 
on the town, but we have some sympathy with them. 
 
The small police force . . . and they really couldn't cope with the 
volume of the case that we've been discussing. So we have 
made an ex gratia grant of $75,000 to the town which 
represents about half of their current outstanding debt and we 
advanced that to them. We paid for that out of the Department 
of Justice, out of the policing allocation, policing vote or 
subvote, whatever it is in the budget. So it came from the 
department. 
 
(1745) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, have all cases surrounding this 
unfortunate incident concluded? I'm referring especially to any 
that the government is involved in. What do you provide any 
. . . provide us with information on any that may be pending and 
in addition can you provide details on how much this entire 
case has cost the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The question is complex, Mr. 
Chairman, and so we undertake to provide the answer to the 
member as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a further 
question. The young offender convicted in this case appealed 
and the initial conviction was overturned. I understand that this 
individual is represented by Clayton Ruby of Toronto. Is this 
correct? Is this individual being represented . . . Is this correct 
or is this individual being represented by Legal Aid in 
Saskatchewan, and if yes, how can this individual be 
represented by someone outside of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We are, of course, aware that the lawyer 
is Clayton Ruby, but we have no idea under what circumstances 
Mr. Ruby has been retained or who is paying for him. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I'm also aware of the fact that Travis Sterling is  

represented by an attorney that practices outside of 
Saskatchewan. Is Mr. Sterling . . . I should say, are Mr. 
Sterling's legal fees being covered through Legal Aid? Are you 
aware of this and how those are being covered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We don't know that either. If it's being 
covered by Legal Aid, we're not aware of it. The member will 
know that Legal Aid is in the Department of Social Services, 
and we just don't know. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So then you wouldn't be really aware then of any 
. . . of the individuals who may be retaining the services of 
Legal Aid in this case at the present time. Okay. 
 
Would you be able to provide us, or would you provide us, with 
a detailed list of all the costs incurred by the government, 
province of Saskatchewan, regarding the abuse case, including 
travel costs for lawyers outside of the province, all other legal 
fees for each individual case, and the estimated total cost 
overall? This comes back to part of the question that I'd raised 
earlier, and this might take some time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. As I indicated earlier, we 
undertake to provide the member with the costs that we have 
incurred in the case, and I mean that. With respect, for example, 
to Mr. Ruby, we haven't incurred any of those costs so we can't 
provide any of that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, it was also brought to our attention 
that one of the victims had moved to B.C. and the government 
moved the entire family back to Saskatoon and provided 
housing. In addition, the family was moved after their first 
address was revealed. 
 
What kind of costs were incurred by this entire exercise, and 
did this situation happen to any other Martensville victims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — We're not aware of any situation such as 
I heard the member raise. We did bring some parents back from 
B.C. for the trial — whether it's B.C. or . . . it's outside the 
province anyway. Some parents of the children came back for 
the trial and we paid for them to make the trip, of course. And 
that information we will provide to you, as I indicated earlier. 
 
Mr. Toth: — As a result of the outcome of the case, and 
complaints from both sides, Mr. Minister, maybe you could 
kind of . . . or give us an idea of what you as a minister, your 
department, and the government, has learned from this case. 
And has . . . (inaudible) . . . department been looking at new 
plans, new programing, or training for officials dealing in such 
circumstances that could deal with . . . that could better handle 
similar circumstances down the road? I'm wondering if you 
could tell us where we're at today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — If the member will excuse me, Mr. 
Chairman, for taking a few moments to collect different pieces 
of information in order to answer that question properly. In no 
particular order, let me answer the member's question as to 
some of the things that we've learned and what we've done in  



May 11, 1995 

 
2180 

response to what we have learned. 
 
At the root of it is an understanding that our system is . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I will ask members to come to 
order. We're having a little difficulty functioning in the review 
of estimates. And if you can just calm down a tad. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the root 
of it we learned that the system, whether it's in Saskatchewan or 
anywhere else in Canada or the United States or the United 
Kingdom or Australia or where have you, isn't very good at 
handling the evidence of very young children. And the reason 
for that is, until just recently, nobody paid very much attention 
to them. 
 
It was the rule in all of these jurisdictions that it was dangerous 
to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of a child. And the 
requirements for corroboration's pretty high, you know. You've 
practically got to have . . . well it's got to be evidence 
independent of the child that indicates that the child is telling 
the truth and that it happened the way the child says. So you 
almost have to have an eye witness — not necessarily, but in 
practice what other kinds of corroborative evidence is there? 
There is some but it's difficult to obtain. 
 
So it's only recently that we have decided that these kids have a 
tendency to tell the truth and that we should believe them when 
they tell us a story. And that's resulted in a whole new set of 
problems for the system in how to deal with, gather, and 
maintain the evidence of young children. So that's been at the 
root of what we have learned from Martensville. We have 
learned that we don't do it very well and that we have to do it 
better. That's very much what the task force idea that Carol 
Dalton raised was about. 
 
We have to this point done the following. We are providing a 
great deal of training to police and to prosecutors and to other 
professionals on this subject — investigating, gathering 
evidence, and preparing that evidence for prosecution. 
 
The victims' program has been very fundamentally affected by 
the Martensville experience, as far as intervention is concerned 
and support for witnesses and that sort of program that you will 
know about, that the member will know about, that we sponsor 
under the victims' program. 
 
We have established a unit, an investigation unit in Regina, that 
has received some publicity, involving the city police and social 
workers employed by the Department of Social Services. And 
they are cooperating in the handling of these cases. And I know 
the member is aware of that experience from the publicity that's 
been given to it. 
 
In Saskatoon we are in the process of establishing a house, a 
child-friendly house, which will bring together a variety of 
professionals to better deal with the evidence of young children. 
The children will be taken to these houses and there they will 
. . . their evidence will be gathered and safeguarded, I think I  

can use that term, although we're still learning how to do that, 
you know, to ensure that their story does not get off the rails by 
improper questioning or any such thing. 
 
Then finally, I mentioned that . . . just mentioned that there is a 
new child investigation protocol that has just been finalized. 
We don't have a copy with us, but I'll send a copy to the 
member so he will be able to see that. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6 p.m. 
 


