













































March 7, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 7, 1995 

 

 

685 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to present a 

petition this morning on behalf of the people from my 

constituency and across the southern part of Saskatchewan. I'd 

like to read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 

and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 

than allocating these funds towards capital construction 

projections in the province. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the areas of Webb, Tompkins, and Gull Lake, and I'm 

happy to table these this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 

today to present from the people of Saskatchewan. The prayer 

reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm 

ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 

deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 

stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 

government to recognize that gun control and crime 

control are not synonymous. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from Carievale, Storthoaks, Swift 

Current, Bjorkdale, Carnduff, Weekes, Somme, Porcupine Plain 

area of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 

to lay on the Table, and as a matter of explanation, deals with 

the Government of Saskatchewan entering into a casino 

agreement with FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations), and that it has since introduced legislation enshrining 

this agreement into law and because it directly affects the Metis 

Nation of Saskatchewan. Therefore I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to pull the agreement until 

such time as the exhibition associations of 

Saskatchewan and the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan 

can be involved in the decision making and the direction 

of gambling in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 

ownership. 

 

 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated toward 

the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my distinct 

privilege today to introduce two very special people in the 

Speaker's gallery. Doneta Brotchie as well as Brian Rombough 

from the CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) are 

with us here today on the important occasion which was 

announced by the Deputy Premier along with CIBC officials 

today in Regina — the introduction and the announcement of a 

new banking centre here in the province of Saskatchewan with 

500 new jobs for the province of Saskatchewan. And I'm sure 

all members will want to join with me in welcoming them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my great pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

legislature, seated in the west gallery, a good friend and 

neighbour, Vic Ellis. Vic has always been very involved in the 

world of energy conservation and in fact has built an energy 

efficient house in my home town, our home town, of Pilot 

Butte. 

 

I would ask all members here to join me in welcoming him here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 

colleague, the member from Turtleford, I would like to 

introduce some guests from his constituency. Seated in the west 

gallery are Dick and Marilyn Roney, and they have with them 

an exchange student from Brazil, Michelle Naback. 

 

And they are here today to observe the proceedings plus have a 

tour of the legislature. So I would like you to welcome the 

Roneys and Michelle to Saskatchewan and to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 7, 1995 

 

686 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Direct Tech Organization in Leroy 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

town of Leroy in the new constituency of Watrous, which I'll be 

representing after the next election, something remarkable is 

happening there. 

 

A while ago a group of local hockey players, members of the 

Leroy Old Chiefs, came up with an idea to raise money for their 

hockey rink. They created a company called Direct Tech, which 

is now owned by the Leroy Old Chiefs Community Association. 

 

Direct Tech gives an annual demonstration of a direct seeding 

near Leroy. But now it has come up with an exciting new 

concept — a concept that was presented in Saskatoon during 

Crop Production Week at the end of January. 

 

The Leroy organization demonstrated a multimedia Internet 

computer service that will advertise Saskatchewan-made farm 

equipment all around the world. The Internet simulation will 

give descriptions and show photographs of direct seeding 

equipment and other machines offered by Saskatchewan 

implement manufacturers. Farmers from around the world will 

be able to see and read immediately about all the equipment 

produced in Saskatchewan. And they'll be able to do that right 

in their own home. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, in the future 

they hope to be able blow up these farm machines part by part 

and so that people who need those parts will be able to access 

them through the Internet. 

 

There is little doubt among Direct Tech members, the 

University of Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan Agriculture and 

Food, that these services will expand sales of our products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one more example of what we all know 

is happening in Saskatchewan. Sask agriculture and 

Saskatchewan industries are marching in step with developing 

technology. This is true at the universities, at Innovation Place, 

and Saskatchewan communities like Leroy. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

26th Annual Winter Festival - Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we think of 

winter, several things come to mind, such as cold weather and 

shovelling snow. But the winter weather hasn't dampened the 

enthusiasm in the Meadow Lake region. Beginning tomorrow 

five days of events are planned for the 26th annual winter 

festival. It's a time set aside for residents to participate in the 

events and have some fun during the winter. 

 

Some of the fun includes snowshoeing, a snowmobile rally, 

chucksled races, a hockey tournament, curling, a sno-pitch 

tournament, hayrides, and always a highlight — the king of the 

woods competition. 

 

One of the real crowd pleasers though, Mr. Speaker, is the 

water boiling contest. Soon to be an Olympic event, this 

requires incredible skill and technique. And the secret from last 

year's winner, simple: start the fire, put on the water, but under 

no circumstances do you watch. As tempting as it may be to 

take a peek, every good water boiler knows that water simply 

won't boil while you're watching it. Besides the crowds will let 

you know when it's boiling. And people say we don't have fun 

in Meadow Lake. 

 

I know the community of Meadow Lake welcomes all 

participants and visitors to the area during this winter festival 

which will provide for entertainment for the people of all ages. 

 

I would like to congratulate the organizers and volunteers for 

their time and energy in preparing the event so everyone could 

have some fun during the winter. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

File Hills Native Policing 

 

Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

member from Meadow Lake announced the creation of the 

Waterhen Nation policing unit. Today I'm happy to report on a 

ceremony in my constituency that also took place yesterday. 

 

I was glad to be present at the File Hills Agency First Nation 

police servicing agreement. Like the one at Waterhen, the new 

police service will provide police service to five first nation 

communities — the File Hills reserves. The File Hills Agency is 

unique, Mr. Speaker, in that it encompasses five first nations of 

three cultures — the Cree, Assiniboine, and Nakota. 

 

These five are closely linked by geographic and family ties, and 

obviously they have learned the wisdom of working together for 

the betterment of their people. The establishment of this 

culturally appropriate police service is just the latest example. 

And I want to congratulate the chief and councillors of all five 

File Hills Agency First Nations  Chief Clarence Bellegarde, 

Chair of the File Hills Agency and chief of the Star Blanket 

Cree/Assiniboine First Nation, Chief Joe O'Watch of the Carry 

The Kettle Nakota First Nation, Chief Marie-Anne Day Walker 

of the Okanese Cree First Nation, Chief Eugene Poitras of the 

Peepeekisis Cree First Nation, and Chief Irvine Starblanket of 

the Star Blanket Cree First Nation. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge and 

appreciate the efforts of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police), the provincial and federal governments, in the 

implementation of this necessary police service. As the member 

from Meadow Lake said yesterday, I'm sure there are more to 

come. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 7, 1995 

 

687 

Donation of Trolley to Saskatchewan Railway Museum 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, just south of Saskatoon near 

the town of Vanscoy in my constituency is the Saskatchewan 

Railway Museum, the fond creation of the Saskatchewan 

railway historic association. I might add, Mr. Speaker, just 

about the only group left that recognizes the value of the 

railway to Canada. 

 

Recently the association had undertaken a project that is both 

historically significant and sentimentally attractive. 

 

Some members more experienced than I will remember "The 

Trolley Song", a song from the musical "Meet Me in St. Louis". 

The one that goes "clang, clang, clang goes the trolley; ding, 

ding, ding goes the bell", and so on. I could sing but I won't. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — From 1912 to 1951 Saskatoon was served 

by several trolleys. And after 1951 most were scrapped or sold 

for storage buildings. However, one owned by Eugene Bulani 

of the Biggar district is in good enough shape to be restored, 

and this is what is happening. 

 

The Bulani family has generously donated the Saskatchewan 

municipal railway car no. 51 to the museum. Car 51 was built in 

Hamilton in 1927, and was the last of the streetcars to run in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Thanks to the generosity of the Bulani family, Wiebe building 

movers, and the members of the railway historic association, 

ambitious plans are underway to restore the car to its original 

condition, and to use it for an exhibit illustrating Saskatoon's 

early street railway system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the preservation of our heritage is a necessary 

function in preparing for our future, and I congratulate all 

involved in this effort. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lakeland's Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Langford: — Mr. Speaker, often the people who do the 

most for their communities are the ones who receive the least 

recognition for their efforts. In Lakeland area in my 

constituency, a citizen who was contributing much of his 

recognition was recognized last Friday. 

 

Jim Logan of Christopher Lake was named Lakeland citizen of 

the year at the Lakeland winter festival. It is an award well 

deserved. 

 

Jim is well known for his services to the Christopher Lake area. 

He is an active member of the Lions Club and the Royal 

Canadian Legion. He has organized many events for both 

children and senior hockey over the years. He has also donated 

his time, energy, and his money to any organization which has 

needed his talent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lakeland is a small area in a large province but 

the hearts and energy of its people are as big as the whole 

province. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to congratulate Jim Logan. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Food Bank Use 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 

rise once again to present questions that have been sent to us 

through our “Mr. Premier, I want to know” initiative. It's been 

an overwhelming success and responses continue to come in 

every day. We're very pleased to be able to offer this service to 

the people of Saskatchewan, because it seems that they have 

been demanding something like this through their responses. 

 

My first question comes from Gerald Fichtemann of Estevan. 

And Gerald wants to know: Mr. Premier, I want to know why 

the NDP (New Democratic Party), when they were in 

opposition in the previous years, did a lot of grandstanding and 

crying out shame, shame when there was a line-up at the food 

banks. They got a lot of TV news coverage that way. Now that 

they are in power the food banks have a much larger number of 

people standing in line at the food banks but nothing is said. If I 

was sitting in the legislature I would be crying even more 

shame. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting that 

we're not getting support from these people on the initiatives 

that are designed to provide better supports to people, to low 

income people, and they're not supporting all the many jobs that 

are being created in the province. Mr. Speaker, they're not 

supporting the Partnership for Renewal. They're not supporting 

the tax break so small-business people can create more jobs for 

people. 

 

And I would say that if they're sincere, if they're sincere about 

dealing with the issue of low income people in food banks, then 

they should join some of the progressive legislation that's 

designed to help low income people and get with the optimism 

of the people of Saskatchewan who are on the move in terms of 

job creation, and not be doom-and-gloom people like they are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Public Service Salaries 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

have a question from the “Mr. Premier” files. The question is 

from Mr. L. Huard from Vawn. And the question is this: Mr. 

Premier, why is it that social workers are allowed a 4.6 per cent 

wage increase and the average person who is on UI 

(unemployment insurance) or working for minimum wage has 

to get by on 6 or $700 a month. Does this government think a 

family can survive on this and have children in school and feed 

and clothe them without the help of the food bank, etc.? 



March 7, 1995 

 

688 

The Speaker: — I've got two people up and I don't know who 

to recognize. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty is 

we can all see an easy ball to bat out of the park and we all 

wanted a crack at this one. 

 

As it turns out, I say to the hon. member opposite, and to your 

questioner, as it turns out there is no such increase offered, 

contemplated, or indeed demanded. The collective agreement is 

currently being . . . in the process of being taken out to the 

memberships for ratification. I therefore do not want to 

comment on it extensively, but I can say that no such sum was 

offered. No such sum was ever contemplated. Your figures are 

right out of the ballpark. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 

question to the Premier, and this one comes from Harry M. 

Wilson from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Premier, in your 1991 pre-election speech, you promised to 

jump-start the economy and close the food banks. What 

happened? You've had three years to move on this, and nothing 

has happened. Would you please answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to respond 

to the question. But in fact, to the member from Rosthern, that 

is exactly what we are doing because everyone knows that the 

best solution to food banks, which were established under your 

administration, are jobs. 

 

And if you look at the record of the government since 1992, 

7,000 new jobs have been created, and I say here by the private 

sector, and today's announcement of 500 more new jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Cargill's announcement yesterday of 

hundreds of jobs in Saskatoon . . . The best solution to food 

banks are jobs. And that's exactly what we're helping the private 

sector facilitate in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Help for Low Income Families 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 

comes from Tena Katzell from North Battleford. 

 

And her question is: Mr. Premier, I want to know what you are 

doing to help low income families. By the time my fiancé and I 

pay our bills and buy $150 worth of groceries, we have no 

money to take our son out. We are home-owners and sick of 

these outrageous bills. If you had to live like we do for one 

year, you wouldn't make it. Could you answer, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

Tena for that question. What I would say to Tena is that in our 

recent budget we targeted tax reduction specifically to middle 

and low income families. Each family in the province will get 

$150 tax reduction, $300 tax reduction for a two-income 

family, because it is across the board. It happens to affect low-

income people more dramatically — they get a higher 

percentage of the benefit than other families. 

 

I'd also point out to Tena that if you take the whole basket of 

utilities provided in this province along with the taxes that 

people have to pay in the province, other things such as the cost 

of housing, if you take the whole basket of basics, 

Saskatchewan is still the least expensive, and I would say, the 

very best place in all of Canada in which to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GRIP Premiums 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question comes 

from Lonnie from Bethune. 

 

Mr. Premier, when the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program ran a surplus, you put it into the General Revenue 

Fund to help the balanced budget. How come you didn't do the 

same when the government caucus office ran a surplus? Do you 

care more for your flunkies than you do for farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, there's a great deal of 

confusion from the opposition — or planned confusion, I'm not 

sure which. Mr. Speaker, the GRIP program ran a surplus as did 

tripartite for cattle and tripartite for hogs and some other 

programs. We wound them down, giving back the producers' 

share to the producers. 

 

We also used the government's share; over 70 per cent of the 

government's share went back into agricultural programing. We 

think that given the tight finances of the province, that this was 

a very fair deal for the farmers of Saskatchewan, and I might 

also — and fair for the taxpayer, as well  I also might add, 

Mr. Speaker, that our farmers, because of the changes to the 

program, got a lot more out of the market-place than did 

neighbouring provinces. And I think that's where farmers would 

sooner get their income if they have that opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Food Bank Donations 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Social Services. 

Mr. Minister, there's been lots of discussion this afternoon 

about food banks and their need for food and the people 

associated with the food banks across this province. 

 

Right after question period I'll be introducing a private 

members' Bill that will enable those in the food industry to 

donate left-over food to food banks. This good Samaritan 



March 7, 1995 

 

689 

legislation is now in place in five other provinces and by all 

accounts is working extremely well. 

 

In Ontario, for example, it was just introduced last June, and 

food banks in that province have seen a significant rise in food 

donations. For example, the food bank in the National Capital 

Region has gained a steady supply of liquid milk that has not 

been previously available. That was a direct result of the good 

Samaritan Bill. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is a common sense solution and it doesn't 

cost the taxpayers of this province one dime. Will you and your 

government support our good Samaritan legislation, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say first of all 

that we are always interested in good ideas as to how we can 

put people back to work and support low income people. I 

might say that this Bill was brought to my office about maybe 

10 or 15 minutes before the House came into session, Mr. 

Speaker, so I've not had a chance to look at it. And I will be 

obviously interested in trying to do the best I can to be 

supportive. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that low income people aren't 

looking for charity. That's why with our balanced budget we're 

looking to make job creation our number one priority, Mr. 

Speaker. And the results are coming in — 500 jobs and 400 

jobs announced yesterday at the canola plant, 100 just in the 

trucking industry, 500 today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Prairie Malt and the Future Skills program, 

the JobStart program, Mr. Speaker, that give people the skills, 

those are the kinds of things that will make a difference and 

deal with the causes, Mr. Speaker. We have no lessons to learn 

from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I'm not interrupting the speaker 

because he's going on too long, but I am interrupting the 

minister because the opposition is simply interrupting too 

much. You're asking a question; then we've got three or four or 

five of you continually interrupting the minister when he's 

trying to answer. Now give him the respect at least to answer 

the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I've indicated in my answer the number of jobs that are 

being created over and above the ones that were announced by 

StatsCanada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were no food banks in this province when 

they came to power in the 1980s. From 1984 to '85 they 

devastated, in their so-called welfare reform, social programs 

for low income people. They didn't admit that poverty existed 

until 1990, Mr. Speaker. So if this is a sincere attempt to deal 

with the issue of poverty with some good ideas, then we'll be 

interested. But the key is dealing with the causes, not charity. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, hungry 

people are looking for only one thing, and that is food. And 

that's what this initiative and that's what this good Samaritan 

legislation is all about. And we don't need to go into any big, 

long-winded diatribes about jobs in Saskatchewan. We're 

simply trying to deal with the situation relative to food banks in 

this province today. 

 

A headline in last Friday's Star-Phoenix reads: Saskatoon food 

bank down to last crumbs. The article explained that the food 

bank is down to just one day's food supply. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have spoken to numerous food banks and 

hunger organizations who support this legislation: the Regina 

and Saskatoon food banks, Chili for Children, REACH (Regina 

Education and Action on Child Hunger Inc.), the Saskatoon 

Child Hunger, just to name a few, Mr. Minister. We've spoken 

to hotels who are prepared to donate left-over food once this 

Act is passed. The Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business supports this initiative. Every interested party supports 

this legislation. We are hoping that all parties in the legislature 

can show that same kind of cooperation. 

 

Mr. Minister, the situation at the Saskatoon Food Bank is 

critical. The Regina food bank is facing similar shortages. Can 

we expect work right away, this afternoon, to pass this good 

Samaritan legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting 

change because last week they were using Ralph Klein as the 

model who's cut so deep; he's cut so deep, Mr. Minister, that 

he's driven people back to reserves and out of province and onto 

the street. That was your model last week. 

 

You gave me this Bill 10 minutes or 20 minutes before the 

session opened. I mean I will take a look at it; I've already 

indicated that. 

 

I want you to know though that we're creating jobs — a 

thousand announced in the last two days. Join us in saying that 

that is the way to go. Support this budget which gives low 

income people tax increases. Regina and Saskatoon have the 

lowest unemployment rates of the major cities in Canada  tax 

breaks, sorry  have the lowest unemployment rates in Canada. 

 

Now acknowledge that and we will . . . and support the 

initiatives designed to support low income people. Talk to your 

person to the left there, the Liberal leader. Get her to talk to her 

federal counterparts to deal with the question of block funding 

and the Crow rate cut-backs. Ask her why her Prime Minister is 

not in Copenhagen with all the other leaders, dealing with the 

issue of unemployment, poverty, and low income people. 

 

We will support this if it's good legislation. 



March 7, 1995 

 

690 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this is 

designed to help hungry kids. This is what this piece of 

legislation is all about. It's been enacted in five other provinces 

across this country. We're not interested in all the rest of the 

stuff you want to talk about. Let's just simply deal with the 

issue this afternoon. 

 

My final question is to the Government House Leader. Mr. 

Minister, earlier today we took the unusual step of providing 

you with a copy of this Bill in advance. I wanted you to have a 

look at it so you would recognize that it is a good solution. It 

cuts across party lines; it's working in other provinces; and it 

addresses a problem that exists right now. 

 

I also want you to commit to dealing with this Bill as quickly as 

possible. We would even like to see it passed today, with your 

cooperation, so the food banks and those in the food industry 

can get to work immediately to coordinate the donation of left-

over food and address the current shortages that are out there. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you agree to put this good Samaritan 

legislation ahead of other House business and deal with it 

today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of 

Social Services has so clearly indicated, of course we will look 

at it. And we're very receptive to positive ideas and I think the 

member has here a positive idea. The irony is though, of course, 

looking back only a few years when the former minister of 

Social Services, Mr. Grant Schmidt, with the Conservative then 

government, of which you members are a part of, was chasing 

poor people around the province, kicking them wherever he 

could. 

 

But obviously, on the issue of this piece of legislation, we'll 

take a very close look at it, and we're very receptive to positive 

ideas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health District Deficits 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

all heard concerns today from the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses that hospital beds may have to close in Regina and area 

to cover the expected operating deficit of the Regina District 

Health Board. We hear that the deficit could be as much as $4.5 

million for the last two years, that l50 beds could be closed and 

250 staff laid off. 

 

My question to the Minister of Health: given that The Health 

Districts Act requires you, sir, to approve any projected deficit 

spending by district health boards, what do you do to monitor 

spending by district health boards on an ongoing basis to ensure 

that they do not get into deficit situations? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report to the 

Leader of the Third Party and to members of the House that she 

makes certain claims in the House today about the size of the 

deficit and what may or may not result. I want the member to 

understand that the Regina District Board is at only a very, very 

preliminary stage in looking at their budget and their plans for 

the upcoming and subsequent years. These are very preliminary 

discussions. 

 

And I want to assure the member, in specific answer to her 

question, that with each of our district boards we worked very, 

very closely. And we'll work with the Regina board in terms of 

their budget and their plans, as we do with every board in the 

province. 

 

Now if she is concerned about a deficit in funding for health 

care, then I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal leader 

please contact the federal government. Please contact her 

colleagues in Ottawa. And she nods and shakes her head. Well 

please do it and talk about the massive cut that's coming in 

health care funding to every province in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can only 

assume that the minister is stating that even though The Health 

Districts Act requires him to note exactly what is going on, he 

did not state whether or not he has anything in place to monitor 

the potential deficit situations of health boards. Deficits for 

district health boards are not new. And the minister cannot 

avoid taking responsibility because he has seen the documents. 

 

I'd like to table today financial statements for Midwest and 

Living Sky health districts for the last fiscal year. They show 

operating deficits for both boards of over $100,000 each. These 

deficits mean lay-offs, and they mean cuts to services. 

 

And I quote from the Midwest report. Quote: 

 

 Staffing patterns and facilities are currently being 

reviewed and staff reductions are anticipated. 

 

This is a very disturbing trend, Mr. Speaker. And it seems that 

the government is offloading its deficit problems to the health 

districts. 

 

My question to the Health minister: since, Mr. Minister, you are 

required — you are required — to see these and other health 

board financial statements, can you assure this legislature that 

you have reviewed this year's situation with each of the boards 

and that you're satisfied that there are no other deficits among 

the 30 district boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Liberal 

leader that the Department of Health and this minister, 

according to the legislation, will be reviewing all of the 

spending and the budgets and the financial accounting of the 

district health boards. There is no doubt about that. 



March 7, 1995 

 

691 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you, if she thinks we've got a 

problem now in funding health care, then she will know what 

will happen when the federal government delivered their 

package of cuts in next year's budget. I mean, to an extent 

where people across Canada, people within our province, and 

people across Canada are saying this sounds, in headline, the 

death knell for medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

interesting to note the minister's comments, and perhaps he'd 

like to get in touch with health economists on this issue. 

 

There are 30 district health boards in the province. The Premier 

and the minister are quick to attack the federal government on 

block funding proposals. But this particular Saskatchewan 

government, Mr. Speaker, has offloaded its responsibilities to 

30 health district boards, each with different doctor-to-patient 

ratios, different waiting-lists, and apparently different financial 

management abilities. 

 

The ultimate authority, however, Mr. Speaker, lies with this 

minister, the Department of Health, and this government. What 

policies does your government have, sir, to monitor the deficit 

situations of health boards on an ongoing basis, and to ensure 

that provincial standards are maintained across the province? 

That's your responsibility. You're the minister in charge. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I found a little difficulty in 

hearing her question. But let me respond in this way, because 

the member stood up and said I should talk to some health 

economists. Well in fact we have been talking to health 

economists, and health economists have been speaking out 

across Canada. 

 

Let me quote from the Star-Phoenix, February 28, a Dr. Allen 

Backman from the city of Saskatoon. He says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 . . . the new block funding arrangement for health, 

education and welfare will leave Ottawa with little 

power to enforce national standards, he says. 

 

 "I think the federal government has sold our legacy 

down the river." 

 

Mr. Speaker, Carol Clemenhagem of the Canadian Hospital 

Association says: 

 

 Block funding signals the end of the federal role in 

medicare. They've dumped all the problems into the 

provincial court and continue to pretend the federal 

government retains its moral and legal role. 

 

That's the Liberal policy. That's the Liberal policy, and it spells 

the end of national medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Construction Opportunities Development Council 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have another example of mixed messages and mixed-up 

ministers from the other side of the House. And it's all about the 

union slush fund — the CODC (Construction Opportunities 

Development Council) . We like to call it the Codco, Mr. 

Speaker, because it's fishy and it's also very funny. 

 

In trying to explain Codco, the Minister responsible for Crown 

Investments told the media the CODC has existed for several 

years and has produced some tremendous successes. But the 

vice-president of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), Bill Hyde, said that Codco in its infancy having 

started . . . is in its infancy having started in 1994 with 

contributions from unionized employers and employees. 

 

My question is to the minister responsible for CIC. Mr. 

Minister, which is it — a tremendous success which has been in 

existence for a year or something not even a year old? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm 

pleased to respond to the question of the member opposite, and 

he is correct that this organization began in 1994, not several 

years ago as I had indicated. 

 

Nevertheless the purpose of the organization . . . and I want to 

present the mission statement as put together both by the 

contractors — that is, the employers and the employees — 

which defines what the purpose of this organization is. 

 

And it says: to develop and maintain a partnership comprising 

clients, unions and members and contractors and employees 

which will create mutually beneficial business and employment 

opportunities and to recognize the value and skills of our 

employees by working towards an accident-, incident-free work 

environment and by empowering individuals to be creative, 

innovative, and productive. 

 

Now I know that the Conservative members opposite don't 

understand that most people in this province prefer to work 

together and cooperate and problem solve and come up with the 

kind of solutions which are a benefit to the province as a whole. 

I know that. But there are some of those people who believe in 

that kind of an approach. And the contractors and the unions 

and the employees who they represent know that, and that's the 

way they try to work. And the mission statement I think makes 

it very clear what the objective of this organization is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, I hope that you intend on 

sending us a copy of the names of those contractors that you 

allude to. I know you'll want to do that, so we'll await those. 

 

It appears, Mr. Speaker, that we have a case of Dr. Jekyll and 

Bill Hyde; only we're not sure which one is the monster today. 



March 7, 1995 

 

692 

Mr. Hyde said in today's paper that Codco will benefit non-

unionized contractors by educating them about the collective 

bargaining terms they must need to do the work for the Crowns. 

 

Now that is simply incredible, Mr. Minister. You have 

implemented a payroll tax to support union activity, and this 

somehow is going to benefit non-union contractors because 

they will be educated on how to become unionized so that they 

can bid for government contracts. 

 

We have heard what Mr. Hyde has said; now let's hear what Mr. 

Jekyll has to say, Mr. Minister. If you would like to confer with 

your alter ego, do you agree that this slush fund is designed to 

promote the union propaganda? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well it just so happens, Mr. 

Speaker, that I do have a list of contractors for the benefit of the 

member opposite, which I will give in a minute. 

 

But first of all let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what this 

organization does. The money that is going into this fund is 

going to the building trades and the CLR (Construction Labour 

Relations Association) to provide for the administration and 

enforcement of this agreement, and the money is going to this 

organization to help improve the productivity and efficiency 

and safety in the construction industry. And it's an example of 

employers and employees cooperating together to problem 

solve and come up with solutions, something that members 

don't understand. 

 

Now what kind of employers? Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

and I hope the member listens carefully. And I'll just give you a 

few examples because the list is very long. Comstock Canada, 

Inter-City Mechanical, Balzer's Canada Ltd., Inter-City 

Mechanical, Dominion Bridge, Christie Mechanical, Hub City 

Steel Erectors, Con-force construction ltd., Thorpe Brothers. 

And the list goes on and on and on. 

 

Those are the employers who want to cooperate with their 

employees because they know when there's a good working 

environment the employer, the employees, and the taxpayers all 

benefit. And that is what our objective is with this fair tendering 

agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Establishment of CIBC Telephone Banking 

Centre in Regina 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today it was 

our pleasure to officially welcome representatives from the 

Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce to Regina to join in 

celebrating the arrival of a very exciting business venture here 

in Saskatchewan. 

The CIBC announced plans to establish a telephone banking 

centre in Regina, an investment which will mean hundreds of 

new jobs for our residents which our youth can benefit from. 

This is indeed a major statement of renewed and positive 

business climate in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we are well aware, such decisions are not made 

lightly. Indeed there were four main criteria that a location had 

to meet. First, a qualified labour force, a solid 

telecommunication infrastructure, reasonable operating costs, 

and a proven track record in call centre operations. We took an 

aggressive team work approach in demonstrating that 

Saskatchewan excelled in all those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier personally lead a team of individuals 

from SaskTel and the Department of Economic Development in 

presenting the Saskatchewan opportunity to CIBC in Toronto. 

Today we reap the result of the hard work of many individuals 

as the telephone banking centre will provide the equivalent of 

500 full-time jobs and an additional $15 million in annual 

payroll to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this is a situation that 

young people in our province can take advantage of. I would 

like to take this opportunity to say a thank you to all those who 

were involved in bringing this new project to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has a proven track record along with 

highly competitive rates. We've developed, through the Crown 

corporation, an infrastructure that can meet the demands of call 

centre technology, and for which, I might add, we are now 

receiving international recognition and contracts. 

 

In this province, Mr. Speaker, we also have a stable fiscal 

environment, one that has been made possible by the dedication 

of Saskatchewan residents. We are the first province to have a 

balanced budget and it is that effort that now allows us to go 

after job creation and training as our top priorities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, we have a solid 

dialogue between business and government. We have made a 

commitment to strengthen an already top-notch labour force — 

a labour force that is already one of the best educated and most 

dedicated in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the recent provincial budget it has also 

continued a very clear commitment to expanding and 

renovating and rejuvenating training services in the province. 

We will develop the training and the recruitment capacity 

required to take advantage of opportunities in the call centre 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when CIBC opens its telephone banking centre 



March 7, 1995 

 

693 

here in the province, residents will be ready, willing, and able to 

fill the hundreds of jobs available. These jobs are part of the 

new economy, an economy based on the plan that builds on the 

strengths of technology, agriculture, resources, research, and 

most importantly, the people in the province. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank, along with all 

colleagues in the Assembly, the work done here, especially the 

CIBC people who are with us here today. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

welcome the representatives for CIBC today and also like to 

compliment them on choosing Saskatchewan as a location to set 

up this centre. 

 

I note that in the minister's news conference and release he put 

out that it's the equivalent of 500 full-time jobs. Any jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, are welcome in Saskatchewan, very welcome. 

 

I find it somewhat ironic though, Mr. Speaker, that while 

yesterday was an announcement that Cargill was coming to 

Saskatchewan and the government was participating, today it's 

the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce that's coming to 

Saskatchewan with a new centre, and the government is 

participating. 

 

Perhaps all those things they said about Cargill and the big 

banks while they were in opposition was just irresponsible. 

Perhaps they really didn't mean it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very, very indicative of what was 

happening in the province that the opposition of that day, when 

they were sitting over on this side, was prepared to say anything 

and everything about someone from outside of the province. 

And yet when they become government, they're prepared to sit 

down and work hand in glove. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative deals with the youth. And the 

minister for Social Services was bragging during question 

period of how great this was going to be for the people in the 

food bank lines. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot more people 

in the food bank lines that aren't youth than there are that are 

youth. And so this initiative, if it is dealing with mainly youth, 

is not going to have any effect on those food bank lines, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again I would like to compliment the bank for coming to 

Saskatchewan. We appreciate your business. I don't want to get 

too negative because I do have a loan with them, so I would just 

like to thank them for coming. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

delighted that Saskatchewan has been chosen as the site for the 

CIBC call centre, and I truly hope that this is the first of many, 

many announcements of new companies coming to 

Saskatchewan, because the people of our province have been 

waiting a very long time for something tangible to materialize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so many people in our province are hoping for an 

opportunity to make a contribution to our home, that I cannot 

overstate the importance of new employers and new 

opportunities. Today there are more than 30,000 people willing 

to work, people who have no jobs. Today there are 30,000 

people looking for work and 80,000 more who have given up 

and are collecting welfare. These jobs will provide encouraging 

news to these people, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that one day 

there will be enough jobs to go around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge this government to pursue new employers, 

and most importantly, to enhance the climate for investment 

and job creation for small business in our economy. 

 

I welcome CIBC very much. I congratulate the minister and the 

employees of his department for whatever roles they have 

played in securing these jobs for our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Donation of Food 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

that a Bill respecting the Donation of Food be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — When should this Bill be read a second time? 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd: — With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to repeal The Economic Development 

and Tourism Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

The Economic Development and Tourism Repeal Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Department of 

Economic Development Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 



March 7, 1995 

 

694 

The Department of Economic Development Amendment Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 

01, An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the Briercrest Bible 

College, be now read a second time and referred to the Standing 

Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Unfair Contractor Tendering Policy 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's indeed a 

pleasure and a privilege to be able to stand up in the Assembly 

today to talk about the motion that I am about to pass. 

 

I was really quite surprised that I'm standing this quickly in the 

Assembly this afternoon because we had really thought that the 

government would want to talk about their gambling Bill and to 

discuss that for the people of Saskatchewan. But I guess 

gambling must be something that the government has become 

allergic to; it must be a new disease that's going around because 

they don't even want to talk about it now. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of my remarks, I will 

be moving the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly condemn the government for its 

recent Crown tendering policy which demonstrates 

unfair preference for unionized contractors and which 

moves governments away from the principle of 

contracting with the lowest bidder hence driving up the 

costs of government borne by taxpayers, and further that 

this Assembly condemn the government for its gross 

failure to consult and respect the opinions of small 

business in arriving at this agreement. 

 

I would like to start with a quote that says it all, Bruce 

Johnstone in the Saturday Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker: "When is 

a Fair Wage Policy not a fair wage policy? When it's the NDP 

government's Fair Wage Policy, which is anything but." 

 

I'm not sure which facts astounds me more, that even the NDP 

would have the gall to bring in a policy like this or that they 

would actually do this in broad daylight instead of trying to 

bury it on federal budget day which of course is what they did. 

 

But of course, Mr. Speaker, even though they tried to hide it 

under the cloak-and-dagger of the budget from Ottawa, people 

were bound to notice such a horrendous piece of work. We can 

only conclude from this that the NDP is actually proud of this 

policy, that they really think they have done a good thing. 

 

Well let's start with one important fact. Non-unionized 

construction employees make up over 80 per cent of the 

construction contracting industry, Mr. Speaker. Now I want you 

to understand, members of the government, this is 80 per cent, 

like 80 out of 100. That's pretty near everybody. Only 20 per 

cent that is on the opposite side of this thing that belongs to the 

unions. 

 

Yet here we have a construction agreement where 75 per cent of 

all government work goes to the minority of unionized 

contractors. Now that again is the 20 per cent. And we are 

supposed to believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is fair. 

 

Now not only are we supposed to believe that this is fair, but 

we are also supposed to believe, in the words of the minister 

responsible for CIC, that this agreement removes preference 

from government contracting and creates a level playing-field 

for the unions and non-union firms. These statements were so 

preposterous that at first I couldn't understand how even the 

minister could believe it. However, I thought it was only fair to 

try to see things from his point of view. 

 

What is it that would make a government show preference for 

non-union firms as the minister suggested used to happen? Well 

first of all, they are in the majority, so it is hard not to pick 

them. And if you have a bag of marbles, for example, Mr. 

Speaker, with 80 per cent of them are white marbles and 20 per 

cent are black marbles and you reach in to pick one at random, 

you will probably get a white marble. I suppose this could be 

called a preference. 

 

Secondly, the government Crowns are generally required to 

contract with the lowest bidder. Well there is a preference right 

there. If 80 per cent of the contractors are almost always 

cheaper than the other 20 per cent, I guess that's a preference 

too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in other words this policy seeks to eliminate the advantage 

that non-union contractors have by virtue of being cheaper and 

more numerous. These two things add up to a third reason for 

showing preference — common sense. It is just common sense 

to go with the cheapest, most numerous source of contract 

work. 

 

What this policy declares then is that the government, in order 

not to show anyone any preference, will abandon all semblance 

of common sense in deciding how they award contracts. In fact 

just to show how unbiased they are, they will insist that the 

awarding of government contracts makes as little sense as 

humanly possible. 



March 7, 1995 

 

695 

Now perhaps this is a new concept in political correctness, that 

we are all conscious to avoid racism and sexism, and now we 

have a new ism — sensism — discriminating on the basis of 

whether or not something makes common sense. 

 

Now this government has proven that it certainly is not sensist. 

Of course, I'm being facetious, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I wish I could believe that the government actually had a good 

reason for this policy; but we all know what the government's 

reasons were and we all know that they weren't good ones. We 

all know of the long-time cozy relationship that has existed 

between the NDP and the unions. That has been no secret over 

the past years. In fact, if I'm not mistaken, that's the main 

difference between the NDP and Tommy Douglas's old CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation); the NDP has union 

and union money pulling their strings while the CCF of course 

did not. 

 

Given this fact, what the NDP has founded on the premisses of 

giving unions more influence, how can we expect them not to 

bring forward such blatantly unfair and biased policies? If 

anything, we almost have to hand it to this government for 

holding back on this influence for so long. It wasn't until last 

year that they brought in amendments to The Trade Union Act 

and even then they watered them down against the protests of 

their own union friends — not very loud protests, mind you, but 

they were somewhat mildly protesting. 

 

But an election is looming, Mr. Speaker, so the government had 

to do something big and in a hurry to get their union friends 

back onside. Obviously the polls must have shown that the 

NDP were slipping — and badly — and needed that support 

very quickly and very dramatically. 

 

(1430) 

 

It's rather unbelievable just how big a kickback the government 

managed to drum up for the unions — 75 per cent of 

government jobs; forcing all contractors to pay into a union 

slush fund at 21 cents per hour for every hour worked by every 

employee; forcing unionized employees on non-unionized 

firms, giving the unions a foothold for extending certification. 

 

Really a one-sided deal, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it. A tax 

for sure that can only be described as being a tax on the 

employer because none of this money comes out of the 

employee's portion of his cheque. It all comes out of the 

employer, 100 per cent. 

 

Given how much contractors are dependent on government 

contracts, it is no exaggeration to say that this agreement 

delivers the entire construction industry into the hands of the 

unions whether the workers involved want to join or not. It 

almost becomes a compulsory union. This is the NDP's version 

of a no-cut contract. Even if the government or another 

government reverses this policy somewhere down the road, the 

unions will have increased their influence so much that it won't 

matter any more. 

In this underhanded way the government has achieved what I 

believe is a first — the first time a government has forced an 

industry to unionize. The government struggles to spin this the 

right way, but they do their best to confuse the public with their 

talk of eliminating preferences. They struggle to find 

explanations and precedents, all of which fall apart under the 

slightest examination, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to quote once again from Bruce Johnstone, they say, "other 

jurisdictions have fair wage policies for taxpayer-funded capital 

projects, including the federal government." What they don't 

say is that federal fair wage policies don't use union scale as the 

minimum wage rate, but use an average rate of comparable 

projects in that area. 

 

They also cite recent projects like the Shand power plant, where 

a project agreement specified the amount of union content 

required. What they didn't say is that wage rates for the Shand 

were posted and they weren't necessarily union scale. Nor did 

the Shand project agreement require a set percentage of the 

employees to be union members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has pulled its rhetoric in a circle 

in terms of a wagon train on this issue. If there is a distortion 

available to them, they'll use it. If there is a self-evident fact that 

they can deny, they'll deny. They deny that unionized 

contractors are more expensive and that this will cost the 

taxpayers and of course the utility rate users of the Crowns to 

go up; for example, power, gas, phones, etc. 

 

Part of this is just their own willing blindness on the subject, 

just like they refused ever to admit that the unionized portion of 

the Melfort water project was over budget, over deadline, and 

under quality. And of course that is history that has already 

been written and is a fact of life. 

 

Another explanation they supply is that the Crowns will 

actually save money because this deal is buying, pay no strike, 

no lockout agreement. What a ridiculous argument, Mr. 

Speaker. In order to have a strike, you need to have a union in 

there. If the government were not putting mostly union people 

in its contracts, there wouldn't be any danger that there could be 

a strike. 

 

It's like putting a bomb in the middle of a room and saying don't 

worry, I defused it. You wouldn't have to worry about the bomb 

if you hadn't brought it into the building in the first place. The 

members of this House know how this agreement is going to 

interfere across this province, Mr. Speaker. For all of the 

government's trickery, the public is going to see this as a 

government rewarding its friends. 

 

The businesses that have been affected by this commercial 

apartheid will rebel just as they did to The Labour Standards 

Act. And there's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that they will do that 

when you consider the enormous cost that there will be 

involved directly for them at the outset. 

 

The government was forced to renegotiate and water down that 



March 7, 1995 

 

696 

piece of legislation, and I'm talking about The Labour Standards 

Act. What makes them think they're going to get off any more 

lightly this time when they try to force people to unionize an 

entire industry? 

 

I would urge the members of all sides of the House to save 

yourselves the trouble, save the province and the economic 

environment another major upheaval. For the sake of your 

reputation with your constituents, if nothing else, members, join 

with us in condemning this agreement. 

 

The reality is, my friends, that if you continue to forge ahead 

with this kind of legislation and this kind of approach through 

the back door, if you continue to do this and continue to force 

people to pay more and more, you will get our province so 

seriously out of sync with our neighbours around us that 

companies that have been coming to Saskatchewan, as you have 

indicated yesterday and today, those future companies won't 

come here any more unless you cut them secret, private, 

sweetheart deals. 

 

And the rest of the province knows full well that in both of the 

cases of the past two days, you have had to do that. You've had 

to cut sweetheart deals, giving exemptions of taxation, of giving 

not just hundreds of thousands but millions, millions of dollars 

to these two corporate entities in order to buy them into the 

province. You've bought and paid for them at the expense of 

other Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

If you're going to give tax breaks and concessions, why not do it 

for everybody on a level playing-field and really let the 

province develop? Why not stop trying to force everybody to be 

a union member so that they automatically kick into your 

election campaign as your election working team, as well as 

your slush fund for the election itself? To buy votes with the 

people's own money — that's what it's all about. And I think 

you have to put a stop to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, and seconded by the member from Morse: 

 

 That this Assembly condemn the government for its 

recent Crown tendering policies which demonstrates 

unfair preference for unionized contractors and which 

moves government away from the principle of 

contracting with the lowest bidder hence driving up the 

cost of government borne by the taxpayers, and further 

that this Assembly condemn the government for its 

gross failure to consult and respect the opinions of small 

business in arriving at this agreement. 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 

me to second the motion by my colleague from Maple Creek. 

The NDP's announcement of the new Crown tendering policy 

did not come as any surprise to the official opposition. In fact as 

the government is well aware, this policy was brought to our 

attention back in January of this year, Mr. Speaker. We opposed 

the union-preference tendering policy then and we oppose it 

now. The policy is clearly designed to buy union support for the 

NDP for the upcoming election. This 

announcement is only their most recent attempt to buying the 

vote. 

 

Consider some of the government's more recent endeavours. 

First of all, an agreement penned between government and 

municipalities regarding VLT (video lottery terminals) revenues 

and that was indicated here in the discussion we had yesterday 

with the minister responsible for community service. Six per 

cent natural gas rate reduction; a new agreement with the FSIN 

for five new casinos in Saskatchewan; new highway Crown 

with no specific purpose other than to award contracts to 

unionized companies; new SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union) contract awarding 3 per cent increase in pay 

and better benefits such as optometric coverage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here's another one. The new union-preference 

tendering policy is all about getting union support. Support the 

NDP, we're losing, Mr. Speaker, and the new tendering policy is 

supposedly sure to work. After all, under the new policy 

successful bidders on SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, Sask 

Water, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) and Saskatchewan 

Forest Products Corporation contracts will be forced to hire 75 

per cent unionized workers and pay them union wages and 

benefits. 

 

What this policy does, Mr. Speaker, is effectively restrict 

companies from bidding for government work. Only companies 

paying union wages will be able to bid on major Crown 

corporation construction contracts. And non-union companies 

can compete for contracts but they have to pay the same wages 

and benefits as unionized firms. The policy goes so far as to tell 

businesses where to hire their workers. They must hire up to 75 

per cent of their workers from union halls, and employees must 

pay union dues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the irony of that is this, that when Saskatchewan 

people go to the union halls to get a job, they will get a job. But 

when the union hall is empty — and that is something that can 

easily happen in Saskatchewan because only 20 per cent of the 

people in Saskatchewan are unionized  when the union halls 

are empty in Saskatchewan, who gets the first job? Is it 

Saskatchewan contractors? No. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: — No. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: — No. It will be out-of-province contractors 

who have to hire and bid in for the contractors here to supply 

the union labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no, no . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney north is saying that 

this is all wrong. Well, Mr. Speaker, I've had some experience 

of this myself, and that's exactly what happens. 



March 7, 1995 

 

697 

The contractor goes to the union hall, it's empty. Who does he 

get in? He gets employees from Manitoba; he gets employees 

from Alberta. But does the non-union contractor get any 

opportunity to work? No. Do Saskatchewan people get any 

opportunity to work? No. And that's the seriousness of what we 

have here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP government is implementing this policy knowing full 

well that the construction industry is 80 per cent non-unionized 

— non-unionized, Mr. Speaker. Not only will this policy turn 

into a province-wide certification drive of non-union 

companies, it will be obscenely more expensive than a low-bid 

tendering policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is this new policy part of the reason that the Crown Investments 

Corporation did not pay a dividend to the General Revenue 

Fund this year? That's an interesting question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Crown corporations in . . . CIC didn't pay a dividend, as the 

auditor pointed out they should. Is it the reason, so that the 

Crown corporations could have extra money to pay our 

expensive contract provisions? 

 

This new policy is costly, unfair, and unnecessary, Mr. Speaker. 

Why are companies that win Crown construction jobs forced to 

pay the contract administration and industry development fee of 

21 cents an hour for every employee on the job? 

 

Mr. Speaker, 21 cents an hour for every job that is made 

available to a contractor in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 

will have to have a fee attached to it of 21 cents an hour — 21 

cents an hour for each of these employees on the job. 

 

Here's how this money is to be used. The money is to be 

divided between the unionized contractors association which 

this government made up a year ago. And most of the 

construction people in the province of Saskatchewan — we had 

a list of over 300 here yesterday — most of these people don't 

belong to that association. The other association is the Union 

Employees Council and the other one is the Construction 

Opportunities Development Council which was established last 

year. 

 

In what other province in this country do successful contractors 

have to contribute to a slush fund, to a union slush fund, Mr. 

Speaker? And the answer is none. Not even in Ontario do they 

have to do this. 

 

The Provincial Secretary tried to explain the purpose of the 

CODC yesterday. Unfortunately he chose to mislead reporters 

rather than to come clean and admit that this organization is a 

brand-spanking-new one. He tried to suggest that the CODC 

has existed for years. Well Crown Investments Corporation 

vice-president, Bill Hyde, set him straight. He said, and I quote 

the Leader-Post: 

 

 CODC is in its infancy, having started in 1994 with 

contributions from unionized employers and employees. 

I dare to say that the CODC was set up the day the unions 

and the NDP cooked up this new tendering policy. Imagine 

this — one of the purposes of CODC is to improve the 

image of unions, to inform people that union labour is less 

costly and more efficient than that of non-union labour. 

 

Tell that to the people around Melfort, the people that witnessed 

firsthand the difference between union and non-union 

employees. The members opposite should recall the sprinkler 

system that was set up in half of the water pipeline from 

Melfort to the North Saskatchewan River dam. The members 

opposite should recall the fiasco that was created there. 

 

They should also be able to recall that the job was divided so 

that half of the work was done by non-union and the other was 

done by unionized employees. The non-union side had two 

crews consisting of 18 people, Mr. Speaker. The union side has 

twice as many crews, consisting of four times the amount of 

employees. The union side completed its project on schedule, 

exactly on budget. 

 

(1445) 

 

We never did find out, Mr. Speaker, how much the unionized 

cost was and how much really the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

had to provide. But it was in the neighbourhood of 3 million 

over budget on about a $12 million project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am not suggesting that disaster is looming for any project 

going union in Saskatchewan; however I'm suggesting that extra 

costs are obviously associated with union labour. Any of the 

people that we've talked to where provisions are similar to this, 

talk about a 25 to 30 per cent increase in cost. And when we're 

talking about the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan — the 

Crown corporations of SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI, STC or any of 

these Crown corporations — we're talking about contracts that 

are significant in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And will the taxpayer then have to pay 25 to 30 per cent more 

for each of these? Is that why our utility rates have gone up in 

the past year, some four per cent, some nine per cent, some 

seven per cent? Mr. Speaker, that's the way it happened, and 

that is very, very significant. And that's why there is, as was 

quoted in the paper, significant surpluses in places like 

SaskPower — 81 million, l20 million, 118 million — in three 

years. Those are the totals for each of those years. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is borne by the people of Saskatchewan 

trying to do business in the province of Saskatchewan. That's in 

the neighbourhood of $300 million, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

three years. That goes directly into the hands of those people 

opposite to use for whatever purposes they wish, and then they 

have the option on turning this back to unions with a 21 cent-

an-hour factor built in. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why the opposition is against this sort 

of thing happening. It's an unfair advantage that should not be 

awarded to unionized contractors. After all, the only way to 

create jobs and build our economy is through less government 



March 7, 1995 

 

698 

interference and not more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen, as was announced today and 

yesterday, islands building in this province, islands where this 

government is choosing not to tax nine per cent on E&H 

(education and health) tax, islands across this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We have an island in Lloydminster. We have an island 

in Simpson Sears. We have an island in construction of casinos 

on Indian reserves. We have islands where nine per cent sales 

tax is not going to be allowed to be collected, or they have an 

option on not collecting it. 

 

And what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is islands that are going 

to have to say . . . in this contract, what will we do for this 

contractor who has a union shop? And what specific thing can 

we do for him to offset the extra cost that is going to be for him 

to compete with other contractors? Are we going to build 

islands like that for those contractors as well? And that's what 

we're discussing here today. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, because of these things, we felt it 

necessary to bring to the attention of the people of 

Saskatchewan the problems that are going to exist with a policy 

set out by the Provincial Secretary and the minister responsible 

for CIC in setting up a policy that says 75 per cent of the 

contracts given out by CIC will be awarded to union preference 

only, and that 21 cents an hour for every employee will be 

charged back as a benefit to the unions. 

 

And what's it for, Mr. Speaker? It's to provide an opportunity 

for the union — and we had that expressed here today — an 

opportunity for the union to go in and unionize every other shop 

in the province of Saskatchewan. It will give them extra money. 

 

And what will they do, which is obvious to me, is donations 

will come from the unions, which has always financed the 

people opposite in their election bids. Unions will be able to 

pay their NDP Canada fund and then they will transfer that 

money into the province of Saskatchewan deliberately for a 

union contribution that can't be traced. Everybody knows that 

that's what's going on. Why don't you just stand up there and 

admit it? Are you ashamed of doing that? 

 

So we felt it necessary today, Mr. Speaker, to bring to the 

attention of this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, 

the inconsistency of the government opposite. And it is 

therefore with pleasure that I move . . . or second the motion 

presented by the member from Maple Creek today. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to register my opposition and the 

opposition of our Liberal caucus to the Crown tendering policy 

put forward by this provincial government. 

 

The members opposite continue to show, through legislation 

like this most recent tendering policy for the Crowns, their 

disdain for free enterprise and their lack of respect for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is no secret that the NDP has a history of using the Crown 

corporations of this province as an extended limb of its political 

bureaucracy, a hiding place in many instances for political 

friends and appointees. The NDP government uses the Crowns 

as well to feed its insatiable appetite for spending — spending 

taxpayers' money. And the taxpayers and consumers are 

constantly picking up the tab for higher utility rates, fees, and 

licences. 

 

The NDP solution to an opportunity in the market-place always 

poses a question: is this a chance to create a new Crown 

corporation? And so the family continues to grow. 

 

But this particular administration's obsession for power and 

control has taken another twist. For years people have felt that 

union operators have received preferential treatment from NDP 

governments. For years taxpayers and business people alike 

have felt that jobs were not being awarded on the basis of 

lowest bid and most economical contract because there was 

evidence that union contractors were favoured by NDP 

governments. The objection to this had nothing to do with a 

pro- or anti-union sentiment. 

 

The fact is that the taxpaying public wants government to get its 

spending under control; to quit passing the exorbitant costs 

through higher taxes or utility costs or deficits onto the people. 

People were just looking for government to exercise the same 

common sense and smart shopping habits that consumers have 

had to develop during tough economic times. 

 

But this government, Mr. Speaker, which claims to be so 

concerned with deficits and taxes and jobs, keeps introducing 

policies that say, we don't care about jobs, we don't care about 

taxes, and the only solution to deficits is to keep raising more 

money for government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I disagree with this approach, and the 

Liberal caucus disagrees with it as well. I disagree with this 

particular tendering policy and I disagree with the NDP 

government using public tendering policy to prop up its sagging 

support with unions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this policy, like The Trade Union Act amendments 

and the labour standards amendments, is impractical and it's 

uncalled for. Like the "cutting edge Labour legislation designed 

to protect us from the ruthless greed of business," this tendering 

policy is yet one more tedious and expensive millstone around 

the necks of local governments, businesses, and taxpayers. 

 

Just listen to this description in the March 4 Leader-Post and 

tell me if any self-respecting business person would ask 

government to add this aggravation to the bidding process. And 

this is entitled "Hiring policy rapped," and this is the quote, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 The non-union contractor's first employee on the project 



March 7, 1995 

 

699 

can be a regular employee, and if it takes more so can 

(be) the third, the 12th, and after that every fourth 

employee hired to do the job. But the second employee 

must be a union member, and so must (be) the fourth-

11th employees, and three out of (the) four additional 

employees hired for the job. 

 

Now can you imagine how absolutely cumbersome and 

ridiculous this sounds to any person trying to do business in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Let's think about what this really means. When private 

contractors decide they want to bid on some trenching being 

done by SaskTel, they follow a certain process. They determine 

the cost of equipment and fuel and manpower and put their 

experience and expertise to work to come up with a bid because 

they want to win the job for their firm and for their employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of our small and medium-sized construction 

firms are family-type operations where the boss knows the 

employees and where the owner cares about the workers and 

their families. More than that, the contractor wants to make sure 

he can do the job if he wins the tender. Part of the process is to 

assess the skilled labour available to him — the tradesmen, the 

tradeswomen — and to calculate the real costs of the job. 

 

What this government is suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is that 

private, non-union contractors be forced to pay union wages 

when they bid on a government job. Even if a contractor has a 

qualified team of tradespeople willing and able to work for him, 

willing to work for the wages offered, this government is saying 

no, you have to inflate the cost of the labour component of your 

bid because we don't want to be put in a position where we 

have to save the taxpayers considerable money. 

 

That's really what the government is saying, Mr. Speaker. They 

are saying with this policy that the free market, the competitive 

edge, the skill and business acumen of our entrepreneurs in this 

province, is no longer relevant. They are saying that the 

government wants to level the playing-field for its political 

supporters by simply raising the threshold — raising the costs 

to taxpayers by eliminating labour costs as a variable in the 

tendering process. 

 

And that isn't all. That isn't all. The government isn't satisfied 

with setting the wage rates; now they also want to dictate the 

number of union employees at the job site. Mr. Speaker, all of 

this smacks of the government being in the face of business 

when it has no business being there at all. 

 

The member from Elphinstone stands each and every day in this 

House, always commenting on how they're trying to facilitate 

the private sector doing business in the province of 

Saskatchewan. There's absolutely no foundation — no 

foundation at all  to those words if in fact they follow 

through with this policy. 

 

Where does the contractor I've just talked about go now? Where 

does that leave the contractor, Mr. Speaker? Where it leaves 

real people is he's forced to sit out some of his regular workers, 

and this might be for a big job. He might also have to forgo the 

talents and working relationship he has with a tradesperson just 

because he has to meet this quota. Now the contractor has a 

number of union people on his job site and the stage is set for a 

union certification drive happening while he's paying the wages. 

 

And what happens when we have a non-union contractor who 

has to depend on using the unionized employee pool for a job 

while a union shop is bidding on the same project? What 

happens if the union workers choose not to meet the 

contractor's requirement for union employees, just so the union 

shop wins the bid? Who's going to step in and blow this fair-

play whistle in those situations, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I know that the trades council has made assurances that that 

won't happen, but what comfort is that to the contractors of 

Saskatchewan? The whole argument for this is that it will be 

more fair. It will be more fair, they say. There is absolutely no 

evidence of that. I have no evidence. But it doesn't take a rocket 

scientist to figure out that it will certainly be more expensive for 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The budgets of Crown corporations are limited, believe it or 

not. The more one job costs, the less likely there will be money 

to undertake another. That is a fact of life for the private sector 

and it is quickly becoming a reality for the Crowns as well. 

 

I read just yesterday that the president of SaskPower is worried 

about the threat of competition from TransAlta Utilities; that 

SaskPower have may to downsize and trim its bureaucracy. 

Good thinking, I say. Let's do what we have to do to stay 

competitive. But for heaven's sake, let's not talk about 

efficiency in one breath, and then legislate inefficiency in 

another. 

 

There has been far too much valuable time and money wasted 

by small-business people in this province, hiring lawyers, 

organizing rallies, travelling to Regina to meet with the Minister 

of Labour over the last round of labour laws. Meetings that 

should never have been necessary, because the legislation was 

unnecessary. And now just weeks before an election, here we 

go again. Trying to argue the obvious to a government that just 

doesn't get it, or if it does get it, it should truly be ashamed of 

itself. 

 

(1500) 

 

People are tired of pointing out the obvious, and some of them 

when they get tired enough, just pack up their families and their 

capital and their companies, and they move. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier says out-migration has stopped, but every month, 

hundreds and hundreds of people move away from 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yes, babies are born and people move in, so the overall out-

migration is at almost zero. But the fact is people are still 

leaving by the thousands, and they aren't the people who 



March 7, 1995 

 

700 

depend on the government for their livelihoods. Many of the 

people who are leaving are the entrepreneurs. And we know 

we've lost 1,331 employers in Saskatchewan — 1,331 fewer 

than in 1991. The job creators. 

 

The people who are leaving are also the young people who have 

just not been finding work in Saskatchewan, and they are 

skilled tradespeople who are willing to sell their skills in free 

markets of other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to ask ourselves, what has this 

government done to make Saskatchewan stronger and more able 

to compete on a global scale, or even with our next-door 

neighbours? What will this policy do to make us more 

competitive? Will we have cheaper costs of doing business? 

Will there be more jobs? Will this give us smaller, more 

efficient government? Or will we need more watchdogs to 

hover around private contractors to see that yet another letter of 

the law is being met? 

 

This policy will not give people added incentive to invest in 

Saskatchewan. It will not give our young people more 

opportunities. Mr. Speaker, this will add to our reputation as a 

province that is becoming more and more unfriendly toward 

free enterprise. 

 

This legislation comes out of the past, and it is brought forward 

by a government that is living in the past, regardless of how it 

tries to paint itself otherwise. It is time to reject these outdated 

ideas, time to put Saskatchewan taxpayers first and politics last. 

 

On behalf of myself and the Liberal caucus, I urge the 

government to withdraw this policy and to replace it with one 

which supports the philosophy of competition in the market-

place, which gives the job to the lowest qualified bidder — the 

way it happens in a true free market economy, which is what we 

should be aiming to create, not destroy, in our province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

honour to enter into this debate put forth on this malicious 

motion by the official opposition and supported with much 

enthusiasm by the Leader of the Third Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest to the members of the 

opposition and to the third party as they bring their comments 

regarding this resolution to this debate here this afternoon. And 

I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, that as I listened to not only the 

content, but particularly with the Leader of the Third Party, to 

the tone of those comments, that I see here a motion that is 

brought forth with an agenda of fear and division that is part 

and parcel of what they're all about. 

 

I've heard misrepresentation, and I think blatantly intended 

misrepresentation, of the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement here on the floor here this afternoon. 

Now my good friend, the member from Maple Creek, has 

brought his remarks to the Assembly, and I listened very 

carefully. And I note that he is also listening with some 

attentiveness, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps the opportunity will be 

there for him to get back into this debate because I will be 

moving at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, an 

amendment. And if he wishes to get back into the debate, he'll 

have an opportunity to do that. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, let me just give notice to the Assembly 

that at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion 

along the lines that all the words after the words "this 

Assembly" will be deleted, and the following substituted, to 

read: congratulate the government for implementing a new 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement which gives union 

and non-union contractors equal access to government jobs and 

maximizes Saskatchewan employment, while ensuring that 

tradespeople receive fair treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that's a fair reflection of what this 

tendering agreement is all about, and that is what it is intended 

to do. 

 

Now my good friend, the member from Maple Creek, says what 

about the workers? Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest. I 

listened with interest to phrases being used across the floor like, 

union-preference policy and union preference only. Mr. 

Speaker, if you listen to the Tweedledum and Tweedledee and 

pick your Tweed, which is which; but if you listen to 

Tweedledum and Tweedledee, and their use of the word union, 

Mr. Speaker, when it slips through their lips, it comes out as a 

dirty word. 

 

That's what this is all about. Union is a dirty word to these folks 

opposite. And union workers, if you're to believe the innuendo, 

Mr. Speaker, union workers have horns on their heads and 

forked tails behind. Mr. Speaker, it's got nothing . . . when you 

listen to them, it's got everything to do with political 

philosophy, it has everything to do with a campaign of fear and 

division; it has very little to do with honest belief about what is 

good for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they describe this tendering policy as union-

preference policy. Mr. Speaker, if we're going to describe what 

it really is, what we have here is a Saskatchewan worker 

preference policy, to do work for the Crown corporations in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find interesting, as I listen to the remarks of the 

official opposition, and then I listened very carefully to the 

words of the Leader of the Third Party, who says, and if I got it 

down correctly — Hansard will determine whether I got it 

precisely correctly  but if I'm quoting her correctly, she said, 

and I quote: this policy, like the labour standards amendments 

and Trade Union Act amendments, is impractical and 

unworkable. Well she nods her head, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

I've quoted her correctly. 

 

It's kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, when I pull out my blues 



March 7, 1995 

 

701 

for the orders of the day; we've had brought to this Assembly a 

Bill, a private Bill brought by the Leader of the Opposition 

which the Leader of the Third Party has now indicated on the 

record she will intend to support. Now we've been calling it 

every day, day after day, and the Leader of the Opposition has 

not yet moved it. 

 

But I remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 

Opposition, supported today by the Leader of the Third Party, 

Leader of the Opposition has a Bill before the House which is 

entitled a Bill to repeal The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 

1994 and The Trade Union Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

They make it very, very clear — very, very clear that when it 

comes to protecting the quality of work life and the rights of 

working people, be they organized working people or working 

people who are not organized in the collective agreement, Mr. 

Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, they stand opposed 

to progress which working people have earned in their rights 

and protections within the last year in this Assembly. 

 

Now that doesn't surprise me; that does not surprise me, Mr. 

Speaker, because this is all about philosophy. And when you've 

got the white cats and the black cats or the right foot of the 

chicken and the left foot of the chicken or Tweedledum and 

Tweedledee, however you want to describe them, Mr. Speaker, 

what they come to this Assembly is with a political philosophy 

that says if it has anything to do with unions, if it has to do with 

collective agreements, workers coming together, then it's a bad 

thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that I'm a member of a 

government that believes not only in building an economy to 

improve the quality of life of all Saskatchewan people, but that, 

in building an economy and advancing economic development 

in our province, that we are also committed to an equitable 

sharing of that opportunity and security by the working people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. And that is part and parcel of 

the thought behind this tendering agreement that we're debating 

here today. That's what it's about. 

 

We have before us here — let us make it abundantly clear — 

we have before us here today, crystal clear, a difference of point 

of view, a difference of philosophy. That's what this is all 

about; let's not confuse it with anything else. You have the 

Conservatives and you have the Liberals who say that if it's 

good for working people, then it's not good for Saskatchewan. 

And you have the New Democratic Party Government of 

Saskatchewan that says that what is good to be shared in the 

way of opportunity and security for working people is in the 

long run good for all the people of Saskatchewan. There is 

clearly a difference of philosophy. Let us make no confusion 

about that. 

 

What I find kind of interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Liberal leader says that when she refers to people leaving the 

province of Saskatchewan, she says that some of those people 

leaving the province of Saskatchewan are skilled tradespeople. 

And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? She is bang on, bang on. 

And it is a continuation of a consequence of a policy of the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) government through the 1980s that 

led to a significant loss of Saskatchewan people, and in 

particular skilled tradespeople, from our province, that was part 

of the population loss that devastated the province of 

Saskatchewan through the '80s — and, thank heavens, is now 

changing. 

 

And I'm going to comment on that in my remarks just shortly, 

Mr. Speaker. But we saw, we saw in the 1980s when we had a 

PC government, we saw a policy which was intended to weaken 

the security and the opportunity of skilled tradespeople in this 

province, purportedly in the interest of profit for the employers 

— purportedly — that led directly to the outflow of skilled 

tradespeople from the province of Saskatchewan, that is now 

supported holus-bolus by the Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

And I say to all the working people of Saskatchewan, be 

warned. When you listen to the remarks of the Conservative 

members and the Liberal members on this debate here today, be 

warned that if you are a working person in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that a Lib is a Tory is a Lib is a Tory. And they 

have made that abundantly clear in the remarks that we've heard 

here today. 

 

What I find also, Mr. Speaker, kind of interesting, is that the 

remarks we hear today contradict not only the history in the 

province of Saskatchewan, but in fact the history of their 

political parties in the province of Saskatchewan. When we 

think about the responsibility, Mr. Speaker, of government to 

lend some constructive direction to the world of employment, 

when you're given the authority and responsibility to govern, 

then you have to ask yourself, how do you use the tools of 

government in the best interest of the working people of the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that coming with government 

is the responsibility that when you're shaping your policies, that 

you pay particular attention to the impact of those policies in 

the world of employment. And you ask yourselves, do these 

policies lend stability to employment in our province? Are these 

policies which are leading to crests and valleys in the 

employment of the people of Saskatchewan. And clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, I express a bias, I express a bias towards employment 

policies which lend stability to employment in our province — 

predictability, Mr. Speaker, and an absence of the boom and 

bust kind of philosophy that seems to be part and parcel of 

what's endorsed by the members opposite. 

 

You have to ask yourself as well, Mr. Speaker, what are the 

long-term implications? Do employment policies lend to the 

building and maintaining of a pool of skilled tradespersons in 

our province or not? And you have to ask, Mr. Speaker, as well, 

whether these policies lend, in the long run, to the best value for 

the dollar spent when engaging in public contracts. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, finally you have to ask yourself, in the long 

run what are the policies that will maximize Saskatchewan 

employment — maximize Saskatchewan employment. 



March 7, 1995 

 

702 

Employment by Saskatchewan people who pay Saskatchewan 

income tax when they live in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I express very clearly, no doubt about it, a bias in 

favour of all four of those principles — stability of 

employment, the promotion of a pool of skilled tradespeople in 

our province, best value for the public dollar spent, and the 

maximization of Saskatchewan people being employed to do 

Saskatchewan jobs when you're spending Saskatchewan 

taxpayers' money. 

 

And that's what this policy does, Mr. Speaker. When I look 

carefully at the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, 

that's what this policy does. Now I reflect back, Mr. Speaker, 

over the last couple of years and as a member of this Assembly 

and I don't think that I'm particularly unique. All of us have had, 

and we've certainly heard from the opposition many times in 

question period, we've had requests for clarification for the 

construction tendering policy for the Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker, and here is the response. 

 

This is the response to what we've been hearing about for . . . 

and I think with some justification, some confusion as to what 

the policy is. Clearly, construction companies have wanted to 

have a clear and simple statement about what the policy is, and 

here it is. And it's drafted, Mr. Speaker, and it's collected in this 

agreement — the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

Here it is; it's been signed. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now who has signed this agreement, Mr. Speaker? Because the 

members of the opposition would like to leave the impression 

that somehow the Saskatchewan government has taken this 

agreement, and in the dark of night has crafted it out and then 

they flipped on the lights and charged out into the public and 

exposed it to the world and said, here's the policy. 

 

Well nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. This 

is an agreement which has come about as the result of a great 

deal of consultation and then was signed by a number of 

partners to the agreement. 

 

And who are they, Mr. Speaker? Let's identify them very 

clearly. First of all, which Crown corporations are affected by 

that and signatories to this agreement? There's the 

Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation. There's 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance; SaskPower; SaskTel; the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation, (STC); 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation; SaskEnergy. Those are the 

Crown corporations that are signatories to this agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But who is the agreement struck with? There are two other 

partners in this agreement, Mr. Speaker, who were part of the 

negotiations and the discussion that led to the signing of an 

agreement — to the signing of an agreement between those 

parties.

And who were the other two? Mr. Speaker, there was the 

Construction Labour Relations Association of Saskatchewan — 

the Construction Labour Relations Association of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, who are these folks? Mr. Speaker, these 

folks are the certified bargaining agent — let me repeat that — 

the certified bargaining agent for construction employers in the 

province of Saskatchewan. That is who they are. They are 

signatories to this agreement. 

 

And who was the third party, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who is 

signator to this agreement? The third party is the Saskatchewan 

provincial building and construction trade council — the 

Saskatchewan provincial building and construction trade 

council who are representatives for tradespersons. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let us make it very, very clear that what 

we're talking about here today is an agreement that was 

negotiated and signed by Crown corporations, by the 

representative body for construction companies, and by the 

representative body for tradespersons in our province. This is 

nothing that's being rammed down the throats of anybody. 

 

And like any collective agreement there will be those who say, 

well it's not exactly what I wanted, and they'll want to complain. 

And their voice is the opposition and here we are. 

 

But let us make it very, very clear that this is an agreement 

struck with Crown corporations, the representatives of 

construction employers, and the representatives of 

tradespersons. 

 

Let me also, Mr. Speaker, then draw attention of the Assembly 

to the fact that this is entirely consistent — not only in the 

province of Saskatchewan, but I'll dwell on that for a moment 

— this is entirely consistent with the history of employment in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member from Maple Creek referred in his remarks — and 

he's quite correct — he referred in his remarks to the fact that 

this is an agreement that is not dissimilar from some that were 

struck by his predecessors when his predecessors, the 

Conservative government, was in office here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Bi-Provincial upgrader here in Saskatchewan, over in the 

Lloydminster area, the NewGrade upgrader here in Regina, the 

Shand power plant down in the Estevan area, and Cameco's 

Contact Lake gold mine all have stipulations into their 

agreements, Mr. Speaker, which are similar to this agreement 

that are signed by the Crown corporations, the representative 

for the construction employers, and the representative for the 

skilled construction tradespersons of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now when we look back through Saskatchewan history, Mr. 

Speaker, and we ask ourselves, has there been anything like this 

that has ever existed before, if you listen to the words of the 

opposition and to the words of the Leader of the Third Party, 



March 7, 1995 

 

703 

you would think that this was some wild and novel idea that 

came screaming out of the cloud of night and perched to lay 

prey to the construction companies of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. This idea 

has not only been around; it has been government policy in the 

province of Saskatchewan since, get this, Mr. Speaker, since 

January 7 — of what year? — 1913, 1913. This wild, 

ridiculous, radical new idea has been government policy since 

1913 in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my predecessors, the members of the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation, the CCF, the forerunners of the 

NDP, didn't even exist until 1933. Before the NDP and its 

predecessor came into existence, the Government of 

Saskatchewan had had this policy for 20 years when the 

government was run by those who stand in the opposition 

today. 

 

Well this is a radical, new idea coming in screaming out of the 

dark of night to perch and prey on construction employers  

nothing could be further from the truth, and we should be very, 

very cautious, Mr. Speaker, of any who would try to paint it that 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me quote from Hansard in 1913, in 1913 on a 

resolution called the fair wage resolution. Now who was the 

government in 1913? I'm not that old; I don't remember this, 

Mr. Speaker. Was it Liberals? No! Tell me it isn't true. Tell me 

it's not the predecessors of the Leader of the Liberal Party who 

stood here and venomously — venomously  let the words 

“union” drip off her lip, Mr. Speaker. Her predecessors 82 years 

ago — 82 years ago  her party was implementing this 

resolution in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I go around the province of 

Saskatchewan I've had people say to me that they think the 

Leader of the Liberal Party is a tad out of touch. But even this, 

Mr. Speaker, is taking it to extremes. She's a tad out of touch; 

she's more than 82 years out of touch with the history of her 

own party in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But what did the Liberal government of 1913 pass in this 

House, Mr. Speaker? Well it passed a resolution with these 

words, entitled the fair wage resolution, and these are the 

words, and I quote: 

 

 . . . insert in all contracts a clause for the payment of a 

fair and reasonable rate of wages to all workmen 

engaged on . . . (the construction of public works) or in 

lieu of such clause a schedule setting forth the minimum 

wages to be paid to such workmen; 

 

And quote: 

 

 . . . the Government should take such steps as are 

necessary to apply its fair wage policy to all provincial 

works and undertakings over which it has or may 

exercise the necessary control . . . 

Mr. Speaker, all we're talking about here is an agreement — 

an agreement, I read them — with, is it six, Crown 

corporations. The Liberal government of 1913, Mr. 

Speaker, says, and again I quote: 

 

 . . . wage policy to all provincial works and 

undertakings over which it has or may exercise the 

necessary control . . . 

 

Now in the context of their history, I can understand why the 

Leader of the Liberal Party may say you have betrayed the 

history of Saskatchewan, you're only implementing this for 

Crown corporations. The Liberal government of 1913 had it for 

all public works. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, time marched on. And then on March 23, 

1944 . . . and 1944 was a significant year in the province of 

Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, I remind you that June 15, 

1944 was a significant date because on June 15, 1944 

Saskatchewan got its first Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, before the government changed, 

when we had the, I believe it was the Liberal government again 

. . . that's right, because we'd had the Anderson government. 

They'd taken us into the Dirty Thirties and been tossed out by 

the people of Saskatchewan and we now had a Liberal 

government, they were back again. And then on March 23, 

1944, prior to the 1944 election, the Liberal government passed 

an Order in Council No. 301/44, which read, and I quote: 

 

 To more effectively further the purpose of the fair wage 

resolution of 1913. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1944 the Liberal government was saying, not 

only did we have it right in 1913, we're not going to let the 

opportunity pass us by to reinforce this resolution. And 31 years 

later they said we have to reinforce what we did in 1913. 

 

And what did that order in council spell out? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it required that, and I quote: contractors employing 

none but skilled workmen and their apprentices; that — and I 

quote — the rates and wages shall be the standard rates and 

wages for the same trades in the district; that — and I quote — 

subcontractors shall be bound in all cases to conform. 

 

Liberals in 1914, Liberals in 1944, Mr. Speaker  history has 

said that the initiators of this idea in the province of 

Saskatchewan were the Liberal Party. That's who introduced it 

in the province of Saskatchewan, this radical new idea that is 

going to undermine our economy and chase, presumably, more 

skilled tradespersons out of the province than the Tories chased 

out. 

 

This is a little bit difficult to believe, is it not, Mr. Speaker? It is 

a tad difficult to believe. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask, are we alone? I heard the Liberal Party, 

the Leader of the Liberal Party refer to Saskatchewan as an 



March 7, 1995 

 

704 

island. Well are we alone? Is Saskatchewan the only province in 

all of Canada with the leadership of a Liberal government in 

1913 reinforced by a Liberal government in 1944? Is 

Saskatchewan the only jurisdiction in all of Canada that has an 

understanding . . . a construction agreement like the one that's 

been signed here? 

 

Are we an island, a Liberal-led island, as the Leader of the 

Liberal Party would like us to believe? No, Mr. Speaker. 

Unfortunately, unfortunately, the facts of the matter are, for 

debating purposes and points by the Leader of the Liberal Party, 

wrong. 

 

In North America today, Mr. Speaker, British Columbia; 

Manitoba — oh, Tory Manitoba; Quebec — oh, Liberal 

Quebec; New Brunswick  who's in power in New 

Brunswick? 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Liberals. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Oh, could that be a Liberal government there, 

Mr. Speaker? Nova Scotia, who's in power in Nova Scotia? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nobody is. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Nobody. My colleague says nobody is in power, 

but I think officially . . . is it Liberals there? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where's that? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Nova Scotia. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Liberals in Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker. Ontario, 

oh Ontario, that province with a dreaded NDP government 

there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact the Government of Canada, the Liberal Government of 

Canada . . . but here's one that they'll feel very, very 

comfortable with, Mr. Speaker, the federal government of the 

United States of America. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Those are NDPers. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — All those, almost . . . Well the good member, my 

good friend, the member from Souris-Cannington, accuses their 

American brothers and sisters of being NDPers. Ah, Mr. 

Speaker, I recognize that President Clinton, he knew a good 

thing when he heard it. I recognize that he in fact referred to 

himself as a new Democrat in the last election. And not only in 

Canada but in the United States where they heard that term, 

they were attracted, because they know that New Democrat 

government is fair government in the interest of the people of 

the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — But sad to say, sad to say the New Democratic 

Party is not in government in the United States of America 

today. 

 

However in the United States of America, in Canada, in Nova 

Scotia, in New Brunswick, in Quebec, in Ontario, in Manitoba, 

in British Columbia, there is an agreement similar to the one 

that we're talking about here today — this scary, scary 

agreement, Mr. Speaker, that has come screaming out of the 

night and will just throw the entire economy of Saskatchewan 

into bedlam, if we're to believe the Leader of the Official 

Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid that neither history nor in fact the 

facts across our country support them in predicting that 

somehow this is going to lead to some great unravelling of our 

economy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I will move along in my notes here because 

I don't like to be too lengthy and I know other members are 

going to want to get into the debate here. In fact I kind of 

expected my good friend, the member from Maple Creek, in his 

new found enthusiasm for our subject, will want to get back in, 

recognizing that he'll have an amendment that he'll be able to 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at what's gone on in the province of 

Saskatchewan, what I hear coming out of the mouths of the 

Conservative members opposite is not particularly surprising. In 

fact if there's anything you can say about the official opposition, 

the Conservatives, that you can't say about the Liberals, Mr. 

Speaker, at least the Conservatives are consistent. They get full 

marks for consistency. 

 

(1530) 

 

They may be wrong but they are consistent, Mr. Speaker — 

some would say consistently wrong. And some would say that 

that is an admirable quality in . . . if you are attracted to 

consistency, Mr. Speaker, you are attracted to the Tory Party on 

labour policy, because they are consistent. 

 

We'll recall back in 1984, the new Conservative government 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, and one of the acts that 

they did at that time, Mr. Speaker, was to eliminate at that time 

The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well my good friend, my good friend the 

member from Maple Creek, his only disappointment about 

being here today is that he wasn't there then, because he would 

have loved to have been part of eliminating The Construction 

Industry Labour Relations Act. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when 

we reflect on the fact that a new Act was introduced in this 

province in 1992, I believe it was, it was no surprise to us on 

this side of the House that that was opposed by those on the 

other side of the House. 

 

It's no surprise that when there was an attempt to bring back 

into the province of Saskatchewan some sense and some 

semblance of order in the setting of the construction industry 

labour relations, or in the improvement of occupational health 



March 7, 1995 

 

705 

and safety, or improving the protection of workers in The 

Workers' Compensation Act or Labour Standards or Trade 

Union Act, all of that was opposed by Tweedledum and 

Tweedledee, the black cats and the white cats, the left leg of the 

chicken and the right leg of the chicken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's no surprise to those on this side of the House 

that they opposed all of that. And it's no surprise that they bring 

to the House now a Bill to repeal The Trade Union Act and 

Labour Standards Act, as we heard from the Leader of the 

Liberal Party today endorsed with great enthusiasm. It's no 

surprise. 

 

When they repealed The Construction Industry Labour 

Relations Act, Mr. Speaker, back in 1984, I believe it was, what 

happened in the province of Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, 

what happened is that there were . . . it stimulated a number of 

new constructions companies, Mr. Speaker. That's the most 

positive thing I can say about it. 

 

But these were, Mr. Speaker, these are described by everyone as 

double-breasted companies. In other words, these were the non-

unionized companies of unionized construction companies — 

very, very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the member from 

Maple Creek, he wants to know how that worked. 

 

Now I would assume, Mr. Speaker, if there's anybody who 

knows how that worked, he would be the expert, he would be 

the expert. He seems to be the one who understands those 

principles more clearly than anybody else in this House. You've 

got to give it to the member from Maple Creek. He has been a 

leading spokesperson on this subject in the Assembly. Fair 

enough. He is entirely consistent with his predecessors in the 

Conservative Party, and I give him full marks for that. 

 

But what this meant, Mr. Speaker, is that you had non-union 

companies then who would bid on work, they would bid on 

work without paying union wages. And what began to happen 

in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that a very, 

very significant factor in the winning of tenders for construction 

contracts was lower wages. And many of those contracts, Mr. 

Speaker, were then won on the backs of lower paid workers 

doing exactly the same job that they had been doing earlier but 

for lesser pay and with less security, with no pension benefits, 

often without the health benefits that apply to construction 

workers, Mr. Speaker, who are often seasonal workers. 

 

Let us keep in mind as well, Mr. Speaker, that there is a 

difference here between unionized workers in the construction 

industry and unionized workers in the rest of . . . in all other 

industries. In the construction industry, unionized workers are 

registered with a union. They don't belong to a certain 

employer. And they're available for work for any employer who 

requires skilled tradespeople in the province to do the work that 

requires their technical knowledge and their skills. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as a result of these double-breasted 

companies and the elimination of The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Act, history will tell us that wages for 

workers went down, predictably. They went down. And where 

did the skilled tradespeople of Saskatchewan start to go, Mr. 

Speaker? They started to go to other provinces. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party, in her remarks, referred to the 

outflow of skilled tradespeople from the province of 

Saskatchewan and she was right. That was a policy that was led 

and spurred on by the Conservative government of the day here 

in the '80s in Saskatchewan — endorsed today by the Liberals. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, what tends to happen then is that over a 

period of time you begin to have a real lack of skilled 

tradespeople because they go where the jobs are and where they 

can get decent income for plying their trades. And that's where 

we are in Saskatchewan right now. 

 

See I referred before, Mr. Speaker, to a bias in favour of 

stability of employment, maintaining a pool of skilled people, 

skilled tradespeople in our province, and what we've had going 

on in Saskatchewan is attack on that principle — endorsed 

again today by the Tories and the Conservatives. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell us how the union halls work. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well the member from Maple Creek wants to 

know how the union halls work. Let me tell you how the union 

halls work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Union halls work this way. When you are a skilled . . . a 

qualified, skilled tradesperson, then you can join the union and 

you become available to work in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when work is being called in Saskatchewan 

and a union worker is required, then the union goes to its list of 

available skilled tradespersons. 

 

And they have a very, very important bias in terms of the way it 

works, Mr. Speaker. The way it works is this. The way it works 

is this — is that there will be a list of those who are available. 

And, Mr. Speaker, before any worker can ever be called to work 

on a job who lives outside of the boundaries of the province of 

Saskatchewan, absolutely every registered union tradesperson in 

the province of Saskatchewan must be at work. There must be 

full employment of the skilled tradespeople of Saskatchewan — 

that's how it works. 

 

That's how it works, Mr. Speaker. That's how it works. And so 

when I said before, Mr. Speaker, that what we have here is a 

policy in fact which not only promotes but virtually ensures that 

a very, very high percentage — well over three-quarters, well 

over three-quarters — of people who are working on Crown 

corporation construction jobs in the province of Saskatchewan 

will be Saskatchewan tradespeople who pay Saskatchewan 

income tax because they live in the province of Saskatchewan, 

that's how a union works, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now my good friend, the member from Morse, had said earlier, 



March 7, 1995 

 

706 

he'd said earlier, that a problem that he saw with this agreement 

was that, he said, what if there's not a skilled tradesperson 

available because the Tories drove so many of the skilled 

tradespeople out of the province that they're not available now 

when we need them to work on a project? 

 

The member from Morse asked that question. It's a legitimate 

question. And the answer, Mr. Speaker, is found in this 

agreement. Because this agreement says, and I quote: 

 

 In the event that a Union is unable to fill a requisition 

for employees within a forty-eight hour period (within a 

48-hour period) (Saturday, Sunday and recognized 

holidays excluded), the Contractor shall have the right 

to employ qualified employees for that requisition from 

other available sources and the provisions of this 

Agreement shall apply to such employees. 

 

That's what it says. If you can't find a Saskatchewan skilled 

tradesperson to fill the job when it's a union worker that's 

required, then the contractor has the right to fill with another 

qualified employee of his or her own choosing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the reality is today that there 

are a number of union tradespersons, skilled tradespersons who 

are union members, who at times will choose to stick their 

union card in their back pocket in order to work non-union, 

usually at a lower rate of pay and with less security, pension, 

health benefits. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They got a job. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Well now the member from Souris-Cannington 

has become the resident expert; he says, they got a job. He's 

right; they got a job. They got a job working for less than you're 

worth. Let's keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, let's keep in mind that 

by comparison to other provinces, the amounts that are agreed 

to for the hourly wages for skilled tradespersons are negotiated 

with whom? 

 

With the representative for the contract employers and the 

representative for the tradespersons. These are negotiated. 

They're well aware of what the standards are in the rest of the 

country. And they are well aware that they collectively want to 

have an available pool of skilled tradespeople working for what 

they are worth, Mr. Speaker, working for what they're worth in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would like to paint 

this as . . . they call it a union preference collective . . . a union-

preference construction tendering agreement. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I said this is a Saskatchewan preference construction 

agreement. Saskatchewan preference, that's what it is. 

 

Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? Because when the job is 

advertised and tendered, who does it go to? Who will it go to? 

Mr. Speaker, crystal clear in the agreement, it will go to the 

lowest qualified tender. The lowest qualified tender, that's who 

will get the job, no if's, and's, or but's about it — not like we 

used to do in the decade gone by where some would be invited 

and others would not. Open to everybody and then to the lowest 

qualified tender goes the job; Mr. Speaker, the best value for 

the public dollar. 

 

Who will work on those jobs, Mr. Speaker? Saskatchewan 

people will work on those jobs, Saskatchewan people who pay 

Saskatchewan income tax, the best value for the public dollar. 

 

Now they like to say, Mr. Speaker, that this will mean that all 

the employees will be those dreaded union workers, those 

dreaded union workers. Well, Mr. Speaker, that's not what the 

collective agreement here says, I'm afraid. It says that the first 

employee in each trade — not on the job site — the first 

employee in each trade on the job site, the first employee in 

each trade on the job site will be as selected by the contractor. 

 

The second employee will be drawn from the available 

qualified union workers, a Saskatchewan worker from the 

province of Saskatchewan in that trade. 

 

The third employee, if . . . and let's be reasonable here, Mr. 

Speaker. Let's recognize the fact that the large majority, the 

large majority of construction projects will have a large number 

of different trades on site and will usually — usually, not 

always — but will usually not have a large number of each 

trade on site. However, Mr. Speaker, the agreement says that 

the third employee will be as selected by the contractor. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, for each trade, for each trade on the site, not 

number of workers on the site, but for each trade on the site. 

That's what it says, Mr. Speaker. And then the fourth will be a 

union worker and so on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's what it says. That's the collective agreement. That's the 

agreement between these companies, Mr. Speaker, and most 

companies will recognize, particularly small companies. These 

folks opposite like to defend them . . . like to present 

themselves as the great defenders of the little companies, Mr. 

Speaker. What this says is that if you have a company with 

three, with three people in a specific trade on site, in that trade 

two of them will be at the selection of the contractor, one will 

be union. If it's four, it's two and two, and so on. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many out of eleven? 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, well the member says, how many 

of 11? And I ask him, when was the last project you had where 

you had 11 people of the same trade on the same site? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what does this agreement say? This 

agreement says that what those workers who are on site will be 

paid will be the same wage. And it'll be a wage that is 

negotiated between the representatives of the construction 

employers and the representatives of the skilled tradespeople. 

They negotiate that rate and every worker on site will be paid 

the same rate. 

 

Now I know that that is objectionable to the members opposite 

because they are defenders of what they call free enterprise. I 



March 7, 1995 

 

707 

say what the world lives with these days is fair enterprise. And 

the sooner that they get that through their heads, the sooner that 

they will get back in touch with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

That's what people of Saskatchewan want, is fair enterprise — 

fair enterprise where you have an opportunity to tender based 

on your expertise, not on the fact that you are able to take 

advantage of lower-paid workers who have got the same skills 

as others. Every worker will be paid the same rate. 

 

And so what it will do, Mr. Speaker, is it will require . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well now the member from Wilkie 

is chirping away. We have a whole range of labour experts on 

the other side, Mr. Speaker. I can hardly wait. I can hardly wait 

till they get back into the debate here, so we can be entertained 

with the brilliance about this brand-new policy that's come 

screaming out of the night that started with the Liberal 

government back in Saskatchewan back in 1913. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker . . .. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

I will listen with great attention to the member from Wilkie 

because this will be a deep insight — I am sure — into the 

development of the economy and the fair employment of 

Saskatchewan skilled tradespeople. But in the meantime while 

I'm awaiting his rising to his feet, Mr. Speaker, let me say this, 

that these workers will be paid at the same rate. 

 

And so who will win the contract? Who will be the lowest 

bidder? The lowest bidder will be the one with the best 

expertise at working at developing a project effectively, who 

will get the best prices on the materials that are used on the job, 

Mr. Speaker. Those will be very, very significant factors as to 

who is the lowest, who is the lowest bidder  the one that can 

get the best price for the materials used, the one who best 

knows what he or she is doing in organizing the construction 

project. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there will be a bias in favour of the local 

bidder because the local bidder who uses local employees will 

not be required to pay the subsistence that is paid to those who 

travel to the job site. So there would be an advantage there 

again to the local contractor, Mr. Speaker. That's who will get 

the job. And so, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what this 

agreement is about, I find myself feeling a little confused as to 

what all the furore is about. 

 

The members opposite conveniently forget that in this 

agreement — although I have to admit my good friend, the 

member from Maple Creek, zipped across it very quickly — 

this agreement includes a no strike, no lockout clause. What it 

means is that for the next five years, for the next five years on 

construction projects with these Crown corporations, there will 

be no strikes, and there will be no lockouts. And when the job 

starts, it starts. And it will be worked at until it's done, and that's 

guaranteed in this agreement. That's stability of employment, 

Mr. Speaker, achieved through mutual agreement of 

representatives of the contract employers and the skilled 

tradespersons themselves. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we have is an agreement which 

means that managerial expertise and technology and non-labour 

related business expenses such as materials will become a very 

important factor to win tenders with Crown corporations. The 

tenders will go to the lowest qualified bidders, no questions 

asked, no exceptions. They'll be the best value for money spent, 

for the public money spent. Workers will be treated fairly and 

consistently. There will be access for work to the small local 

contractors who will have some slight advantage, and it will 

maximize the use of Saskatchewan labour. If it's possible to use 

Saskatchewan labour to fill the bill, then it's Saskatchewan 

labour that will be used. 

 

There will be fair wages paid; there will be no strikes; there will 

be no lockouts. There will be a level playing-field, and union 

contractors and non-union contractors alike are eligible to bid. 

Workers can come to work and receive union wages without 

having to pay . . . without having to join a union, or in fact the 

other side of the coin, to quit a union in order to get work as is 

happening these days sometimes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that it will ensure that there will be a 

sufficient base of construction trades work in Saskatchewan in 

order to keep our apprenticeship programs operating in this 

province, and a reliable supply of skilled labour in the province 

that will be able to be maintained. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, for all of those reasons I find myself being 

opposed to the resolution that has been moved by the member 

from Maple Creek, and as I said at the beginning, I am therefore 

motivated to move an amendment which I will now introduce, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I move the following amendment, seconded by my good 

friend and colleague the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, and it 

goes as thus: 

 

 That all the words after the words "That this Assembly" 

be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 congratulate the government for implementing a new 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement which gives 

union and non-union contractors equal access to 

government jobs and maximizes Saskatchewan 

employment, while ensuring the tradespeople receive 

fair treatment. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm pleased to 

rise in support of the amendment. And I think one thing that I 

find very interesting about this debate on this particular matter 

and matters of labour policy generally in this House, is the 

amazing similarity between the official opposition, the 

Conservatives, and the Liberal Party when it comes to treatment 



March 7, 1995 

 

708 

of workers in our province. And it's really amazing how similar 

they are and how really there's absolutely no difference between 

those two parties. 

 

Of course one shouldn't one shouldn't be too surprised about 

that when one realizes, looking at events in Ottawa, that the 

Liberals in Ottawa are actually more conservative than even the 

Conservatives were when they were in power in Ottawa. And 

here what we seem to be seeing is the Liberals and the 

Conservatives competing with one another to see who can be 

more right-wing and who can take us back into the 19th century 

faster. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think that people make better 

decisions and that we would make better decisions sometimes if 

we would just put ourselves in the shoes of other people. And 

I'm thinking about construction workers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I'm thinking about construction 

workers, electricians, plumbers, painters, pipefitters, who are 

neighbours of mine and friends of mine and live in the same 

community that I do and that I represent in the city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that despite the fact that our 

economy has improved a great deal in the last few years and 

there's a lot of hope and optimism in our economy and there are 

more jobs, there's one sector in our province that has not really 

shared in the renewal of our economy and that sector is the 

construction building trades. 

 

Because many of those trades are experiencing unemployment 

of 70 per cent, 80 per cent. They're experiencing levels of 

unemployment that are unprecedented. And some of the people 

that work in those trades are living on social assistance for the 

first time in their lives. 

 

And when I listened to representatives of the Conservative 

Party, and when I listened to the Leader of the Liberal Party, get 

up in this House and speak about whether or not these people 

should receive fair wages and a policy that will put them to 

work, what I really think on the most basic level, Mr. Speaker, 

is this. That we in this House, whether we're in the 

Conservative Party, the Liberal Party, or in the government New 

Democratic Party, are privileged individuals in many ways. We 

are privileged because we get to serve in this Assembly; that is 

a privilege and an honour. 

 

We're also privileged because we are paid sums of money that I 

don't think are unwarranted, but we have to remember are above 

the average of what the average person is paid in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And those who are privileged to sit in this 

Assembly, I think, should try to put themselves in the shoes of 

others who are affected by their decisions. And those others 

include construction workers. 

 

And we'll hear the Conservatives and the Liberals talk about 

how much people might get paid per hour to work on a 

construction job. But one should never forget that people who 

work in the construction trades move from job to job. They're 

often hired on a union hall basis, on a rotational basis. They 

have to wait until their name comes up and they don't work all 

the time. They don't necessarily get paid their wages 52 weeks 

out of the year as we are privileged to be paid our wages 52 

weeks out of the year and as many people in other sectors of the 

economy are privileged to be paid. 

 

And when I think of the construction workers, Mr. Speaker, I 

think of the construction workers  the painters, pipefitters, 

electricians  in my riding who have not been working 52 

weeks of the year, who maybe have been working 16 weeks of 

the year. 

 

And when I think of this policy, not much has been said about 

this policy in these basic terms. What I think about is people 

who have families and are trying to make a living and are trying 

to put food on the table for their families. That's what this is 

about. 

 

And from the comfortable position in life that I am fortunate to 

occupy, I don't want to forget about people that aren't as 

fortunate as I have been. 

 

And to listen to the opposition in this legislature, one would 

think that the worst thing that this government could do would 

be to say that people working on construction projects, people 

lucky enough to get work for part of the year should be paid fair 

wages, that that's just the most irresponsible, worst thing that 

any government could do. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, that's just not true. As the member for 

Moose Jaw Palliser has very ably pointed out, governments 

across the country of all political stripes have this kind of policy 

because it's a fair policy. 

 

The member for Moose Jaw Palliser also pointed out, and I'm 

going to return to this, that this policy has its origin in a 

resolution of this legislature in 1913, Mr. Speaker, brought in, 

in 1913 by the Liberal Party. Those were the days when we 

actually had a Liberal Party in the province of Saskatchewan, 

not a second Conservative Party run by people from the former 

government of this province who have now moved to the 

Liberal Party because they want to take power again. Those 

were the days in 1913 when we actually had a Liberal Party. 

 

The concern that the members opposite seem to have with 

paying fair wages, I have to say, is not a concern that I share, 

that is, being against it. My concern is people that need to have 

some work and some fair wages to put food on the table. 

 

(1600) 

 

I noticed that the members opposite, the Conservatives who 

spoke earlier and the Leader of the Liberal Party, didn't bother 

going into any detail about what the effect of the policy would 

be in terms of whether it would increase the amount of 

construction costs. They didn't talk about the percentage of the 

cost of a construction project that is made up of wages and the 

percentage that is taken up by materials and the percentage 



March 7, 1995 

 

709 

that's taken up by architectural fees or anything like that. 

 

They want to leave the impression that if you bump people's 

wages up a bit in construction, that that somehow is going to 

cost the taxpayers of the province a great deal. Of course that's 

not true. The percentage of any increased wages as the result of 

this kind of policy, the percentage increase is really quite minor, 

and the overall effect that it would have on a construction 

project is so small that those jurisdictions that have such a 

policy, as several do, have not even bothered to quantify any 

cost differences because Price Waterhouse has confirmed that 

any cost difference is small enough to be very difficult to 

calculate. So what we really have here is an attempt by the 

opposition simply to convince people that the government is 

doing something irresponsible here, which of course is not the 

case. 

 

Now I want to issue an invitation to the Conservative Party and 

the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. And I think it's timely to issue 

this invitation in this year of 1995, which is five years before 

the beginning of the 21st century, or six years if you belong to 

the school of thought that says that the 21st century doesn't start 

until the year 2001. But in any event, whether or not the 21st 

century is five years away or six years away, I think it's not too 

early to issue an invitation to the Conservatives and Liberals to 

come on into the 20th century. Come on into the 20th century 

before we get into the 21st century. 

 

Now it's interesting that this policy of paying fair wages on 

construction jobs which the Conservatives and the Liberals find 

so outrageous, is or was — as the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser pointed out awhile ago — actually begun in the 

province of Saskatchewan in 1913. And in 1913, Mr. Speaker, 

January 7, 1913, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

which at that time was governed by the Liberals, passed a 

resolution that said: 

 

 Whereas it has been the policy of the government in 

providing for the construction of public works to insert 

in all contracts a clause for the payment of a fair and 

reasonable rate of wages to all workmen engaged on 

such works, or in lieu of such clauses a schedule setting 

forth the minimum wages to be paid to such workmen; 

 

 and whereas it is desirable that this policy which has 

been so beneficial to the wage-earning classes employed 

to all undertakings over which the government has 

control, therefore be it resolved that in the opinion of 

this House, the government should take steps such as 

are necessary to apply its fair wage policy to all 

provincial works and undertakings over which it has or 

may exercise the necessary control for this purpose. 

 

So in other words, in 1913 the Liberal Party adopted a fair wage 

policy such as has been adopted by the government recently in 

the Crown sector. But it didn't just apply to the Crown sector 

which at that time admittedly was quite a bit smaller than it is 

today  that is, the Crown corporation sector  but it applied 

it to the entire government, to all the government departments 

and agencies. Any time the provincial government from 1913 

on hired people for a provincial project, those people were paid 

a fair wage according to an established schedule. Now that was 

good enough for the Liberal Party in 1913 but not good enough 

for the Liberal Party in 1995. 

 

Well it would seem, Mr. Speaker, that in terms of being 

concerned about working people and fair wages for everybody 

and spreading the wealth around a bit, which I think is still a 

good principle in our society, the Liberal Party has been going 

backward since 1913, instead of forward. It's too bad; it's really 

unfortunate. 

 

The Liberal Party was in power also in the spring of 1944, 

before the election in June of that year when T.C. Douglas and 

the CCF were elected. And before the Liberal Party was 

defeated, the legislature passed another resolution. And they 

confirmed the principle that has been part of our legislative 

policy since 1913, and went on to say . . . and I won't read the 

whole policy although it's reasonably detailed. But they said 

that contractors had to post on their premises, for the workers to 

see, a copy of the fair wage clause and the schedule of wages so 

that everybody could see that there was a certain rate of 

payment required. 

 

They had to keep a record of the people that worked for them 

and that had to be open to inspection by the government, and 

the rate of wage had to be open for inspection. They had to 

employ skilled workmen and their apprentices. So the policy 

tried to say, don't just hire whoever will do the work for the 

lowest amount; hire skilled workers, and hire apprentices so 

that we can bring people along in the trades and have them 

develop the skills that we want to have in our province and 

develop a skilled workforce so that we don't have to import all 

our workers from Alberta, so that we can have skilled workers 

right here in the province of Saskatchewan. That was always an 

objective of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the agreement goes on, but I won't read the whole thing. 

But let me say that to listen to the Liberals and the 

Conservatives, one would think that the government here was 

doing something that was very radical, very much against the 

public interest. 

 

But it is not radical. It is not new, and it's not against the public 

interest. What it is, is in favour of fair wages for construction 

workers to allow them to continue to live in the province of 

Saskatchewan and work and earn a living and feed their 

families. 

 

That, I think, would be in contrast to the dog-eat-dog attitude 

that simply says you pay the lowest wage to whoever will do the 

work for the lowest amount. And if that means that people have 

to move from province to province to find work, well that's 

their problem. 

 

And I noticed in her remarks, the Leader of the Liberal Party 

said, well this kind of policy will cause skilled workers to leave 

the province and seek work elsewhere. And of course, Mr. 



March 7, 1995 

 

710 

Speaker, there is nothing further from the truth. 

 

The reality is that this kind of policy, which says that we'll 

employ skilled workers, that we'll have an apprenticeship policy 

and train apprentices in the trades, and that we'll pay people 

decent wages will have the effect of maintaining a skilled 

workforce in the province of Saskatchewan. And that's what we 

want to do. 

 

I want to say too, Mr. Speaker, that the construction trades have 

been hard hit, as I said a few minutes ago, by unemployment 

and a high rate of employment. And aside from a simple 

concern that people have reasonable incomes, I think we have 

to be concerned about the fact that we've got unacceptable 

levels of unemployment in the building trades. 

 

And I am concerned about that. I'm not embarrassed to say that 

in my riding in Saskatoon there is an unacceptably high level of 

construction tradespeople who are unemployed. And I'm not 

embarrassed to stand in this House and say that I want the 

Government of Saskatchewan to have a policy which will get 

those people to work. That's what I want, and that's what we've 

got. And I support it, and I'm proud of it. 

 

And I said a few minutes ago that it doesn't really make much 

difference in terms of the overall cost of construction. What it 

really means is that you try to achieve efficiencies in other 

ways, that if you're bidding on a contract you will get the lowest 

bid, not at the expense of workers, not by saying I'm going to 

employ whoever will take the lowest possible bid, regardless of 

whether they live in Saskatchewan and pay taxes here, 

regardless of whether they are qualified, regardless of whether 

they have an apprenticeship program. 

 

No, we're not going to get the lowest bid through that kind of 

method. We're going to get the lowest bid through cost-

effective planning and materials and others factors that go into 

construction projects which I think, Mr. Speaker, are a more 

major part of the classic construction projects than wages paid 

to workers. 

 

The opposition, both the Liberals and Conservatives, have 

suggested today and on other occasions that this policy is a 

union-preference policy which will mean that a union has to be 

accepted for work on a Crown construction project. And when 

the Liberals and the Conservatives say that, in an effort to 

undermine the policy of the government, they are really not 

being completely straight with the people of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, because the policy adopted by the government is not a 

union-only policy. 

 

There's nothing stopping a company that is a non-union 

company, a non-union construction company, from bidding on 

a construction project, and there's nothing stopping them from 

winning the bid. All they have to do to win the bid is have the 

lowest bid; that's all they have to do. And they are on a level 

playing field with unionized construction companies. There's no 

advantage to unionized construction companies. The only effect 

of the policy is that when you make a bid, the bid has got to 

have a fair schedule of wages that will be paid to the workers. 

 

And for the reasons I indicated before, I support that. I think 

that's good policy, and it has been the public policy of this 

province since 1913. And when the Liberal leader gets up and 

tells people that we've got some new kind of Draconian and 

unacceptable policy, I think she'd better explain why this has 

been acceptable public policy since 1913 when the Liberals 

introduced it, but it ceased to be acceptable public policy in the 

year 1995. 

 

This is a policy that has not been imposed by the government 

on anybody. It's a policy that's been arrived at through 

consultation with employers and unionized tradespeople and the 

Crown corporations sector. 

 

The policy does these things that will be good for the province 

of Saskatchewan. Firstly, it encourages the employing of local 

Saskatchewan workers through its hiring formula. And I want 

to say, Mr. Speaker, that when we have unemployed 

tradespeople in our constituencies, we'd better be concerned 

about a policy that encourages hiring of Saskatchewan workers. 

I think we'd better be concerned about that. And so I support it. 

 

It encourages the majority of workers on Crown-funded 

projects to be Saskatchewan residents. I make the same 

comment there: that's good; we should support it. It means that 

people who are employed on Crown construction projects will 

cash their pay cheques here, buy their goods and services here, 

buy and licence their vehicles here, and pay their taxes here. 

And that's good, and I support that too. And so should the 

opposition. 

 

It means that we will keep skilled tradespeople living in our 

province and better develop a skilled construction labour force. 

And that's good too. When skilled tradespeople leave our 

province, they hardly ever return. And looking at what this kind 

of policy does, Mr. Speaker, frankly what I have to say is we 

should have done it a long time ago. 

 

(1615) 

 

The policy, as I said before, doesn't force anybody to unionize. 

The question of whether to be in a union or not to be in a union 

is now, as it has been in the past, an individual's right; a person 

chooses that himself or herself. A union shouldn't be taken 

away from anybody if they want to be in a union, nor should it 

be forced on anyone. And there's nothing in this policy that 

does either of those things. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that sometimes the opposition 

portrays this kind of policy as a policy that favours unionized 

employees in the cities. That's not true. More than 60 per cent 

of unionized tradespeople in our province live outside of 

Regina and Saskatoon. These are people that live in Moose Jaw, 

Prince Albert, Coronach, Shaunavon, North Battleford, 

Battleford, and all over the place. 

 

And of course there are provisions in the policy too that would 



March 7, 1995 

 

711 

encourage local contractors to do local work in these 

communities and would make them more competitive in 

bidding on a contract in their local area because their cost of 

doing business, if they hire local people who live in the area, is 

less because they don't have to pay a living allowance for the 

people. And I think that's good too. 

 

The policy that the government has brought in, Mr. Speaker, I 

said is not that different than the fair-wage policy brought in by 

the Liberals in 1913. But it also is a policy that has been used 

on other projects, notably the NewGrade project which was a 

project of the co-operatives and the Government of 

Saskatchewan; the Bi-Provincial upgrader which involved 

Alberta, Canada, Husky, and the Government of Saskatchewan; 

the Saskferco fertilizer plant which of course is Cargill and 

government; Cameco at their new Contact Lake gold mine. 

 

And if that policy is good enough for Cameco and the Bi-

Provincial upgrader, NewGrade, and Saskferco, I think the 

opposition should explain why it's such a terrible thing when it's 

applied in the Crown corporation sector. Of course the reason 

they take the position they do, Mr. Speaker, is just to distort 

what the policy really means and to play politics. Otherwise 

how do they explain the fact that Saskatchewan is not unique in 

having a fair-wage policy for construction workers working on 

government construction projects? 

 

For example, British Columbia has such a policy. Ontario has 

such a policy. Manitoba, which has a Conservative government, 

has such a policy; Quebec, Liberal government, now PQ (Parti 

Québécois), such a policy; same for New Brunswick, Nova 

Scotia, and the federal government . . . oh, and the federal 

government of the United States. These jurisdictions all have 

fair-wage policies, and now Saskatchewan has an updated fair-

wage policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: — And so we should. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, this policy has been successfully used 

and working very well. I certainly support it wholeheartedly 

because, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is, as I said when I began, 

that we can get up in this legislature and play politics and 

distort the truth and say that a policy says something it doesn't 

say. But when you boil it all down, what we have to remember 

is that this policy affects real people with real families who are 

trying to make a living and trying to feed their families. That's 

what it's all about. That's what it's going to do. And I support it. 

And I'm very pleased to second the amendment proposed by the 

member from Moose Jaw Palliser. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. 

Speaker, it's not surprising that today we're talking about a 

Conservative motion that condemns the government for 

reaching its recent Crown corporation tendering policy. It's not 

surprising because that's the same Conservatives that governed 

Saskatchewan from 1982 to 1991 while the construction 

industry workers struggled for their livelihood, struggled for 

fairness, struggled for Saskatchewan content, and indeed 

struggled to keep things together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am delighted today to stand and tell you I 

support my colleagues, the member for Moose Jaw Palliser and 

the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld. Both of them spoke very 

eloquently on this very important matter. 

 

But equally as important, I am delighted to say that the 

Conservatives and the Liberals stood together today. I have 

never seen a better example than this debate that shows that 

New Democrats stand for fair value, for fair opportunity, for 

fair Saskatchewan content and for fair treatment of 

Saskatchewan workers, and they do not — neither party, neither 

Conservative nor Liberal. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today the Leader of the Liberal Party said the 

government just doesn't get it. I want to tell you Lynda 

Haverstock's got it dead wrong. She doesn't get it and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I know the member 

knows he cannot use a member's name in the legislature other 

than referring to the constituency that the member represents. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that ruling, and of 

course I know it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the politics of the lowest common denominator 

might be the Liberal way, it might be the Conservative way, but 

it sure is not my way. It's sure not the Leader of the New 

Democratic Party nor any of my colleagues' way. The politics of 

Saskatchewan is the politics of us growing together, of us all 

being in this together, making this province a better place. As I 

said earlier, my colleagues have spoken very eloquently on it. 

There's little I can add in a substantive way other than this 

debate clearly delineates the difference, us from them. I think 

it's time we voted on the issue. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we have 

just had another example of the disgorgement of the fairy tale 

as the member from Moose Jaw provided us earlier today, about 

how great it is to be in the union and how great it is to have 

union pay for everybody. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what we have here in reality is an 

edited and revised version of Saskatchewan's history. The 

member from Moose Jaw has even gone back to 1913 as an 

example of how the Liberal Party supported the NDP's union-

only policies. Well I think when you look at that, Mr. Speaker, 

when you look at that 1913 piece of legislation, it never said 

union any place in it. It said, a fair wage for all workers — not 

just for union workers, Mr. Speaker, but for all workers. 

 

And the 1944 amendment to that Act never mentioned the word 



March 7, 1995 

 

712 

union. It said, wages — not union wages, but wages, Mr. 

Speaker, for people. And no one in Saskatchewan is opposed to 

fair wages for employees. But when it becomes a selected few 

employees, there is a major problem, Mr. Speaker, a very major 

problem. And that's what the government is supporting — 

wages and jobs for the selected few that vote for the NDP. 

That's who this policy is for. 

 

In reality, Mr. Speaker, this whole piece of legislation is a re-

enactment of the events leading up to the 1982 election. The 

unions were unhappy with the NDP in 1982. The nurses had 

been legislated back to work, so what did the unionists do? 

They didn't go out and knock on the doorsteps for the NDP. 

They didn't give their money to support the NDP Party, and the 

NDP members of the day that had been the government that had 

voted in favour of legislating the nurses back to work were 

dumped out on their ear, Mr. Speaker. Unceremoniously turfed 

out onto the street. And that's what this is all about. This is the 

member from Riversdale's attempt to reforge that unit of NDP-

unionist coexistence, that incestuous relationship, Mr. Speaker, 

between unions and in particular unions working for the 

government and the NDP Party. That's what this piece of 

legislation is all about. 

 

It's an attempt by the members opposite to buy, to buy the 

unionist support in the upcoming election because when the 

union member goes out to protest, Mr. Speaker, against another 

political party other than the NDP, in a lot of cases they're paid 

by the union to be out there. When they're out on the doorstep, 

knocking doors, in a lot of cases, Mr. Speaker, they're being 

paid by their union. When they work as the campaign managers 

for the NDP candidates, they're being paid by their union. 

 

And that's what this is all about, Mr. Speaker. It's an attempt by 

the members opposite to ensure that they have somebody who 

will be their campaign manager, somebody who will go out 

there and knock on doors, somebody who will go out and lick 

stamps for them to send out all their propaganda. That's what 

it's all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's nothing about fair wages for the people of Saskatchewan. 

It's all about trying to win the next election, plain and simple. 

It's how the members opposite, the NDP Party, can buy the next 

election with the help of the unions. 

 

If it was fair, Mr. Speaker, if it was fair, then why would only 

two people out of the first 11 be from the company's own 

workforce? Why would the other nine have to be from the 

union hall if the company isn't unionized? What happens if that 

company has 11 employees already and they go to work for the 

Crown corporation? They have to fire, lay off, do whatever it is 

to their regular employees and say, sorry boys — boys or girls 

— you can't come to work with us any more. We have to hire 

the NDP's friends. 

 

It's not exactly what I would call fair, Mr. Speaker. It's certainly 

fair if you're sitting in the union hall looking for a job because 

you can count on your brothers in the NDP to give you a job. 

But it's certainly not fair to the family person who has that job 

already and who's going to lose it just to give them an election 

worker on election day. And that's the only reason, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw talked about the U.S. (United 

States) president and how he was a great new Democrat. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, the American voters sent a message to that great 

new Democrat last November when, for the first time in 40 

years, they turfed him out of the House of . . . I was going to say 

House of Commons, but their legislature, their House of 

Representatives. They turfed him out of the Senate, Mr. 

Speaker. And in 1996 they're going to turf that new Democrat 

president, Mr. Speaker, just like they're going to turf the 

members opposite in the next election here. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw also talked of Tweedledum and 

Tweedledee. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to agree with him on 

Tweedledum and Tweedledee because that is the NDP Party 

and Barb Byers, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 

playing tiddledy-winks together with the taxpayers' money 

because that's what this is all about. It's how they can get the 

labour unions on side, and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will 

pay the bills for them. 

 

That 21 cents that they're talking about siphoning off every 

worker's wages, Mr. Speaker, the worker doesn't have an 

option. He's going to pay union dues whether he's in the union 

or not to support more money into the NDP coffers. And they're 

going to siphon off 21 cents an hour more off of him to go into 

their CODC, which is a joke, Mr. Speaker. And a portion of 

that money will go to education and union activities. In other 

words, it will be siphoned back into the NDP Party. 

 

Just this great big sucking sound going on in Saskatchewan, 

with all the money from the taxpayers sucking back into the 

NDP Party coffers. It's exactly what's happening. And I can hear 

it coming from over there already. 

 

(1630) 

 

The question of fairness, Mr. Speaker. It's only fair, only fair for 

those who have union cards in their pockets today. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw talked about Shand. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Shand was an open site. That meant you could be 

either union or non-union. And what happened down there, Mr. 

Speaker? Talk to a number of people working at that location. 

A fair number of the union people, Mr. Speaker, that were 

working on that site were not Saskatchewan people. The 

member was saying earlier that there were no jobs in 

Saskatchewan for the union trade halls. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, down at Shand, the union workers were 

from Manitoba. So if he's saying there was no jobs in 

Saskatchewan in the '80s for the union halls, why were they 

hiring union people from Manitoba to work at the Shand site on 

union contracts? That's not true, Mr. Speaker, when he says that 

they have to hire every Saskatchewan person that belongs to the 

union before they can hire anybody from outside. Not a chance, 



March 7, 1995 

 

713 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They hire them from wherever they can get them. They come in 

from out of province and put their names on the list here and 

now they qualify as a Saskatchewan unionite, and they get hired 

to go down to Shand and work. 

 

But what happens, Mr. Speaker? The guy at Shand from 

Estevan isn't listed in the Estevan union hall, he's listed in 

Regina. So he works in his home town and collects pay for 

working out of town. He collects travel allowance back and 

forth from Regina, and people wonder why they feel that union 

wages are too high. 

 

B.C. (British Columbia) has done this sort of thing, Mr. 

Speaker. They've gone to a union-preference, union-only policy. 

And what does it cost? Thirty per cent more for the job, Mr. 

Speaker — 30 per cent more. And in this province, who's going 

to pay that 30 per cent? It's going to be the taxpayers, each and 

every one of them. And they're not going to be getting the jobs, 

Mr. Speaker, it's only going to be the people with the NDP 

union cards that are going to get the jobs. 

 

The two out of eleven workers, Mr. Speaker, the union halls 

have no regard to whether or not that employee may have been 

a long-term employee, 20-year employee with that company. 

They're simply going to bump him out of the job. We see that in 

the various jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. You look at the hospitals 

right now. As soon as there is a lay-off the union says, no, this 

person has to lose their job because they're not senior to this 

person over here. Boom, you're out of here. 

 

The Minister from Social Services today was bragging about the 

jobs that were going to be made at Cargill and at Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce, Mr. Speaker. And good jobs. But 

what he forgot to mention is that there's 70-some people losing 

their jobs over in Moose Jaw because of this government, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are good union jobs and they're dumping them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they talk about fairness, they only mean 

fairness for the people that are going to be supporting them or 

that they hope that are going to support them. 

 

You look at the Cargill project, Mr. Speaker, that's up and 

coming. The government members opposite vilified Cargill 

during the late ‘80s and ‘90s -- vilified them. Booed them when 

they were introduced in the legislature here, Mr. Speaker, as the 

Minister for Economic Development introduced the people 

from the Imperial Bank of Commerce today — they booed 

them; booed them, Mr. Speaker. How utterly rude and ignorant. 

 

But that was the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, when they 

were in opposition, and they haven't changed today, Mr. 

Speaker. But now today, now today, Mr. Speaker, what'd they 

do? They're prepared to say, oh well, that was when we were in 

opposition, and when we were in opposition we can say 

whatever we want, because now they're getting into bed with 

Cargill and giving them $3.8 million to do that, Mr. Speaker — 

$3.8 million for that big, bad company that they wouldn't have 

anything to do with, that they were going to run out of this 

province. 

 

That's what it is, Mr. Speaker. Now it's good to have Cargill 

here, Mr. Speaker, very good to have Cargill here because they 

are a very strong and progressive company. They will make 

things happen within their industry; they'll be good for the 

canola industry in this province. But they came here in spite of 

the government opposite, not because of it, Mr. Speaker — in 

spite of it. 

 

There was a union boss on the radio . . . in the paper the other 

day, Mr. Speaker, who said, oh no, we wouldn't certify a 

company because they had union people on site while they're 

working for a Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. Well when else 

do they certify workers of a company, Mr. Speaker, other than 

when they're employed by that company? This is simply another 

attempt by the government to certify more and more of the 

construction trade within this province. 

 

They had to bring in their own pet company, CLR, because, Mr. 

Speaker, the real construction people of this province wanted 

nothing to do with them. They had to get their own little pets to 

come forward to form a corporation. There's over 300 

construction companies in this province, but the government 

went out and picked six to form a little trade group of their own 

to make representations to the government. And they gave them 

the sole jurisdiction over all construction labour in this 

province. 

 

That's what they call fair, Mr. Speaker. Six can overrule 300 — 

that's fairness on behalf of the government opposite. Mr. 

Speaker, they don't understand the terms of the word fair. 

 

If they were really interested, Mr. Speaker, in being fair, if they 

were interested in being fair to employers that have to hire their 

trade unionists, Mr. Speaker, their 9 out of 11, they would bring 

in a rule, Mr. Speaker, an amendment to The Trade Union Act 

that says that unions cannot proceed with a certification while 

they're under contract to a Crown corporation. 

 

Now that would be fair, Mr. Speaker. If they can unionize that 

construction company outside of their work time with Crown 

corporations, fine. Then the employees obviously want to be 

unionized. But when the government is forcing that company to 

hire about 90 per cent trade unionists, Mr. Speaker, to work on 

a Crown corporation job, then they should not be allowed to 

certify. It should be outlawed, banned. And, Mr. Speaker, it 

should not be allowed to have deemed happened, which seems 

to be one of the favourite words of the members opposite. 

 

Because that would be fairness, Mr. Speaker. What is unfair is 

to force the companies, force them to hire 90 per cent union 

employees, and then turn around and allow that union to certify 

them. Now that is unfair. 

 

But that is exactly what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker, 

because it does a couple of things. It ensures that those union 

employees will now have a job permanently with that company; 



March 7, 1995 

 

714 

and in turn, because those union employees now have a 

permanent job, they will be permanently paying into the NDP 

coffers through their union dues. And that's, as I said earlier, the 

entire object of this, is to build up the war fund and the human 

resources for the NDP to move forward to win the next election. 

 

Let's talk about a couple of the union projects that have gone 

ahead in this province already. Let's talk about the Melfort 

sprinkler system. I'm sure everybody is familiar with that 

project — it's the water system to supply Melfort and 

communities in that area. 

 

The contract was originally let to a non-union contractor. The 

government came forward and said, oh no, oh no, we can't have 

this; we've got to have union people working on here. So they 

jerked a portion of that contract away from the contractor who 

was the lowest tender and gave it to a union contractor. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that union contractor did such a shoddy job 

on it that it came in after deadline; it had innumerable leaks all 

along it, innumerable leaks. And that was the union portion, 

Mr. Speaker. The non-union contractor was done on time and 

under budget, Mr. Speaker, but not the union contract. It came 

in over a million dollars over budget. 

 

Now that's fairness; that's fairness because it was union wages 

that were paid on that, Mr. Speaker. And in fact a good portion 

of those union wages went to the people in Alberta. And B.C. is 

no different. Their construction jobs are costing about 30 per 

cent more, Mr. Speaker, than what the non-union jobs cost, and 

it's all being paid for by the taxpayer. 

 

When the member from Moose Jaw talked about his 1913 Bills, 

there was no union involvement in that legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

That was just a figment of his imagination. He was attempting 

to say, oh no, no, no, we're not the bad guys in this; it's been 

done before. Well, Mr. Speaker, they are the bad guys in this. It 

was not done before. It was done in the 1970s by the same 

member sitting opposite, but it certainly wasn't being done back 

in 1913. 

 

And that's what's wrong with this, Mr. Speaker, that's what's 

wrong with this. It's only as my colleague here says, they're only 

telling you half the story, and they're not even telling that much. 

They're just telling you that you've got to hire a union guy and 

you've got to pay him union wages and you've got to give him 

all the union benefits. 

 

And I have to say whether he's entitled to it or not, you're going 

to have to give him pay for being away from home when he 

may be in his own community because he gets hired out of the 

union hall in Regina. You're going to have to pay him travel 

back and forth whether he is driving a mile or he's driving 600 

miles, Mr. Speaker. Just because he gets hired out of the union 

hall in Regina doesn't mean that he doesn't happen to live in 

Nipawin, which is what happened to the Nipawin dam project. 

 

The people there were hired out of the union halls in Regina 

and Saskatoon who lived . . . their homes were originally in 

Nipawin. And that's where they lived and yet they got paid the 

transportation back and forth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one person who is getting hurt by this is the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, and the other person that's getting hurt 

by this is the people who were working for those companies 

initially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other unfairness about this is when a person is 

employed with a company and is not a part of that union, he 

doesn't receive any of the benefits from the union but he will 

pay union dues to them. The day his job is done, because the 

contract has ended, there's no benefits left for him. He's paid his 

money out. He's paid his money out, but he gets nothing back 

for it. But the NDP opposite do, because they've got a portion 

of that money that comes back to them into their party coffers 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My colleague says, how that 

would happen. 

 

Well I'll tell you how that happens, Mr. Speaker. What happens 

is the union to whom that member is paying his dues turns 

around and gives a donation to someone. Now I'm sure that in 

some cases they give it directly, such as what would be given to 

the member from Moose Jaw Palliser. Some union in his area 

will come up to him at the election time and say, Mr. Member, 

here's a campaign contribution to you. And so it shows up in the 

member's statement, election statement, after the day is over, 

that he got a big bundle of money from his friendly 

neighbourhood union. 

 

But that's not all the money that goes to the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser from his friendly neighbourhood union, 

because they also give some to an organization called Tommy 

Douglas House. Now who in the heck is Tommy Douglas 

House, you might ask. Well, Mr. Speaker, it's an entity created 

by the NDP Party. Now the friendly neighbourhood spiderman, 

or union, gives his contribution to Tommy Douglas House. 

Tommy Douglas House in turn gives it back to the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser and it shows up in his statements after 

the election as a contribution from Tommy Douglas House. 

 

Well who else would you expect to contribute to an NDP 

member other than the past leader, the foundation for the past 

leader of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), 

Mr. Speaker? I mean it sounds all very logical to everybody that 

Tommy Douglas House would be making contributions to the 

NDP members. But the question is, is where did the money 

come from? Where does the money come from? 

 

I really wonder how much money to Tommy Douglas House 

comes out of the pockets of those six construction companies 

that formed CLR in the first place. That would be interesting to 

know. Because we don't get a chance to have a look at the 

books of Tommy Douglas House, Mr. Speaker. That's all a 

deep, dark secret. 

 

The only part we get to see is when Tommy Douglas House 

turns around and makes a contribution to a member sitting 

opposite in their election campaign or a contribution to the 



March 7, 1995 

 

715 

NDP Party. But other than that, Mr. Speaker, it's a deep, dark 

secret where this money . . . how it's funnelled into an 

organization like that. 

 

Or like a number of other ones that are around the province, Mr. 

Speaker. Money can be given to them because they're claimed 

to be non-profit corporations. And then those non-profit 

corporations can turn around and make contributions into 

anybody's political campaign, Mr. Speaker, because each 

member's election campaign is a non-profit event also. 

 

There's some other issues too that we could talk about — such 

as the member for North Battleford. His rent goes to a non-

profit corporation. I think if you look on the list of the rents 

paid by the members of this Assembly, you will find that his 

rent is one of the highest, Mr. Speaker, if not the . . . 

 

(1645) 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I looked very carefully at 

the Bill, and I think the member is wandering away from the 

motion and the amendment, and I ask the member to return to 

the debate that is before the House. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed we're 

talking about the labour union policies of the government, and I 

shall return to those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're talking about how unions pay off their 

political allies and their political brothers. As I was saying 

earlier, they give their contributions, which are taken from the 

membership. The membership doesn't have to agree that they 

want to have those union dues taken off and given to a political 

party; they're simply taken. They're simply taken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And how often, Mr. Speaker, do you see a union conduct a 

secret ballot to say whether or not we should be making a 

contribution to a political party. I don't think they've ever done 

it, Mr. Speaker. It's decided around the boardroom table — 

that's where it's decided — by the people who can benefit most 

by it. 

 

If you look throughout the halls of government here, and 

throughout the Crown corporations, we see a significant 

number of ex-union leaders occupying those positions, Mr. 

Speaker. That's one of the pay-offs that you get by supporting 

an issue of giving money through union funding to the party 

opposite. That's what happens, Mr. Speaker, and that's the pay-

offs. 

 

And the government is trying to ensure now with this piece of 

legislation that indeed those funds will continue to roll into 

their coffers, whether it's through a direct contribution or 

whether it's funnelled through one of their nefarious 

corporations to launder the money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I've mentioned this earlier, Mr. Speaker. But whenever we get a 

large piece of legislation like this coming forward — it's not 

even legislation; it's just being done by policy and regulation —  

there is somebody who has to pay the bills at the end of the day. 

 

Whenever this particular piece of . . . this regulation comes 

forward and the bills go up by 30 per cent, who pays? Who 

pays? It's going to be the taxpayer of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, the taxpayer of this province. And that's perhaps why, 

when you stop and think about it, Mr. Speaker, why the utility 

rates have gone up; why SaskPower has increased, SaskEnergy, 

SaskTel, SGI, everyone of them, Mr. Speaker, up, up, up, up, 

up. 

 

And the government says, well there's no particular reason why 

these bills have to go up, why our utility costs have to go up, 

but it's our policy that we will raise the rates on a regular basis 

every year whether we need it or not. How are these 

corporations supposed to pay for all this added cost they're 

going to have to bear when they have to hire all these union hall 

people to do this construction? 

 

And that's what this has to do with that, Mr. Member from 

Biggar. It has to do with how do you generate the money to pay 

for this contract? You generate it by jacking up the utility rates. 

That's why grandma down the street has to pay more for her 

telephone bill, is so that we can hire a union hall member from 

the Biggar constituency. That's why, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk about the lack of employment in 

Saskatchewan for the union halls I think you have to take a very 

serious look at the economic environment in which we operate 

in the province of Saskatchewan. There has been absolutely no 

reason, absolutely no reason, Mr. Speaker, why anyone would 

want to come to Saskatchewan to do a construction project or 

set up a business. The only way the government can get 

anybody to come in is to pay them. What did they do with 

Sears, Mr. Speaker? They harmonized their taxes  now the 

big, bad harmonize word  with E&H and GST (goods and 

services tax), that's how they got them in, Mr. Speaker. They 

harmonized it for five years — allow them to write off their 

E&H tax. 

 

That's how the government got jobs in here, Mr. Speaker. It's 

not good enough for everybody, but for our selected friends, 

hey, we got a deal for you. They had a deal for that Cargill 

company also — $3.8 million to come in and set up in 

Saskatchewan. It would be really interesting now, Mr. Speaker, 

to find out what the deal is with the CIBC. Because the 

government's initiatives have not allowed any construction 

projects to go ahead that would have provided work for union 

employees, for any employee for that matter, in the construction 

trade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Down in Estevan at the Shand project, a significant number of 

the employees there voted against the member from Estevan 

because they were supporting the NDP. And what happened? 

Shortly thereafter, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite, with 

the kingpin Jack Messer, said: hey, we're not going ahead with 

Shand 2; that's it, cut, no job, no job. 

 

And what happened to those union people that were working 



March 7, 1995 

 

716 

there, Mr. Speaker? Sorry, you don't have a job any more. But 

now what are they going to do? Now they're going to try and 

buy those people back by giving them all the other jobs that 

may have been involved with the Crown corporations across 

this province. Every little construction job is now going to have 

to have its union rep on there. 

 

I've never belonged to a union, although I did come close once. 

It was a scary thought, but I managed to get out of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so what happens when you have all these union 

people on site now with a non-union company? Are they going 

to have to have their union reps on there too? Who pays for 

them? Are they going to have to have study sessions, Mr. 

Speaker? What happens then? Now are they going to say, well 

gee, I can't possibly work with this non-union person; he's got 

to be unionized. So either you get rid of him or we're going to 

wobble. I'm never quite sure how you wobble on the job, but 

that's what unions do. 

 

They say either that guy's got to go, or we go. And you got to 

have the union guys there, or you don't have a contract, Mr. 

Speaker. So all of a sudden number 1 and number 3 lose their 

jobs because the unions are going to wobble because they're not 

prepared to work with non-union people. 

 

And fact is, a lot of times unions aren't prepared to work with 

unions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from Morse 

asked what wobble means, and I have no idea, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it means that they're sort of on the work site, but they 

aren't doing any work, which in a lot of cases could be a 

government employee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of Shand. It was a project down at 

Shand to build the towers. And there was two unions on site, 

the steelworkers and the boilermakers, Mr. Speaker. And they 

could not come to a decision as to who should actually be doing 

the construction. 

 

One company had been hired with their union employees to do 

the job, but the other employees believed that it was their job. 

And so the group that didn't have that particular piece of work 

went on strike, or they wobbled. They wobbled, Mr. Speaker, to 

try and get the jobs away from the other employees. They threw 

nuts and bolts at the other workers, Mr. Speaker, as they were 

walking past to go to their job sites. So there is no harmony, 

Mr. Speaker, even when the unions are on the job site; they're 

fighting amongst themselves all the time. 

 

So what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker? What's going to 

happen when you have nine union workers on one hand, 

employed on the site because they've been forced on this 

company, and two non-union workers? What's going to 

happen? 

 

They are going to make life very rough and very untenable for 

those two workers because they're going to go out of their way 

to try and ensure that those two people are gone, that they lose 

their jobs, and that somebody else in the union gets it. And 

heaven forbid it should be somebody from a different union, 

because that will just cause chaos amongst them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw was talking about 

how great it would be when everybody receives the same pay. 

How fair that would be and how equitable. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

it reminds me of a place in this world that had that kind of a 

policy, of fair and equal wages for all, without regard to the job 

they did, without regard to the quality of the work they did, 

without regard to anything. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where was that? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — That was in Russia. What a great 

example of what the member from Moose Jaw Palliser would 

like to emulate, Mr. Speaker. What a great example. 

 

Everybody will get the same pay, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn't 

matter how well they work or how poorly they work, or whether 

or not they're in the union or outside of the union or whose 

company they work for, because they're all going to be paid the 

same, Mr. Speaker. And that's what you call fair and equal. 

 

There's no concept in their circumstances for merit, Mr. 

Speaker, for the guy who works hard, who's prepared to spend 

that extra five minutes, ten minutes, or half an hour on the job 

site. There's none of that. 

 

When you look at a union site, you've got a burnt-out light-bulb, 

and the carpenter is walking past and it's dark in his work area, 

what can he do? He can't change light bulbs, he's not an 

electrician. So he has to sit down and wait for an electrician to 

come along. Now that's great if there happens to be an 

electrician on the work site. But if there isn't an electrician on 

the work site, well then he may have to wait until the next day 

before he can ever pound in his nail because the light bulb's 

burnt out. There could be a box of light bulbs sitting in the 

corner, but he's a carpenter; he's not allowed to change light 

bulbs. 

 

And then what happens, Mr. Speaker, when they do have the 

nine out of the eleven workers on site and the unions decide, 

well, you know, we've got to certify this company? You know, 

these guys get a lot of jobs. These guys get a lot of non-Crown 

corporation jobs. So now you just can't go up to the company's 

employees in the normal sense when they're employed out in 

the workplace and convince them that we need a union. You 

know, they've had a long-term job, they've got a pension, they 

got benefits, they got a good salary, they get to work in their 

own community. But we need . . . no, no, we can't unionize 

them then because they're happy. 

 

So what do we do? Well, Mr. Speaker, we wait and we wait 

until they get a contract with a Crown corporation. That's what 

we do. We wait until they get a contract with a Crown 

corporation and then we submarine in our union employees. We 

slide them in because they're forced . . . the government says, 

you've got to hire them. You don't have a choice; you've got to 



March 7, 1995 

 

717 

hire our buddies from the union hall. 

 

And what's the first thing they're going to do after they've got 

them slid in, submarined into this company? Well all of a 

sudden you're going to see the little union cards come floating 

around. Would you like to belong to the widget union? Well 

gee, I already belong to the widget union so I don't see why this 

company shouldn't be unionized. We'll have a closed shop here 

and everybody can belong to the widget union. 

 

And that's what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker. And those two 

little guys that are left there working — or the few more 

because number 12 doesn't have to belong to the union either 

— what's going to happen to them? They're going to be strong-

armed, Mr. Speaker, into signing those union cards. They're 

going to be strong-armed into it. Because things are not going 

to be very pleasant on the job site. All you have to do is look at 

what happens when they have two unions on a job site fighting 

for jurisdiction. It gets pretty ugly, Mr. Speaker, pretty ugly. 

 

And we've seen the comments that Daryl Bean has made about 

scabs — how they should be drowned in a pool of slime. That's 

the kind of attitudes that you're going to run into, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And all of those people that are going to be left stranded, 

stranded on the job site when all these union people are 

submarined in and their friends are forced out of those 

positions, are going to be left in a very untenable position, and 

they are going to be unionized. Doesn't matter whether they 

want to be unionized, they're going to be forced into it. 

 

So the union is going to come up some night when the kids are 

all at hockey, and dad, who's the number one worker for this 

corporation, is out at Johnny's hockey game, and they're going 

to have a certification vote. They're going to have their 

certification vote and now that whole corporation, that whole 

company, is unionized only because they once applied for a job 

with . . . a contract with a Crown corporation. Just once. And 

now they've gone down that never-ending tube that siphons 

money into the NDP Party. 

 

When you look at the concept that unions are fair and 

democratic, Mr. Speaker, fair and democratic, how many people 

on a job site or in a work location really vote on the 

certifications? How many? 

 

Now you have to get 50 per cent that'll sign the card that says 

yes, I'm interested. But when it comes down to the vote, how 

many of them really vote in favour of it? Not many. 

 

But sometimes that corporation, that company site, gets 

unionized anyways. And now with the new labour policies that 

the government has brought in, the employer can't even say boo. 

He can't say anything about it. He has to just keep his mouth 

shut and stay back. He can't talk to the number one employee or 

the number three employee or the number twelve employee to 

say, well, gee guys, you know if we unionize this site somebody 

else is going to get your job. Because you're going to have to 

belong to the union hall and you've got to go 

on the seniority list. And since you're going to be the junior 

man on the totem pole — number 2 and number 4 to 11 are all 

senior to you in the union — you're toast; you're out of here. 

You don't have a job any more. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the total unfairness of this whole 

piece of legislation — the total unfairness. It has nothing to do 

with fairness for the wage-earners, Mr. Speaker. It only has to 

do with how fairly the NDP can get their hands on the union 

money. That's what it's all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bruce Johnstone wrote a very interesting article, Mr. 

Speaker, a very interesting article. And the headline on it says it 

all, Mr. Speaker. The headline on it says it all. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


