






















































March 14, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 14, 1995 

 

 
841 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are constituents from the Assiniboia, 
Lafleche, Wood Mountain area of the province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present petitions today on behalf of the people from the Maple 
Creek, Gull Lake, Medicine Hat regions of the province. And I 
will read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I would like to thank Bev Christie from Maple Creek for 
sending these in today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to  

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, our guests today from Wilfred Hunt School, seated 
in the west gallery. We have 25 students in grades 7 and 8. 
Young adults in our community who are visiting the legislature 
today and then will be walking back and enjoying the beauty of 
the day. I hope they enjoy question period and that we're all 
able to be in good form and behaviour for them during that 
time. 
 
And accompanying them today is Mr. Brad Howard, their 
teacher. I'll look forward to meeting with them briefly, and a 
photo on the steps later on. I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming the students from Wilfred Hunt School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, a couple of constituents from the Shaunavon 
constituency and good friends of mine, Nick and Evelyn 
McCuaig, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I ask that all the 
members welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a great pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, a group visiting here today from Pangman School. 
They're grade 5 and 6 students that are here today, and they're 
accompanied by their teacher, Judy Schwindt, and chaperons 
Todd Schwindt, Donna Lillejord, and Al Huckabay. 
 
It's really nice that they're here this week being as that it's 
Education Week, and I will enjoy meeting with them after 
question period. And after they have a tour, and we'll have 
drinks and pictures. I'd just like everyone to join me in a warm 
welcome to the students from Pangman here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 
introduce a group of nine cancer patients from the Cancer 
Patient Lodge who are here with us today to observe question 
period. I know all members will want to join with me in 
welcoming them here today and also wishing them the best of 
luck in their treatment that they're now involved in. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, I just 
noticed a gentleman who was a former bank manager, Mr. 
Miles Lozinsky, sitting in the gallery, and I'd like to invite 
members of the Assembly to welcome him to the gallery and to 
the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 14, 1995 

 
842 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Hitachi Expansion 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, more good news from Saskatoon. 
Another business expanding and new jobs being created. 
Yesterday Hitachi Canadian Industries announced a $2.2 
million expansion of their Saskatoon plant. This follows a $3.5 
million expansion that took place last year. 
 
The most recent expansion, Mr. Speaker, was supported by our 
government through a training allowance of $262,000. Mr. 
Speaker, since Hitachi first came to Saskatoon it has increased 
its workforce from 34 to 115 good jobs. Many are graduates of 
either SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) or the U of S (University of Saskatchewan). 
 
Providing work for Saskatchewan's young people is just one 
Hitachi benefit. Another is expanding Saskatchewan's export 
market. Hitachi exports 60 per cent of its product to the United 
States and another 35 per cent to Japan. At Hitachi in Saskatoon 
we see the goals of Saskatchewan's Partnership for Renewal in 
action, namely, worker training, increased exports, and the 
development and marketing of advanced technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to commend both Hitachi and officials at 
our Economic Development department for their part in 
providing good jobs and a good future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
National Recognition for Sacred Heart Community School 

 
Ms. Murray: — Mr. Speaker, during Education Week I want to 
mention a school in the constituency of Regina Elphinstone 
which has received national recognition for its innovative 
programs. The Toronto Globe and Mail came to Regina to find 
a positive example for the educational reforms suggested by an 
Ontario royal commission on learning. That example is Sacred 
Heart School. Sacred Heart is one of four community schools 
established 13 years ago in urban core areas. These schools 
were meant to work closely with their local communities to 
combat the special problems of the inner-city school. 
 
Under the guidance of principal Len Kleisinger, Sacred Heart 
has pushed the idea of parental involvement far beyond its 
traditional meaning. With the cooperation of a parent advisory 
council, the school has several programs appropriate to its 
students and their environment. For instance the school day 
begins at 7 a.m. with breakfast for any student who arrives. 
There are preschool programs for three- and four-year-olds and 
nutrition classes. Of particular interest for many of the students, 
there are courses in Indian and Metis history and culture. 
 
To enforce the concept of parental involvement, the advisory 
council controls $5,000 in community development grants as 
well as a $5,000 grant for curriculum development. This means 
teachers consult with parents in the selection of materials. 
Consultation takes place before the teaching begins as well as  

after. Principal Kleisinger believes that the more the parents are 
involved, the better the children do. 
 
Sacred Heart School is to be congratulated . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member's time has 
run out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Anniversary of Women's Suffrage in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 79th 
anniversary of the day women were given the vote in 
Saskatchewan. On this day in 1916 Saskatchewan was the 
second province in Canada to get women the vote, after four 
years of petitioning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, important milestones such as these are good to 
remember because they demonstrate that we as a society have 
made some progress. But also the fact that we label as progress 
something so obviously proper for a modern society suggests 
that we have a way to go yet. 
 
On this day when we remember half the population's entry into 
the Saskatchewan political process, we should also note some 
other markers along the way. 
 
In 1917 the first woman candidate ran in the constituency of 
Thunder Creek, and lost. In a by-election in 1919, Sarah K. 
Ramsland from Pelly became the first woman MLA (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
It was not until 1938 that a general election had more than one 
woman candidate. The CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) ran two; both of them lost. 
 
The grandmother of the member from Regina Albert North was 
the first but certainly not the last CCF-NDP (New Democratic 
Party) member from Maple Creek. And Marjorie Cooper of 
Regina was the first and only woman elected four times — from 
1952 to 1964. 
 
Victories to celebrate, Mr. Speaker; set-backs . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member's time has run out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Week 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The theme of 
Education Week, making tomorrow come true, is playing a role 
in Education Week activities in my riding of Saskatoon River 
Heights. L'Ecole River Heights, or to anglophones, River 
Heights School, has invited the public to view its classes at the 
mall at Lawson Heights. 
 
Throughout the week, students will be showcasing their skills  



March 14, 1995 

 
843 

and showing why they are proud to be students at L'Ecole River 
Heights. These students, in the spirit of making tomorrow come 
true, have joined with businesses at the mall by decorating store 
windows, and each classroom has made a banner for the mall 
depicting a springtime theme. A special display area includes 
the students' artwork and video tapes of the students working on 
various projects. 
 
Many of the students are witnessing firsthand activity in the 
business sector which demonstrates the link between business 
and education. And that, Mr. Speaker, is where the theme, 
making tomorrow come true, fits in. 
 
I would like to congratulate the students at L'Ecole River 
Heights, the principal, Ron Boden, and the staff for their hard 
work in promoting Education Week and for involving the 
public in the process of educating our children. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Awards 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has always been held in high regard because of 
the number of people who volunteer for events and worthwhile 
causes right across the province. 
 
Well I have an example of this in my own riding and would like 
to recognize several individuals and groups who have received 
awards for volunteering in communities where they live. 
 
The 1994 Last Touch awards dinner was recently held in Cupar. 
These volunteer recognition awards are handed by the Last 
Touch Regional Recreation Association which supports 
volunteers in recreation support, sport, and culture. 
 
Mr. Brock Turner of Cupar received a volunteer recognition 
award for his many years of service to the Cupar Golf Club 
since the late 1960s. He helped to ensure that the course was 
kept in good condition. 
 
A special award of achievement was presented to the Southey 
rink committee for rebuilding the rink after the old one was 
destroyed in a fire in June. 
 
The Dysart volunteer fire department received the community 
spirit award, which honours volunteers who don't fall under the 
category of sport, recreation, or culture, but make a significant 
contribution to the community. 
 
Betty Tershur of Raymore and Sheila Fraser of Strasbourg also 
received volunteer recognition awards. 
 
Congratulations to all of the award recipients for volunteering 
their time and energy to make their community a better place to 
live in. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Country Music Awards 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Howdy, Mr. Speaker. You all probably heard 
of the phrase, "kindly keep it country." The sixth annual 
Saskatchewan country music awards are handed out as a grand 
finale to the country music appreciation week in Saskatoon. 
 
Some 1,400 people attended the award ceremonies at the 
Centennial Auditorium. Meadow Lake's favourite gospel 
singers, the Cockrum Sisters, were nominated in four 
categories. 
 
And the winners were: Sheila Ann, originally from Dodsland, 
was presented with the legend and legacy award. Scott Kyle 
King of Regina captured four awards, including best male 
vocalist, single and album of the year, and most promising 
entertainer. 
 
The female vocalist of the year was Terry Harris of Battleford, 
and the Johner Brothers from Midale were named entertainers 
of the year and group of the year. Rosetown's Marilyn Faye 
Parney won video of the year. 
 
CJVR radio station in Melfort was presented with the award of 
merit for playing the most Saskatchewan artists and CJWW 
radio in Saskatoon was named radio station of the year. 
 
Don Mitchell of CKBI-CIPA TV was named country music 
person of the year and on-air personality of the year. 
 
I would like to congratulate all of the award recipients for 
entertaining audiences throughout North America and beyond 
with excellent country music. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Corporations Construction Agreement 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition caucus is pleased once again to present some 
questions we received through our "Mr. Premier, I want to 
know" initiative. We feel this is an exciting way for ordinary 
taxpayers to communicate directly with the government. It 
looks like the people of Saskatchewan agree, Mr. Speaker, 
because this program continues to work very well. We've been 
inundated with responses from people across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would direct my question to the Premier or his 
designate, and it comes from Kelly Fraser of Kindersley. Mr. 
Premier, your union labour preference on Crown corporation 
construction jobs is unfair to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
Please remove all union preference clauses from all government 
tenders so that work in this province is fair to all taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We appreciate Kelly's question. That's  



March 14, 1995 

 
844 

exactly what this government has done. We've put in place a 
Crown corporation tendering policy. We feel it gives a level 
playing-field and good balance so that whether firms are 
unionized or non-unionized, they will have a fair chance on 
doing work for Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workplace Injuries 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 
comes from Pat Rayner from Regina. I want to know why under 
the Workers' Compensation Board rules, no one is responsible 
for injuries that are deliberately caused by an employee. Also, 
why have these rules taken away the right for full legal action 
against such persons? 
 
Perhaps the Minister of Labour would care to respond to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the member would appreciate, in 
the days when the Conservative government was in, most 
constituency offices of MLAs were inundated with calls. A lot 
of the casework done in the constituency offices was Workers' 
Compensation Board related. 
 
Since that time all members of this Assembly will recognize 
that the workload coming into our constituency offices from 
workers' compensation problems has diminished considerably. 
 
There's been some undertakings over at the Workers' 
Compensation Board to much improve the role of the board not 
only for injured workers, but also for employers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Labour Standards Amendments 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question comes 
from Devin Malakoff from Regina: Mr. Premier, I want to 
know how you could have the nerve to put thousands of 
employees' incomes at risk with the mandatory benefits 
legislation for part-time workers. This law is going to cut hours 
for part-time workers because employers will opt not to give 
over 15 hours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well we appreciate the question. I think 
that what we have to realize is that in Saskatchewan there's a 
climate whereby employers and employees for the most part, at 
least, actually work together for the benefit of each other. Most 
employers in Saskatchewan appreciate their employees. They 
value them. They have considerable costs in having employees 
trained. Employees appreciate the jobs they have. 
 
We believe that the companies who are coming into 
Saskatchewan, that are expanding in Saskatchewan, are really a 
testimony to the good labour climate that we have here. In fact 
if you look at the labour climate in Saskatchewan, if you use the 
measurement across other jurisdictions, we have about one-
third of the labour problems that exist on the national average. 

We have companies like Hitachi. We have companies like the 
call centres for CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) 
and Sears. There are many, many employers moving into the 
province, many employers like Bourgault Industries expanding 
in the province. 
 
There is a good climate here in Saskatchewan. And the labour 
laws that have been brought into place, I think that the 
Saskatchewan public required them. I think that workers 
required them, and I think that the employers who appreciate 
their employees required them as well. 
 
And I think that we have a good balance in Saskatchewan with 
our labour legislation, and not only the organizations and the 
companies that I have mentioned. We'll see more of that coming 
in the future because of the good job that our government is 
doing in setting a climate for business and labour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ban on Replacement Workers 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a question 
for the Premier, and it comes from Maureen Morin from Edam. 
And Maureen wants to know, Mr. Premier: I want to know what 
is the compelling need to even consider banning replacement 
workers in the event of a strike. As far as I am concerned, when 
these people keep striking they should be fired. It is because of 
them that our economy is the way it is now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We appreciate the question that's been 
sent in to the opposition in regard to replacement workers. 
 
Some jurisdictions across Canada ban replacement workers; 
other jurisdictions choose not to ban replacement workers. 
 
You will note that some cases such as the mine disaster up in 
the Northwest Territories was an issue that brought replacement 
workers to the forefront. Many people in that area felt that if 
replacement workers had been banned, that the deaths would 
have never happened and the unfortunate event would not have 
taken place where a worker obviously was pushed too far and 
caused the death of other people in that particular instance. 
 
The whole problem with banning replacement workers has to 
do with the essential services and how far you go on that. 
 
What we'd like to think that we can do in Saskatchewan is that 
we can work with the employers of this province, that we can 
work with the employees of this province, whether they are 
organized labour or whether they are unorganized, to make sure 
that we have a climate in Saskatchewan that's right for working 
men and women and is also right for businesses to prosper 
within the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 14, 1995 

 
845 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question comes 
from Joyce Callfas from Lloydminster: Mr. Premier, I want to 
know why most of your legislation is to please the unions. It 
will ensure their votes but is killing our province. As for the 
deficit, anyone could balance if they bled the populace white. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — While I appreciate being able to 
respond to that particular question, it's based on some false 
assumptions. And we are not geared as a government to 
represent any one sector; we are elected by the people of this 
province to represent all people of the province. 
 
We were elected by the people of Saskatchewan to get the 
financial house of this province in order; we've done that. 
 
We have passed legislation that is sometimes controversial, 
whether it be in regard to business or whether it be in regard to 
working men and women. We've passed legislation on a great 
number of items, and the member would well understand what 
items have been controversial and what items have not been 
controversial. 
 
What we've done, on balance, is trying to provide good 
government for the people of this province, and I think that in 
the next election they'll show that we have provided good 
government for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you've 
heard from individuals around this province, there remains a 
great deal of concern regarding the NDP's labour legislation. 
 
While the government has backed off on many of the offending 
provisions in The Labour Standards Act, they conveniently left 
them in the Act as amendments yet to be proclaimed, like a 
sword over the heads of small-business people across this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Labour. Mr. Minister, if you truly believe these provisions are 
ill-advised and need not be proclaimed, will you support the 
legislation I'll be introducing this afternoon that will repeal 
them from the Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Absolutely not. We have a good climate 
in the province of Saskatchewan, jobs are being developed. 
Businesses are doing quite well, thank you. New businesses are 
coming into the province. The only thing that the Bill you're 
bringing into the House this afternoon shows is your blatant 
disregard for the balance of working men and women in this 
province, and you should be ashamed of yourself. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 
refusal to remove the amendments from the Act tells us that it's 
pure and simple that you are the friend of labour, the friend of 
unions in this province. The only thing that you care about is 
unions in this province, and everyone knows it. Everyone 
knows that that's clearly where you and your government stand. 
You believe your union friends should take precedence over 
small business and job creation at every turn. When you backed 
down from the Co-op upgrader deal because of your dictatorial 
style, you repealed the legislation with regard to that. 
 
That's all we're asking for with this as well, Mr. Minister. We 
are even prepared to amend our Bill so that all of the offending 
provisions are removed, as they have not been proclaimed yet. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you agree with the legislation that we'll be 
bringing forward instead of holding out a carrot to the union 
leaders across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don't 
support your Bill; in fact I support very little that you do. I don't 
blame you as the new Leader of the Progressive Conservative 
Party in this province, but I certainly blame some of your 
colleagues, especially those sitting on your front bench. 
 
During the 1980s, the Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan tried to divide urban people from rural people. 
You tried to divide organized labour from unorganized labour. 
You tried to distance between working men and women and 
business. 
 
And part of the agenda of this government has been to mend 
those wounds that you created in Saskatchewan. Whether it's 
between urban and rural people of this province or whether it's 
between working men and women or whether it's between 
business and labour, we are mending and healing the wounds 
that you inflicted on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Board Deficits 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week Liberals tabled district health board financial statements 
showing that seven health boards had more than $22 million in 
deficits in '93-94. Today I table nine more statements — nine 
more — Mr. Speaker. The health deficits that we now know 
amount to some $27 million. I'm hearing from people across the 
province who are very concerned about this trend. They're also 
concerned that their own government has not, has not told them 
the extent of the overall deficits for the health boards of last 
year. 
 
My question is to the Health minister. Will the minister tell us 
today how many health boards had deficits last year, and what  



March 14, 1995 

 
846 

the total Health deficit was for the province? And will he tell us 
today, today Mr. Speaker, instead of waiting until after the next 
provincial election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to answer 
this question on behalf of the Minister of Health. Obviously 
there's a SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention meeting in Saskatoon today, and a 
number of our colleagues are attending a session in Saskatoon. 
But what I would say to the member from Shaunavon is that 
your credibility, when it comes to asking questions in this 
House, is questionable at best. 
 
Last week the Leader of the Liberal Party brought in statistics as 
it related to the Regina Health Board, as it related to the health 
board. She hasn't asked a question on health since, and there's a 
good reason why. Because when she raised the issue, the next 
day Royce Gill said that the information was false that she 
brought to this Assembly. And I say to you, Mr. Member from 
Shaunavon, when the lists that you bring to this House on 
political appointments then turn out to . . . in the Leader-Post to 
be false, and people go to the press and say that it wasn't true; 
and you don't have the courage to stand and apologize for the 
misinformation you bring here. Your leader brings 
misinformation about the health board in Regina. 
 
What I say, I'll be questioning and looking at the information 
you brought today to see whether there's any accuracy to the 
facts that you bring here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm surprised that 
the House Leader would call in to question the financial 
statements, the financial statements of their own health care 
districts. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. We just can't have 
that interruption going across the floor. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, Mr. 
Speaker, the Health minister denied knowing about health 
deficits for this year, 1994-95. Yet the legislation establishing 
the boards requires that he approve any planned deficits. We 
now see that at least one health board, the Twin Rivers Health 
Board, did include a planned deficit for this year, Mr. Speaker 
— a deficit that a Lloydminster newspaper report, which I'm 
tabling here today, says was approved by the minister. 
 
You are putting your stamp of approval on these health board 
deficits, and everyone in Saskatchewan knows the only way to 
pay off a deficit is to raise taxes or to cut services. So my 
question again is to the minister: can you confirm that the 
minister did in fact approve the Twin Rivers deficit? And can 
you tell us how many other health board deficits were approved 
and for how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 
opposite again, obviously these questions of detail in Health  

will be answered in a very succinct manner by the minister in 
estimates. If the member cares to be here for estimates, he will 
be able to answer and ask detailed questions about the Health 
department, and you will be able to have a fair exchange with 
the minister at that time on these kind of detailed questions. 
 
But I say when it comes to credibility on issues you've raised in 
the House so far this year . . . whether it's the job numbers on 
StatsCanada which you are clearly silent on for the last four 
weeks; we know why you are silent because you misled with 
information you brought to the House about the job record of 
the private sector in this province by saying they were fewer 
jobs, when in fact there are 9,000 more. 
 
When it comes to the issue of the health care board in Regina, 
Royce Gill says that you brought false information to the 
House. When it comes to your opinion on VLTs (video lottery 
terminal), you've flip-flop so many times you don't know which 
side of the issue you're on. 
 
I say to you, we will be looking at this and giving answers in 
estimates on these detailed questions. But I say to you, try to get 
your facts straight before you come to the House, and it would 
help the process a great deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the member 
opposite is worried about the facts, why doesn't he address what 
we've been tabling? This morning, Mr. Speaker, at a news 
conference announcing a new kidney treatment program that 
will happen some day down the road, the Health minister was 
asked why he was announcing this so far in advance of the 
program implementation. The minister said, and I quote: the 
purpose was to share with the public early. Well that's a 
laudable principle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the same minister who told the legislature that he would 
not inform us about the Health deficits for this year until 90 
days after the fiscal year. I think the minister is betting, Mr. 
Speaker, that the June 30 election will be far gone and he won't 
have to . . . (inaudible) . . . Okay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the minister, will you extend your stated principle of sharing 
with the public early and commit to tabling the amount of the 
Health deficit at the earliest possible time and do it before the 
next provincial election? Now as a member of cabinet you 
could give us that assurance today. Will you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have indicated to the 
member opposite that these detailed questions that he's asking 
will be answered in fact in Health estimates and he can raise 
them as he knows he can. But obviously he will have to be here 
for estimates in order to do that. 
 
When he talks about the date of the provincial election, I want 
to say clearly for a Liberal from Shaunavon to be wanting an 
early election is a little bit like a turkey wanting an early 
Christmas. But I can say to you, Mr. Member, that the election  



March 14, 1995 

 
847 

will come soon enough and we will see how things sort out. 
 
But what I can guarantee to you, that next time estimates comes 
up on Health in the House, if you are here you will be able to 
ask these kind of detailed questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Rail Strike 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
becomes clearer every day where the priorities of this 
government lie and it certainly isn't with small-business people 
or farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. It clearly lies with 
the union movement. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Agriculture said that he would not 
support back-to-work legislation to keep the rail lines open and 
Saskatchewan grain moving to port. The Ag minister, who 
supposedly represents agriculture in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
has lined up four square behind the rail unions. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Labour in 
questioning said, that there should be not 1 cent of economic 
loss to this province with a federal rail strike. My question is to 
the Premier: do you support the dithering of the Minister of 
Agriculture or do you support the Minister of Labour? Do you 
support agriculture in this province, Mr. Premier? Will you urge 
the federal government to bring in back-to-work legislation 
sooner rather than later, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
supports both the Minister of Agriculture and myself because 
we're saying the same thing. You inflame the situation; it's a 
serious situation, it needs to be monitored. Of the five unions 
that are involved in regard to the current lockout, three have 
signed tentative agreements with the rail company. One is very 
close to that. The other union, we expect there can be an 
accommodation reached whereby this situation will not 
escalate. 
 
It's important for us to have the grain and the other products 
move from this province to their markets. We take it seriously. 
We have contacted the federal government and the unions, 
letting them know our intentions and the seriousness with 
which we take this situation. And I think that you overreact, sir, 
to be calling for something to remedy something else that has 
not yet occurred. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
minister got his knuckles rapped sometime last night because 
there's 3,200 out on strike now, sir, and there is no time to 
waste. There's a railcar shortage already in place. Elevator 
agents contacted this morning said that there was already a 
shortage of cars and that if action is not taken, it will be  

exacerbated even worse in the days to come. 
 
Your government, the Government of Saskatchewan, represents 
the province with the most to lose, sir. No one else in Canada 
will feel this impact as much as the province of Saskatchewan. 
Now the time to act, sir, is today, not yesterday. You said 
yesterday not 1 cent of economic loss to this province. Are you 
now prepared to live up to your words of yesterday, sir, and 
have the Premier back legislation in the federal parliament to 
make sure this doesn't happen to this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do want the 
member opposite to realize, and he should realize this, that first 
off this is a federal matter. We have made representations to the 
federal minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We will also . . . the former premier 
asked for us to table them. We'd be more than happy — I don't 
have those responses here with me — we'd be more than happy 
to do that. 
 
This is a federal matter. We're watching it very closely. We'll be 
making further representations to the federal government. 
 
We would also ask you to keep in mind, what is the Liberal 
opposition doing here in the legislature? Are they doing the 
same thing as you? They have their cousins sitting there in 
Ottawa, with no apparent action on their part. What 
representations have you made, rather than making political 
gain in this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, half of your cabinet is up 
facing SARM today. And I am sure the questions are coming 
thick and fast about what your government is prepared to do. 
 
Your Minister of Agriculture yesterday says he will not support 
legislation. You, sir, say that there should be not 1 cent of 
economic loss to this province. Why don't you take your 
responsibility seriously, and if the federal Liberals aren't up to 
the mark, sir, why aren't you making representation and make 
sure that they are going to protect the farmers of this province 
from an economic disaster that's looming on the horizon? Why 
don't you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
should just calm down a little bit and listen to what the answers 
are. 
 
We take the seriousness of the situation full-heartedly. We have 
made representations to the unions involved and to the federal 
ministers involved. We will continue to make representations to  



March 14, 1995 

 
848 

them, and we will be monitoring this situation very closely. We 
do take the problems of Saskatchewan people, whether they're 
farmers or whether they're urban people or whether they are 
organized or unorganized . . . contrary to what the hon. member 
did when you were in government in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, those representations have 
fallen on deaf ears. As of this morning there are 3,200 out and 
another 4,000 waiting to go. We are at the height of the 
shipping season in this country, sir, and day by day the losses 
will mount. If the elevator agents in this province are saying 
they're short of cars today, think what they will be short 
tomorrow. 
 
These people have had ample opportunity in the last 18 months 
to sort this mess out. It shouldn't fall on the backs of agriculture 
in this province and the farm families of this province to make 
up for the dithering of the federal government and the dithering 
of your government, sir. Are you prepared to ask the Premier to 
call Ottawa and say, we will back legislation the minute you 
bring it in? Are you prepared to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, we have made it very 
clear that we have approached the federal government; in no 
uncertain terms, said how important the settlement of this 
dispute is to the farmers of Saskatchewan. I say to the member 
opposite, that your style is that back-to-work legislation is the 
instantaneous reaction. We say the federal Minister of 
Agriculture has a role to play, the federal minister responsible 
for labour, of using their good office, and in fact their ability as 
ministers to become involved and settle this dispute without 
back-to-work legislation  back-to-work legislation being only 
used as a last resort. 
 
Now of course this is an important issue for farmers, but what's 
even more important and we'll be dealing with here in a few 
moments, and we would ask for all members to support us in 
questioning the federal government's change to the Crow rate 
which is going to drastically increase the amount farmers pay 
for freight. Also the announcement of major changes to the rail 
system in this province, which will mean abandonment of rail 
in many parts of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after question period, I will be tabling a chart of 
the rails that are proposed for abandonment under the federal 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. Next question. 
 

Youth Smoking Legislation 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. Mr. Minister, last year your government introduced Bill 
68, an Act to prohibit the sale of tobacco to young persons. 
That legislation was widely supported by various health  

organizations who are concerned about the number of young 
people smoking and about the serious health problems which 
they may experience later in life. 
 
At the time, Mr. Minister, it seemed like your government was 
prepared to take action to address this problem. In January, 
however, you announced that you were pulling this legislation 
and counting on — guess who — the federal government to act 
instead. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you waiting for the federal government to 
address the problem of young smokers in Saskatchewan? Why 
aren't you showing some leadership by proceeding with this 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as is obviously the 
case, we want to make sure that the proper consultation is 
completed. The federal government has also brought forward 
legislation which helps us in trying to attempt to reduce the 
number of young people taking up the smoking addiction 
because we know it's a serious health problem. 
 
You will want to watch carefully as the consultations go on and 
we would appreciate input from your caucus as well. But I say 
to you this is a high priority for our government and something 
we will be working on in the months to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

A Bill to repeal The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 
1994 and The Trade Union Amendment Act, 1994 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move an 
Act to repeal The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 1994 and 
The Trade Union Amendment Act, 1994 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:14 p.m. until 2:23 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Boyd Devine Swenson 
Neudorf Martens Goohsen 
Toth Britton Muirhead 

— 9 
Nays 

 
Van Mulligen Thompson Lingenfelter 
Shillington Anguish Simard 
Johnson Goulet Lautermilch 
Kowalsky Mitchell Penner 
Upshall Hagel Bradley 
Lorje Teichrob Pringle 



March 14, 1995 

 
849 

 
Cline Murray Hamilton 
Trew Draper Whitmore 
Sonntag Flavel Langford 
Scott Kujawa Stanger 
Knezacek Harper Keeping 
Carlson   

— 34 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask leave of the 
Assembly to make a statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Appeal of Conviction 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — I'd like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the members of the Assembly. 
 
Nearly 17 years ago today . . . 17 years ago, I was elected as the 
member of the Legislative Assembly for the constituency of 
Arm River. At that time I entered public life because I truly 
believed there was a place for people with a Christian faith. My 
parents taught me as a young boy that the word of God in the 
Bible should always be my guide for living. In my heart, I truly 
believe that I made a genuine effort to live as a good and decent 
person and I cherished my reputation for being a man of his 
word. 
 
John Diefenbaker was a friend of my father. From the time I 
was a young man, I admired the Chief because he represented 
good, solid values of honour and integrity to me. In my years of 
service as a MLA for Arm River, I tried my best to live up to 
the ideals of Mr. Diefenbaker. Now, at the age of 63, I find 
myself facing one of the darkest times of my entire life because 
a judge in court said that in the eyes of the law I am guilty of 
one count of fraud to obtain a saddle. 
 
It should be noted that in the same trial, I had been charged with 
breach of trust and this charge was stayed because the court 
concluded there was no personal gain for me on either charge. 
The Bible says in the Ten Commandments, thou shalt not steal. 
And I say before God, who comes before all else in my life, I 
can without hesitation say that I did not steal. 
 
In our free and democratic society we value the belief that a 
person is innocent until proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that 
they are guilty. Sometimes the justice system fails, and innocent 
people are persecuted and made to suffer the consequences of a 
justice system that can and does make mistakes. 
 
The very fact in our system of justice . . . we have an appeal 
process that goes right up to the Supreme Court of Canada and 
supposedly shows that we as a people have a commitment to  

protecting innocent citizens from being wrongly accused and 
sentenced. The case of Guy Paul Morin, the innocent young 
man who was falsely charged with murder and put in prison, 
though he was innocent, comes to my mind. Should we as a 
society have denied him the right to appeal because a lower 
court said Mr. Morin is guilty, even though he strongly stated 
that he is innocent of wrongdoing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a citizen, I am appealing the ruling of the judge 
who said I'm supposed to be guilty of fraud, because it is in my 
heartfelt belief that I am innocent of any wrongdoing. 
 
(1430) 
 
Let me just briefly state my position. There is no doubt I bought 
a saddle with features that clearly identified me as the MLA for 
Arm River. The guidelines and directives of the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly as I truly understood them to be in 1988 
were such that I did think it was okay to order parade 
equipment including advertising sash, breast collar, saddle, and 
saddle-bags identifying me as MLA for Arm River. I have never 
tried to deny that. 
 
Over and over again I have to ask the question, if it was wrong 
for me to have asked the legislature to pay for the parade 
equipment and accessories, then why did they not tell me 
outright in 1988 — Mr. Muirhead, we cannot allow you to have 
this parade equipment, and this is why. 
 
Then a few years later I find myself charged, hauled into the 
courts, and sentenced by a judge for fraud. To me it is a living 
nightmare for myself and my family and friends. Not only was I 
put on trial in a court of law, I've been put on trial by other 
politicians trying to score points by condemning me and making 
this the greatest, greatest trial of all my life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the record. The Leader of the Opposition 
quoted in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and Regina Leader-Post 
as saying that he gave me a chance to resign my seat. He never 
made such a statement to me in person, and I'm sure . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member puts the 
Speaker in a very, very difficult position when he imputes 
motives to other members of this House without a member 
having any opportunity to respond. 
 
When leave is granted to a member to make a statement, it is 
always given to a member recognizing that he is an hon. 
member and will therefore not impute any motive to any 
member of this House. If the member continues to do that, I 
have no opportunity but to ask him to cease making a statement. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. And I'll just jump a 
couple of paragraphs so that we'll leave that out. 
 
Mr. Speaker — I'll just say this — I refused the offer of the 
Leader of the Opposition and I automatically became an 
independent member. I wish to state that I hold no resentment  



March 14, 1995 

 
850 

towards the member for Kindersley for what he did. He was 
taking his advice from other political advisers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I ask the Leader of the Opposition and the 
Leader of the Third Party is the same consideration that the 
Premier gave Mr. Koskie, and that is fairness. 
 
The Speaker: — I hate to interrupt the member again, but the 
member simply cannot make statements referring to other 
members in this House. And if the member has a statement 
which affects him personally and he wishes to convey that to 
the members of this House, as a member of his constituency, I 
will accept that. And I think that's what the members have given 
him leave to do. And again would the member please refrain 
from referring to any other member in this House. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My only avenue is 
to take my case to an appeal court and to the court of public 
opinion. Every day I pray that God will see me through this 
dark trial and that my legal appeal will find me innocent. It is 
my prayer that those who value the standards of our free and 
democratic society will respect my standing firm and fighting 
hard to prove that I am innocent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is known that when a court finds a person guilty 
of an offence, legal experts will tell you that usually it is 
difficult to have an appeal court turn it around. In my case, if 
certain people would come forward with the truth, there would 
be no need for appeal. 
 
In 1941 I was 10 years old. I rode in the Craik fair parade. In 
the 54 years since, I have rarely missed riding in that parade and 
have rode in many other parades in the Arm River constituency. 
Good people in my constituency encouraged me to identify 
myself in the parades as the MLA for Arm River. That is how 
the parade equipment and saddle came about, not as some 
sinister and dishonest plan to steal from the taxpayers, not as 
some crooked way for me to get free parade equipment and a 
saddle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I were indeed guilty of what it is said I am guilty 
of, I would resign from this legislature because it would be the 
honourable thing to do. 
 
When I was a boy, I read about Abraham Lincoln. By all 
accounts of history, he was a kind, decent, and forgiving man 
who had always shown compassion to those he believed to be 
innocent. Lincoln's words, "with malice towards none," should 
be a reminder to all of us that any of us could face a dark and 
trying time in their life. We must always hold firm to the belief 
that in the end, the truth will prevail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've been encouraged by the many letters and 
phone calls and personal encounters I've had with the good 
people from my constituency and from all over Saskatchewan, 
telling me to stand firm and stand up for what I believe to be 
true. 
 
I wish to thank the news media for their more than fair coverage  

over the last year. I also wish to thank all members of the 
Assembly and all employees in this Assembly who have 
extended to me their kindness. To each and every one, I say 
thank you. 
 
The heartfelt support of my constituents has meant a great deal 
to me. They have told me not to give up. My faith in God and 
truth leads me to the same conclusion. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to make this final statement 
to the members in this Assembly and to the constituents of Arm 
River. I'm not sure — and only the Premier knows — when an 
election will be called, but if it happens to be soon and I don't 
get a chance to speak in this Assembly again, I want to say 
thank you to the people of Arm River for giving me a chance to 
serve them for nearly 17 years and also to serve in this 
Assembly. 
 
For the many friends I have, and you people here are my friends 
— all past and present MLAs from all political sides of life  
and I just want to say to each and every one of you, that let's all 
be friends. I want to be friends with everybody. I want no . . . 
Life is too short not to have friends, and we have many. 
 
And I want to say, as we go into the next election, whenever it 
would be, if I don't get a chance to speak again, good luck to 
each and every one of you, and God bless you all. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Condemnation of Crow Benefit Abolition 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise to take issue with the federal government and their 
insensitive abolition of the Crow benefit, for their lack of 
common sense approach to the whole issue of rail line 
abandonment, and for their horrendous lack of foresight and 
lack of vision for the future of this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I will move the 
following motion: 
 
 That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 

its unfair agricultural and transportation cuts to western 
Canada compared to other regions; and in undermining 
the stability of Saskatchewan farmers by abolishing the 
Crow benefit, and accelerating its practice of rail line 
abandonment and deregulation; and its inability to 
provide a blueprint for transition. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I speak from the heart not only as a politician but 
as a Saskatchewan farmer. There is no place left for us to go 
with this latest attack on our livelihood. The federal government 
abolished the Crow with one swift pen stroke, wiped out what 
once was not only a piece of history but something that was 
considered to be a right. Call it a right of passage, if you will, 
Mr. Speaker, but it was a regarded as a right for western 
farmers. 
 



March 14, 1995 

 
851 

We once had it to settle the West in the early days. Sure, it 
evolved — it had to — and became something slightly 
different, but its intention never changed, Mr. Speaker. Its 
intention was to help our farmers get their product to port, and 
in case the federal transportation and Agriculture ministers 
haven't noticed lately, we're in a land-locked province and 
getting our product to port is something of a challenge and it is 
very expensive. 
 
With this latest move — and I call it the Liberal rural western 
revenge — our freight costs have taken an unprecedented leap. 
Why, Mr. Speaker? They're so high in some instances, the cost 
of moving grain and other commodities to a port is more than 
the actual cost of growing the grain in the first place. 
 
There's something drastically wrong with that picture, Mr. 
Speaker. There is something drastically wrong with a federal 
Transport minister and a federal Minister of Agriculture who 
did not stop to think about the impact that this kind of move 
would have on farmers of Saskatchewan. We see the 
elimination of a historic benefit, one that was a part of 
Confederation, one that was part of our forefathers' vision of a 
nation from sea to shining sea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the natural trading patterns in North America very 
much run north and south. But we decided as Canadians to be a 
country that was tied together east to west by a national rail 
system. We had a national dream, and, Mr. Speaker, that has 
been destroyed by the unfairness of the federal budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the national trading patterns run north and 
south, at some time we as farmers will be shipping grain south. 
We have to. If the Canadian taxpayers are not prepared to 
support our farmers, then we as farmers are not going to carry 
the Canadian taxpayer. We will be forced to move our grain the 
cheapest and the fastest way that we can find, and that may 
include the Mississippi River system. A national transportation 
policy and the national transportation system is essential to the 
unity and the well-being of our great country. And we have seen 
this taken away at the expense of Saskatchewan farmers and 
Saskatchewan communities. And I might add that all of Canada 
will suffer because of this change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as of August 1 of this year, the farmers will pay 
about double the cost of moving their grain to the ports so they 
can move it to our customers overseas. You combine that with 
the cost of branch line abandonment, the increased costs of 
trucking, road maintenance costs, and it's easy to see that 
Saskatchewan was treated extremely unfair with this federal 
budget. 
 
How was it done? Unfair? You bet. The western Canadian grain 
transportation Act or the Crow is completely gone, 100 per cent 
cut, and yet the dairy subsidies which mainly affect eastern 
Canada were only cut by 30 per cent. And I ask, Mr. Speaker, is 
that fair? 
 
I have a major concern when I see a federal government cutting 
the Crow which will significantly change our transportation  

system. But what is just as concerning for me and the 
Government of Saskatchewan is the lack of a vision of what 
they, along with the interested groups, see for a vision as to 
what the future transportation system may look like. 
 
Do they have a vision? I think not. Why was it done? 
Financially? Well somewhat. But I believe that maybe the 
member from Humboldt, as he addressed this House on 
February 28 of this year and he pointed out, here we have a 
Minister of Agriculture in the federal government in Ottawa, 
the same person who worked as a ministerial assistant to the 
former minister of Transportation in Ottawa, by the name of 
Otto Lang. Mr. Otto Lang was the minister that started the 
whole process of doing away with the Crow. Mr. Otto Lang 
started many years ago, and maybe for Mr. Goodale, this is the 
end of a mission accomplished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for heaven's sake, Mr. Goodale comes from this 
province, and he knows firsthand what it's like to grow a crop 
and to get it to market. He knows, and yet he stood by and 
watched the Crow as it was killed. He then went so far as to add 
insult to injury and say okay, let's give them one-time pay-out 
this year, a $1.6 billion pay-out to compensate them. 
 
Compensate? Mr. Speaker, this nowhere near compensates our 
farmers for their increased costs. They will be getting barely 18 
to $20 an acre while freight costs could double that. 
 
He just doesn't get it. He just doesn't seem to see that it's not 
enough, it's not fair, it's not equitable, and it's not a solution to 
reducing the federal government debt. Reducing the debt on the 
backs of Saskatchewan farmers just won't cut it, Mr. Goodale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's been pretty quiet out there. Our farmers haven't 
been saying a lot since this latest injustice. And why is that? I 
think it's because we're still in shock. We've been done in, so to 
speak, and we've been kicked once too often, that we just can't 
believe it's happened again on such a monumental scale. 
 
Our farmers are in the depth of a severe depression. They have 
still got their fighting spirit but they have suffered a set-back. 
They still know that they can take things into their own hands 
and turn them around, and maybe diversify. 
 
(1445) 
 
But that's not the sole answer. That's not going to solve 
anything either because if we do diversify, and indeed we have 
extensively already, we will still need to get our products to 
market. And just because the federal Liberals eliminated the 
Crow doesn't mean that we've got any closer to the ports. 
 
So what we have got here, Mr. Speaker, we've got a ridiculous 
situation where the federal Liberals have encouraged our 
farmers to diversify and then cut the rug out from under our 
producers. You might say it's just like the Charlie Brown comic, 
where Charlie comes to kick the football and Lucy pulls it away 
from him at the last moment, causing Charlie to land  



March 14, 1995 

 
852 

flat on his backside with the wind knocked out of him. 
 
And that's what's happened to our farmers, Mr. Speaker. And 
what compounds the problem is the fact that there is no vision, 
no plan for things to come. They say they're going to reduce the 
deficit in a series of short-term plans. There is no long-term 
plan, and I believe there is no plan, period. 
 
And that's pretty scary. A short-term solution never solved 
anything, except in the short term. There always has to be 
something else to step into play when the quick fix comes to an 
end. And right now all we have is a quick fix with nothing to 
back it up. 
 
Those federal Liberals are a real piece of work, Mr. Speaker. 
They've devastated our livelihood, have no real plan to address 
the mess they've created, and they are now saying, we'll be 
flexible on how we distribute the pittance we're allowing you. 
 
And while I'm on the subject, it isn't just the federal Liberals 
that are the problem. The provincial Liberals haven't been 
helpful since the Liberal budget came out either. We still don't 
know with any degree of certainty what side the Liberal Leader 
of the Third Party is on. I'm not certain she even knows what 
side of the issue she's on, except perhaps the side that sounds 
the best in the media. 
 
We've seen far too many examples of the third party leader 
saying one thing in this House, going outside the House and 
saying something else to the media, then coming back in here 
and doing something entirely different than either what she said 
to the media or in the House. 
 
It's enough to give one a headache, and it certainly gives one a 
great deal of pause when it comes to talking about credibility. Is 
the Leader of the Third Party credible when it comes to this 
issue? Mr. Speaker, I don't think so. In fact, I would venture to 
say that the third party leader doesn't really grasp the issue and 
its extremely negative impact on the way of life for this 
province. 
 
If however she does understand the issue, and she has been 
quoted as saying our farmers got what they deserve, then this 
should give us cause for a great deal of concern. And it should 
also tell us that this person isn't able to take a set of principles 
and stand by them consistently. 
 
I want to move on to another thought here, Mr. Speaker — rail 
line abandonment. We knew that it was coming; we saw it; we 
fought it. But we did succeed in getting some prohibition orders 
imposed on lines. But with the elimination of the Crow, the 
doors are now wide open for the acceleration of rail line 
abandonment. And, Mr. Speaker, with the privatization of CN 
(Canadian National) looming, we know darn well that more 
lines are going to be abandoned, and abandoned so quickly that 
our heads will spin. 
 
Why would any rail line keep a line open if they're not 
profitable. Well I think we all know the answer to that — they  

just won't do it. And they aren't about to wait until our farmers 
get their feet back on the ground either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've got such a horrendous situation on our 
hands that I think that the federal and provincial Liberal 
politicians fail to see what they've really done. At least that's the 
way I see it. 
 
I think they really think that through this logical conclusion, 
that they don't think about the impact the elimination of the 
Crow would have on our province. That they didn't really 
realize that our trading patterns would be drastically altered by 
this fiasco. That we might be forced to trade north and south 
rather than east and west. That our highways will deteriorate 
from the increase in heavy haulers. And that the federal 
government didn't provide for any transition plan during the 
inevitable adjustment period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they've stranded us. Or to be slightly more 
specific, they have jammed us between a rock and a hard place. 
And it's not going to be easy trying to sort out the ramifications 
of this mess. And most definitely, the Liberal Saskatchewan 
leader isn't going to be able to contribute anything worthwhile 
since she can't seem to decide where she stands on the issue, 
and many others for that matter. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan farmers will once again 
have to take the matters into their own hands and make 
adjustments and get on with their lives. 
 
Our government will continue to talk to Mr. Goodale and point 
out what he's done is not equitable, is not fair, and to ask that he 
reconsider. I don't think he's going to help, because I think he's 
chosen, like the Saskatchewan Liberal leader, to turn a blind eye 
to this situation — to take the position, that's all you're getting, 
make do with it, and the consequences be darned. 
 
Well I think the Saskatchewan Liberal leader is dreaming to be 
premier. I shudder at the thought of it. I shudder to think of 
what chaos would befall us. Mr. Speaker, it's not the Crow that 
should be abolished, it's the federal and provincial Liberal 
governments that should be abolished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Biggar: 
 
 That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 

its unfair agricultural and transportation budget cuts to 
western Canada compared to other regions; and in 
undermining the stability of Saskatchewan farmers by 
abolishing the Crow benefit, and accelerating its 
practice of rail line abandonment and deregulation; and 
its inability to provide a blueprint for transition. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, this seems to be an issue that I 
guess is finally coming to an end if everything goes well in 
terms of what the federal Liberal government has done in terms 
of the Crow benefit. 



March 14, 1995 

 
853 

Mr. Speaker, it's an issue that certainly I've been involved in for 
many years, long before I entered this Legislative Assembly, in 
terms of other active roles in farm organizations and the whole 
area of grain transportation, particularly the Crow benefit. 
 
And after, as I say, I guess 15 years within this battle, battles 
won, battles lost — and one could say at times possibly the war 
is lost — is that everything that was talked about in terms of 
changing the Crow benefit and the problems it would create are 
about to happen. And I would like to talk about those 
repercussions. 
 
But the question of the whole argument in terms of the grain 
transportation Crow benefit comes down to one major factor 
which underpins everything else. It is a transfer of the total cost 
of moving grain in this country onto the farmers. Simple, 
period. That's exactly what it is — a transfer of the cost. 
 
Repercussions will mean increase in freight costs. We're unsure 
in terms of the variability of those freight cost differences. It 
ranges on the next crop year, August 1, from 14 to $35 a tonne. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do believe that those ranges can be even 
that much greater. If one considers certain parts of this province 
that are a long ways away from main line tracks, those freight 
costs could be substantially higher. 
 
Approximately four or five years ago, the senior grain 
transportation authority did a study on branch lines and talked 
about the change and the freight differences. They speculated a 
freight difference between Saskatoon and Meadow Lake within 
the range of $60 a tonne for moving a commodity — $60 a 
tonne. 
 
So up front, farmers are faced with a direct transfer of costs and 
freight costs. But the underlying thing that takes place also in 
terms of the transfer of costs is in the area of branch lines, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Without a doubt, the grain handling system 
which has been going through evolution, which has been going 
through a transition, which farmers can adapt to, will now be 
put into the term that is used in the television program, warp 
speed. The transition that will take place in the grain handling 
system will be done at warp speed in the next five years. 
 
And when one talks about branch line abandonment and what 
rail lines will exist by the year 2000 or 2010, because under this 
system, as the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
outlined, what will be profitable will determine what will be 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I assure you that those farmers who 
will benefit the most in terms of this are only those who live 
very close to main line tracks. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let there be no doubt about this. 
Where those main line tracks are . . . because I think there is a 
fallacy that where farmers believe they'll be hauling grain. 
There are only the main line tracks that run the community of 
Regina, CNCP (Canadian National and Canadian Pacific); the 
main line tracks that run through Saskatoon, CNCP; one 
branching off to Calgary, a CN track; and a CN track going off 
to Edmonton. 

We're talking about the possibility of four rail tracks in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We are talking distances of moving 
grain 150 miles to those rail tracks. People will say, well this 
won't happen; there'll be protection there. There will be 
safeguards to protect the producers. 
 
Not under the federal government, Liberal government's 
proposal. This proposal goes to full commercial rates. This 
proposal goes to full deregulation of the system. And that is the 
greatest attack on the farming community in this province — it's 
is the move to deregulation. There will be no protection for 
farmers — absolutely none. 
 
All we have to do is look south to see the examples of what 
deregulation does. In the early '80s, deregulation took place in 
the Dakotas and in Montana — massive closure of branch lines, 
massive changes in terms of the grain handling system. 
 
And I might add, even those communities that are on branch 
lines are not secure because the system will consolidate to such 
a degree that these points will be 50, 60, 70, maybe 100 miles 
apart — again increasing the costs that are going on. 
 
Farmers will be faced with tough decisions: whether they 
should continue farming, particularly those that are close to 
retirement; or trying to grow different crops by which they can 
take advantage of the system. Because the other thing that this 
Bill does in terms of the changes to the Crow system, it changes 
cropping practices. Crops that are low in price but high in 
volume become worthless to export. They are almost worthless 
to move out of the province. And there's only a limited amount 
of value added that you can do in respect to barley and oats that 
I speak of. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now some have said there will be an increase in livestock 
production with the change that is coming. The former 
Progressive Conservative government conducted a panel to 
study such things, producer panel, and they suggested, 
particularly in Saskatchewan, there would be no changes to the 
cattle and hog herd — minimal changes. 
 
So farmers are going to recognize that barley and oats are not 
the crops to grow. They'll be going into other crops. Farmers in 
this province are very adaptable. But don't think tomorrow that 
the cattle herd's going to increase, because it's not. It takes time 
and it will not increase to that degree. 
 
The other thing that takes place that many experts are saying, 
land values are going to drop. And we've just gone through a 
time in history in Saskatchewan where land values dropped 
significantly and are just starting to recover. Equities by farmers 
are starting to increase, but that's been taken away. 
 
Every expert says land values will drop the farther you are from 
the main railway grain handling system. Land values will drop 
that much more. So that really poses a problem to people that 
are in those fringe areas throughout the province that are a long  



March 14, 1995 

 
854 

ways away from the main line tracks. 
 
And the last thing that this legislation does is determine that the 
payment go to producers. We now see clearly the problem of 
making the payment to producers. Who should get it? 
Landlords, banks, government institutions, or tenants? Should 
tenants get it, or actual producers? 
 
This argument had been going on for years. Everybody said pay 
it to producers. But none of the groups ever determined where it 
should go because they saw the problems also. 
 
We now see the problem of paying the producers. We are 
seeing this fight in terms of farmers and tenants determining 
who should get it and who will benefit from it. 
 
In the end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no one will benefit, no one will 
benefit from the meagre $1.6 billion. It failed to recognize the 
size of payment that was needed, but it also emphasized the 
whole difficulty of having a payment system to producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've heard the argument made that offers have 
been put on the table that at one point in time it was $7 billion, 
it was $4 billion. Let me assure you that every federal 
government was unable to meet this requirement. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, I will be clearly supporting this resolution and 
thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, Mr. Speaker, to 
speak to this motion. And at the end of my comments I will be 
making an amendment to the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Because frankly, listening to the NDP talk about saving rural 
Saskatchewan is nothing short of pathetic, given their track 
record and given their rhetoric over the past few years. And if 
they would just have the patience to listen to the truth, perhaps 
they might get a little bit of humility in defending rural people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn't it interesting that when we talk about 
the abandonment of the Crow rate and the NDP stand in the 
legislature and say how much this really bothers them, that you 
don't see any rallies, you don't see any rural support, you don't 
see any people standing up and fighting for the cause of rural 
Saskatchewan, you don't see any organizations taking place, led 
by the NDP or led by their organizations or led by their friends. 
What's happened? 
 
This is the fight of the life. The NDP said that this is it, this is 
entirely their cause, to be elected in Saskatchewan or any place 
else, was to defend rural Saskatchewan against the Crow. And 
we don't hear a peep in rural Saskatchewan. Not a peep. And 
the reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they have cried wolf 
once too many times. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Grant, go home. 
 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, listen to them. The 
hypocrisy of the NDP standing up in 1995, saying that they 
believe in rural Saskatchewan and rural Canada, is so evident 
that you can hardly have enough members in the House to 
support them, let alone people across Saskatchewan. And not 
one person would come to an NDP rally to say, I will vote NDP 
to stick up for rural Saskatchewan. Nobody would. Nobody 
would. It's pathetic. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You have no credibility in this province. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, listen to them chirp 
from their seats. They'll have lots of chances to speak, but they 
can't stand the facts. The facts are that the NDP have cried wolf 
too often, have let people down, and particularly rural people. 
 
After the election, Mr. Speaker, where they promised that they 
would have a cost of production, they'd have more money for 
people in towns and villages for health and hospitals and roads 
and jobs and they would really stick up for senior citizens in 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they would stick up for 
their crop insurance, guess what happened? The NDP 
government of the day brought upon, as the member mentioned, 
the revenge, the political revenge on rural Saskatchewan like we 
have never seen. And now they're trying to say, oh but we really 
didn't mean it, it's all the Liberal's fault. 
 
Just look at the record on rural Saskatchewan by the NDP and 
why nobody would come to an NDP rally to stick up for rural 
Saskatchewan. Nobody would ever say yes, I believe the NDP 
would be the best to look after farmers or the best to look after 
the Crow or the best to look after rural lifestyle. They don't 
believe that. They don't believe that at all. 
 
Number one, when they talked about helping rural people, did 
they mention they were going to open hospitals and build them? 
Yes, they did. And the truth is they did the opposite, and rural 
people know that. 
 
So you go to your communities. Have you opened any new 
hospitals recently? Have you brought in more health care to 
rural Saskatchewan? Have you closed 52 hospitals? Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the public knows and the seniors know and the 
families know. 
 
Have you offloaded taxes and costs onto rural municipalities? 
Absolutely. Hundreds of millions of dollars of local taxes have 
gone up. And you can just go back and look at your own land 
values and look at the taxes there, and the NDP have caused 
that offloading, unbelievable offloading to rural people. 
 
School boards, school boards — school boards have to raise 
taxes because of the offloading because of the cut-backs and the 
NDP say no, we're here to defend rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And crop insurance . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you think 
maybe they could have their turn speak and we can take turns in 
the legislature? Just ask them to talk about, when they get on 
their feet, about GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and  



March 14, 1995 

 
855 

about crop insurance. 
 
People had the opportunity to have protection. I can recall, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when we would bring a billion dollars a year 
from Ottawa to Saskatchewan alone to help farmers and the 
NDP would say, but we need more, we need more from the 
feds. It's not enough. And they would go and try to rally people 
and say we need more coming to Saskatchewan than a billion 
dollars a year. 
 
And they said, we would do better. That's what the NDP said. 
We will protect your crop insurance. We'll give you the cost of 
production and we'll get billions and billions and billions from 
Ottawa. That's what they said. That's what they campaigned on. 
 
And guess what happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They not only 
didn't get billions, they took away hundreds of millions of 
dollars from Saskatchewan farmers. The very crop insurance 
program people depended upon, the NDP members took them 
away — $189 million that they took out of the pockets of 
people on farms, and they said oh, but we have to worry about 
the Crow and we have to worry about this. They didn't care 
about farmers at all. They don't care one dime about farmers. 
 
Look at the provincial agriculture budget, look at the crop 
insurance budget, look at the GRIP budget, roads, hospitals, 
schools. Saskatchewan Pension Plan for senior citizens, 
particularly rural women — they cancel it; wipe it right out. 
 
The NDP in the province of Saskatchewan have zero credibility 
when it comes to defending farmers. They told farmers a 
falsehood. They said, believe in the NDP and we'll be there to 
protect you. We'll protect your GRIP and we'll protect your crop 
insurance, we'll protect your freight rates, we'll protect your 
communities. 
 
And do you know what the NDP did? They gave farmers a stab 
in the back. They took away crop insurance and they took away 
all their support mechanisms, and they over and over and over 
again said to those members, don't trust other political parties; 
you can only trust the NDP. 
 
Well if you go across rural Saskatchewan today, I'll tell you the 
public will sing a different song. They'll say, I don't trust the 
NDP because they have cried wolf so many times to get us to 
vote NDP. They've said so many times if you don't vote NDP it 
will all go away. And now we find out the very people that 
caused it to go away are those newly elected NDP members in 
this session of the legislature. 
 
I can remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the NDP said, well 
we're against deregulation. The NDP said, we're against 
diversification. The NDP says they're against terminals. The 
NDP are against variable rates. The NDP are against free trade. 
The NDP are against equity and share offerings and 
privatization. And the NDP said, oh we're against banks and 
we're against multinationals. They have talked so many times 
out of both sides of their mouth that the public doesn't know 
what to believe about the NDP. 

What does the NDP today believe about privatization? What do 
they believe? Is it good or bad? Speak up. Well a few seconds 
ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they wanted to tell everybody what 
they believe. What do they believe about privatization? What do 
they believe about privatization? Speak up. What do they think 
about that? 
 
Well at one time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was a holy . . . 
unholy sin to talk about equity and share offerings and 
privatization. And they're mum now. Not a word out of them. 
What is it? 
 
Well guess what. The local co-op is going to be privatized. 
Whoops, moving into the 21st century, and the NDP are going 
to rise and support it. And the public's just shaking their heads, 
well I thought that was something evil like banks or like 
diversification or like deregulation or like terminals or other 
things. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me say this. Let me say this. The 
reason for the wreck in agriculture coming from the federal 
government is in good part because of the provincial NDP 
which have caused the problem to start with. They wholesale 
gave up on Saskatchewan. And the federal Liberals say, I can 
give up on it as well because nobody's going to complain in 
Saskatchewan because nobody believes the NDP or the 
Government of Saskatchewan when it comes to agriculture. 
Nobody believes them. 
 
There should have been $7.2 billion coming to this part of the 
country as a result of the Crow and the Crow benefit. And it is 
not coming here because of the NDP and because of their 
cooperation and there's conniving with the provincial Liberal 
government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member's time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. Devine: — May I make an amendment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — No. Only during the 10 minutes that's 
allowed. 
 
Mr. Devine: — By leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — By leave then. Is leave granted for the 
member to move an amendment? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Morse: 
 
 That all the words after the word "condemned" be 

deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 
 both the provincial and the federal government for 

unfair agriculture budget cuts adversely affecting the 
province of Saskatchewan, more specifically the  



March 14, 1995 

 
856 

 rovincial government for undermining the stability of 
Saskatchewan farmers by cancelling thousands of GRIP 
contracts and eliminating support to Saskatchewan's 
agriculture sector, and the federal government for 
abolishing the Crow benefit without proper 
compensation and concise plans, which will lead to rail 
line abandonment, low land values, and increased cost 
to Saskatchewan producers. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Shaunavon on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well was there not a need for unanimous 
support on whether the member could bring forward the 
amendment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I asked for leave and I didn't hear 
anyone say no. I saw the member was preoccupied with other 
items; I didn't hear the member say no. It was only after I had 
asked for leave and I didn't hear any no's that the member then 
raised a question of order. 
 
I find this is in order. The debate continues. The amendment is 
in order and the debate continues concurrent on the amendment 
and the main motion. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to today, 
enter the debate on this discussion on the rationalization of the 
rail system as it relates to the discussion about the Crow. 
 
We have talked at considerable length over the last few weeks 
after the federal budget came down. We've talked about various 
kinds of things that impact into the province of Saskatchewan, 
and I would say, first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the debate 
on the demise of the Crow rate will be fairly extensive over the 
next few months — and perhaps even a few years — as we 
begin to adjust ourselves to the impact of what's going to 
happen. 
 
The first item that I believe of significance in this discussion 
. . . and I believe we have to talk about certain areas that are 
going to impact in Saskatchewan. We have to talk about, first of 
all, is the railroad going to rationalize itself over the next two or 
three years in a way that's going to be constructive? 
 
I'm going to try to obligate some of the people in the 
government side of the House; however, I think that the 
rationalization of the railroad is going to take place over the 
next two or three years in a way that is going to seriously 
impact in various communities across Saskatchewan. 
 

I am told that the majority of the rail lines that deal with the 
steel that runs the rails is most represented in the CN lines. And 
the CN lines in Saskatchewan are generally in the northern part 
of Saskatchewan. Those rail lines will have the most 
devastating effect . . . or the Crow rate will have the most 
devastating effect on those rail lines. 
 
The second thing that we have to talk about I believe, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is how will this impact in rates being adjusted 
and set, so that the people of the province of Saskatchewan who 
are going to have increased costs will have the lowest costs 
made available to them in dealing with the cost of moving grain 
to port? And that is going to have to be set at some point in 
time by someone. Either the National Transportation Agency is 
going to have to regulate the grain and the rates, or somebody is 
going to have to do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is a very 
serious issue that has to be dealt with. 
 
The third thing that I believe we have to identify is those costs 
to rural communities across Saskatchewan. I just read in the 
paper today, the headline said: most cities will not be affected 
by changes to the Crow. And I really think, Mr. Speaker, that 
that is a serious, serious problem that exists in Saskatchewan 
because urban centres think they're not going to be impacted. 
But $300 million less income in a year in agriculture, in this 
province, are going to significantly impact in urban centres. 
 
Large urban centres are going to be very seriously impacted. In 
the city of Regina, for example, 80 per cent of all the business 
in Regina is conducted in rural Saskatchewan. Eighty per cent 
of the businesses in Regina are in some way going to be 
impacted negatively by a reduced volume of income by rural 
people. Rural agriculture is going to be that much less viable 
and therefore, Mr. Speaker, the things that rural people will buy 
is going to be significantly reduced. 
 
And that is going to be a significant community cost; whether 
it's a large urban centre, whether it's a small urban centre, the 
community costs are going to be felt throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
The elevator system in the province of Saskatchewan is also 
going to have to adjust itself. There are about 500 elevators in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that number is going to be 
reduced significantly as these rail lines are abandoned in view 
of what the federal government has done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has unilaterally made a 
decision to cut the cost. What they have, I believe, not done 
anything about is setting up a process where the elimination of 
these benefits can be handled by the people of western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a whole lot of us who have argued in the 
past about paying the producer. We never, ever said that you 
reduce the volume of dollars coming to western Canada — 
which is what happened with the federal Liberal government — 
but we have always said, pay the producer so that we have a 
level playing-field with all of the benefits being spread out 
across western Canada, and not only the grain side of 
agriculture receiving the benefits. 



March 14, 1995 

 
857 

Mr. Speaker, if they had paid the producer to start with, the 
benefits would have accrued to everyone. 
 
Another thing we're going to have to deal with in how we 
handle this is the road costs. Whether it's the highways, whether 
it's the municipal roads, these are going to be extremely 
important to the delivery of grain when we have to haul. Rather 
than 10 miles or 8 miles or 20 miles, it's going to be 60 and 90 
and 100 miles that this grain is going to have to move. Those 
are also things that are going to have to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that is going to impact and I think it 
has to be looked at, it is that those people in the southern part of 
this province are going to have to have options that deal with 
the U.S. (United States). If we're not going to be allowed to 
move grain into the U.S., we are going to be seriously curtailed 
by the options that are available to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many things that we have to think about 
— the economic opportunities. Feature $300 million going out 
of the farming sector, 10 per cent of the gross income is going 
to be lost by agriculture. And if any other sector in 
Saskatchewan would lose 10 per cent of its benefits and take 10 
per cent off of its viability line, there would be serious 
repercussions throughout Saskatchewan in every facet that it 
would impact. 
 
And that's what's happened on the grain side in agriculture. 
Between 8 and 10 per cent of the people's livelihood is going to 
be taken away. 
 
Another item that I think that has to be included in this 
discussion, Mr. Speaker, and it hasn't appeared anywhere, and I 
would say that this government is equally responsible for the 
problems that we have with this discussion because they haven't 
given to the federal government any kind of outline of what 
they should do. They haven't given any kind of a rationalization 
of the impact — they haven't said to anybody. 
 
I just recently got a letter saying that the minister of transport 
had sent a copy of some of the things to the federal Minister of 
Transport. What it clearly indicates to me, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there is a serious shortage, a serious shortage on any kind of 
knowledgeable representation by this government to the federal 
government on what the impact in Saskatchewan is going to be. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we bring forward this 
amendment. This amendment identifies all of the aspects of the 
concerns that we have as opposition party, telling the 
government you need to address the shortfall in agriculture in 
many ways. 
 
You haven't done that. In fact you let it get away on you. You 
deliberately gave back to the federal government $300 million 
that was their share in the premium paid by them in the GRIP 
program. You took $180 million back into your budget so you 
could balance the books. And what did the farmers get out of it 
in Saskatchewan? 
 

Alberta and Manitoba's farmers got the benefits of all this 
national program, but did the Saskatchewan farmers get that 
$300 million? No, Mr. Speaker, they did not. And that to me is 
where the federal government began to see. They began to see 
that we can reduce the value of the Crow to the people of 
Saskatchewan and western Canada because it's been led by an 
attack on agriculture by this government. 
 
And that's what our amendment says, Mr. Speaker, and that's 
why it's important for us to clearly understand that the value of 
the Crow is only a part of what the total loss to agriculture is. 
 
Three hundred million dollars lost to the economy in 
Saskatchewan in a way that is negative to agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, and the grain producers are going to be negatively 
impacted. These remarks, Mr. Speaker, are important in this 
discussion, and they need to be addressed as a part of the value 
that the transportation reduction in payment is going to be — 
$300 million loss on an annual basis to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that is extended to the other provinces as 
well. And that would be a loss in the neighbourhood, for this 
year, of 560 million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we go back in history, it was a loss of 
$700 million. And that is even more serious to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member's time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm 
pleased to stand up and speak today on the motion or the 
amendment to the motion. But, you know, there's some serious 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm 
pleased to stand up and speak to the amended motion today, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But, you know, there's some serious 
problems when I look at the motions and the amendments to the 
motions that continuously come forward from the governing 
party and the official opposition, in the sense that everything 
they do is coming out condemning someone. 
 
And you know, when we take a look at where the people's 
minds are today, they know full well that we are really all 
Canadians, and we are really all in a serious situation, not only 
in this province. I mean the debts of this province rung up by 
the former Conservative government, well they were 
unforgivable, extremely high. And the people of the province 
are doing what they feel, I guess, what they felt were very 
necessary things. And of course the government of the day took 
it far beyond with taxation and really put the province into a 
negative spin. 
 
But you know, when I hear some of the arguments coming 
forward about how we've got to continuously condemn the 
federal government, this is the federal government that they are  



March 14, 1995 

 
858 

forever reaching out to and say, help us and save us because 
we've made some mistakes. They've made some mistakes, and 
they want now somebody, somebody who's trying to clean up 
the finances of Canada as a whole because of Conservative 
administrations again. 
 
But the fact of the matter is these people aren't prepared to work 
with anybody. They're far more interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in trying to find an election issue in the next couple months 
because the problem that they're having is that they are pretty 
much issue free because the people are so far ahead of them. 
 
That is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I 
will be moving an amendment to the amended motion, and I 
think putting perhaps this in a better context of where the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan would like to see their 
elected representatives go. They want everyone working hand in 
hand, working for the benefit of not only the people of 
Saskatchewan, other provinces in fact, but as Canada because 
there's only one taxpayer, that it's all . . . this whole thing is for 
everyone at the end of the day. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is why I think that there's a better way to approach this than for 
always to be condemning somebody for something. 
 
And in fact when we take a look at this particular government's 
own actions, as the member for Morse had just talked about 
minutes ago, the fact of the matter is there you have a provincial 
government who gave up on rural Saskatchewan in such a way 
. . . gave up on the farmers entirely. In fact when we had, as the 
member from Morse stated, 2 to $300 million of money on the 
table from the federal government, and the government of the 
day gave it up. They chose not to leave their amount of money 
into the pot, but they decided that they wouldn't make an 
investment in Saskatchewan farmers. They wouldn't make an 
investment in agriculture in this province. In fact they'd forgo 
that money. And you know, when you look at it, even on the 
smaller scale . . . but I think it really means the same thing. 
 
I was at a meeting last Friday evening in the community of 
Consul. And we hear all levels of governments right across 
Canada, but especially right here in Saskatchewan  right here 
in Saskatchewan where they've come out with a glossy booklet, 
Ag 2000  how we've got to get away from being a wheat 
dependent economy and in fact start to diversify. Right? So 
now we hear what they have to say, and we can see it in 
expensive, very expensive glossy literature, but what does it . . . 
you know, what are the actions at the end of the day? 
 
Well if we take a look at just in the community of Consul where 
they had a project which was announced a few years ago, a 
community of Consul where a few years ago there was a dam 
that was announced, the Battle Creek reservoir. And this is a 
great example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of where a government 
could put its words to action, but they chose firstly, once they're 
elected in 1991, to put a halt to the project. 
 
(1530) 
 

And right away, they're going to back up and say well, we've 
got some environmental concerns, so we can't go ahead with 
this even though the people down there want some 
diversification for their area. Move into alfalfa, into more of the 
beef industry, try and get away from the dependency on wheat 
crops and such, and yet what are we seeing? Even on this scale, 
on this project, they're pulling away. 
 
The federal money, as I found out at a meeting in Consul the 
other night, is on the table until the end of March. But what are 
these people prepared to do? Nothing. They're saying that it 
can't go ahead because of some environmental concerns, but it 
was Sask Environment that says, well we can't go ahead 
because the provincial government decided to pull the money 
off the table. So it's a real catch 22. 
 
And I know that the minister in charge . . . he sits there smiling 
about it. The fact of the matter is he's not fooling anyone out in 
Consul, Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they know 
that deep down that these people are not for diversification. 
They're not for rural Saskatchewan moving ahead. They want 
everyone to move into the cities, but they're forgoing a lot of 
federal dollars that they can now stand up and complain that the 
federal government isn't supporting . . . supporting what? You 
people keep giving up the money. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it's disappointing when we see 
this government say one thing, bring in motions that are 
condemning, and they want more and more. But yet when it 
really comes down to the crunch, they never pull through for 
the farmers. They never pull through for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But you know when we talked about the issue that was first 
brought up in this motion as far as the changes in the 
transportation subsidies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they, right 
after the federal budget, were standing up and saying well, we 
were so surprised; we didn't realize this was coming down. 
 
Well you know who is surprised? Everyone else in the province 
perhaps, other than them. And I'll tell you why. We've got the 
Leader-Post articles dating back to April 8, 1994. And in fact 
the headline is: GATT will impact Crow. Cost of moving grain 
can be reduced. And right here, it says the GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) . . . and this is the 
international trade rules which they have known for quite some 
time were coming down and in fact that changes in agriculture 
subsidies and transportation subsidies had to be changed by this 
July. And they feel it's fine just to sit back and say, well yes, but 
we can ignore that because for political reasons . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member's time has 
elapsed. It's now time for question and comments. 
 
I stand to apologize to the member and to the House. The clock, 
I am informed, started not at 75 minutes but at 65 minutes, so 
the member has another 2 minutes and 21 seconds. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
in the event that I do get cut off, I'll move my amendment to the  



March 14, 1995 

 
859 

amended motion at this time: 
 
 That all the words after "that" be deleted, and the 

following substituted: 
 
 this Assembly acknowledge that the elimination of the 

Crow benefit was inevitable as a result of the GATT 
agreement; and therefore that this Assembly work with 
the federal government in the promotion of 
diversification and value added processing. 

 
And that will be seconded by the member from Regina North 
West, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the reason for this amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — As I understand it, the member has 
moved his amendment to the amendment. 
 
I have to declare that the amendment moved by the member for 
Shaunavon is out of order. As I read the amendment . . . or the 
proposed amendment to the amendment, it is clear that what he 
is trying to do is move an amendment to the main motion, but 
because there is an amendment on the floor made by the 
member for Estevan, any amendment made by him or others 
must be relevant to the amendment that is on the floor, and this 
amendment is not relevant to that amendment. 
 
The member from Shaunavon, why is he on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — A point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Both the amendment and the amendment 
that I brought in were both dealing with the transportation 
subsidies. How . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I've ruled on the amendment. The 
member should not question the Chair. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, again I rise to take part in this debate on a bit of a note 
of sadness  sadness for the farm economy, the provincial 
economy, although I know the resilience that's out in rural 
Saskatchewan. I know farmers will take up this challenge, yet 
another challenge to them, and carry on through it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the important point here that we're dealing 
with in this motion, is the unfairness of the agricultural cuts, 
number one. We're dealing with the accelerated practice of rail 
line abandonment, abolishing the Crow rate, basically the whole 
agricultural package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think over the last four years since 1991-92 the 
cuts to agriculture across Canada have gone something like this. 
Now remembering '91-92 was the end of the Conservative era, 
right through into a new Liberal era where cuts to agriculture 
federally to Quebec have been about 22 per cent, to Ontario  

about 30 per cent, and to Saskatchewan about 60 per cent. A 
continuation, Mr. Speaker, of the offloading and undermining 
of agriculture support from the federal government over the last 
four years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that speaks for itself, despite the fact that the 
Liberal leader in Saskatchewan says that the cuts were fair 
across the country. 
 
Now the member for Thunder Creek may want to get into the 
debate. I'm not sure. I could leave him a minute or so to tell us 
everything he knows, but I don't know that I'll do that. 
 
We have a situation, Mr. Speaker, that I want to explain to the 
members opposite, and especially to the Leader of Liberal 
Party. Because what's happened in Saskatchewan today with the 
demise of the Crow benefit reminds me of someone . . . if 
you've ever grown up on a farm and had chickens, if you ever 
threw a bunch of breadcrumbs down on the chicken yard. 
 
And that's what the federal Liberal government has done to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. They've thrown the breadcrumbs 
down and everybody is there because they desperately want to 
get a part of this action. And it's a scramble for the crumbs. 
 
They threw the breadcrumbs down with no organization, no 
forward thought about how to organize the distribution of the 
money from the Crow benefit, trying to blame the farmers, the 
farm organizations, and indeed the provincial government. Sort 
of saying, well it's up to you. I mean, the onus is on you. You 
better get yourselves organized to figure this out. That is an 
unfair position to put them in. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, think of this. You've got a federal government 
who . . . a federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale, who 
wasn't strong enough — for the lack of stronger words I might 
use — wasn't strong enough to maintain a fair level of 
compensation for Saskatchewan farmers. Okay. So the Crow's 
gone; we get an inadequate pay-out to replace it over a short 
period of time. That's bad enough. 
 
But then just think in the last few days, Mr. Speaker, of what's 
happened with the CN lockouts/potential strike. We see again 
the federal Minister of Agriculture not only not strong enough 
to take a position to ensure that the farmers of this province are 
not financially affected and the economy of this province is 
affected; he's compounding the farm problem by not taking a 
position on this strike/lockout. 
 
So he's weak with the Crow benefit pay-out and he's 
compounding the farmers' problem by not being strong enough 
to say to the railroads, the managers and the unions, that this 
will not happen; we can't afford a strike. 
 
Throw one more little piece into this puzzle, Mr. Speaker. And 
the reason I say he's compounded the problem is because the 
farmers in this crop year, the last crop year that the Crow 
benefit is available to them . . . and I have the schedule here, 
Mr. Speaker, the tentative schedule of rates. Before I finish that  



March 14, 1995 

 
860 

I'll give you a little example. 
 
My point of Young, the rate is going to basically . . . it will just 
a little bit more than double. Let's take Bredenbury — from 
$11.35 to $21.59 — $10 a tonne; almost double. 
 
So what are the farmers’ reaction? They want to get as much of 
their crop into the system, two-port position this year, so that 
they can gain the benefit of the present Crow. 
 
So what's Mr. Goodale and the Liberals done? By not taking a 
strong position on the strike and lockout that has started and 
could escalate, they are further jeopardizing farmers' ability to 
grasp or complete the income from last year by being able to 
access the Crow. 
 
So if they fail . . . and I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we on this side 
of the House have made representation to CN, written a letter to 
CP, to the unions of the rail, to the west coast, to the west coast 
management authority saying, do everything you can to prevent 
this strike. Everything you can. 
 
I would challenge the Conservative Party. Our minister, in the 
House today, it was question period, said he would be willing to 
table that. I would challenge the Conservative Party to table 
theirs; I'll challenge the Liberals to table theirs. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Under Rule 16, the 65 minutes of time 
has lapsed and according to the rule there now will be a 
maximum of 10-minute question and answer if members wish 
to participate in that. So we were opening to questions and 
answers now. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
for. . . two questions, I will ask them one at a time. 
 
First of all, as I said in my comments that our minister has been 
willing and made it public that we're willing to table our 
representations we've made on behalf of the province and 
farmers to ensure that the strike, this lockout, does not continue. 
 
I'd like to ask the member for Shaunavon if he would . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . yes, the Liberal member from 
Shaunavon or any of his colleagues over there, if he would be 
willing to stand in this House now and agree to table all the 
correspondence they have had with the federal minister, the 
CNCP, the labour unions, to ensure that we're working together 
on this issue and to ensure that the farmers in this province 
won't be affected by this strike. 
 
I'd ask the member if he might do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I'll recognize the next question. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess there's 
no answer to that. 
 

The second question I would ask is if the member from Morse, 
on behalf of his caucus, would like to table today or at some 
convenient time correspondence they might have with CNCP, 
the labour unions involved, the Prime Minister or the Minister 
of Agriculture federally, to show that their support for the 
farmers is the same as what ours is in trying to avert any action 
that might deny farmers some monies. 
 
Mr. Martens: — The member for Thunder Creek will be doing 
that at his earliest convenience, and he will be doing that 
representation to the various agencies, because as his critic 
responsibility he will be doing that. He has made some 
representation to the unions already in discussion with them, 
members of the union, and he will be doing that later on. 
 
The Speaker: — I see no further questions. 
 
So that members have it clear in the future, if you use up your 
65 minutes of debate, then there is no vote because you have 
used up all your time. The last time we had . . . last week we 
had a vote on it, or the week before we had a vote on it because 
members allowed themselves the extra time or the 65 minutes. 
But other than that, we can't have a vote on it. But there is a 
maximum 10-minute question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, because of the 
importance of this issue, I would ask for leave for a vote to be 
called so that this issue could be referred to the House of 
Commons because it's probably one of the most important 
issues we will deal with in this session. And I think the 
members of the Assembly would like there to be a vote so we 
could forward it to our colleagues in the federal government. 
And therefore I would ask for leave that a vote be held. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave granted? Order, order. Does the 
member want to speak to that point of order? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much, 
Speaker. I want to concur with the Government House Leader. I 
think when we spend this amount of the legislature's time on 
significant issues like this, I think it behoves us to come to 
some kind of decision. I think we should do this on a regular 
basis and when we have these debates that a decision is 
reached, Mr. Speaker. And I would certainly say to the 
Government House Leader, the official opposition gives leave. 
 
The Speaker: —I think Beauchesne's is very clear on this. 
When members . . . the House is allowed certainly to do 
whatever they so wish, but that does not set a precedent, if 
members do it by leave. And it should be noted that this is not a 
precedent. 
 
I would suggest to members in the future, if they do want to 
have a vote, that they should allow themselves sufficient time in 
the 65 minutes to do so. Leave has been granted, and the vote 
will be taken. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



March 14, 1995 

 
861 

The division bells rang from 3:50 p.m. until 4 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Swenson Neudorf Martens 
Goohsen Muirhead  

— 5 
Nays 

 
Van Mulligen Thompson Lingenfelter 
Shillington Anguish Johnson 
Goulet Lautermilch Kowalsky 
Mitchell Penner Upshall 
Hagel Lorje Teichrob 
Pringle Cline Murray 
Hamilton Draper Whitmore 
Sonntag Flavel Langford 
Scott Kujawa Stanger 
Knezacek Harper Keeping 
Carlson   

— 31 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think the Speaker was one step 
ahead of you people. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, 
order. I agree with the member who said that I always am a step 
ahead of you. But the Speaker was a little bit ahead. There was 
only a recorded vote asked on the amendment. So the vote will 
now be on the motion, the original motion. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:04 p.m. until 4:20 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Van Mulligen Thompson Lingenfelter 
Shillington Anguish Simard 
Johnson Lautermilch Kowalsky 
Mitchell Penner Upshall 
Hagel Lorje Teichrob 
Pringle Cline Murray 
Hamilton Draper Whitmore 
Sonntag Flavel Langford 
Scott Kujawa Stanger 
Knezacek Harper Keeping 
Carlson Devine Swenson 
Neudorf Martens Goohsen 
Britton   

— 37 
Nays 

— Nil 
 
The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate that I'm not able to raise a point of 
order during the conduct of a vote. The point of order that I 
raise is to ask whether it is permissible to take the vote before  

time has expired, if there is no one from the Liberal caucus who 
is present to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order! The 
member's point of order is not well taken. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Effects of Federal Government on Economy of 
Western Canada 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me pleasure today to rise in this Assembly and speak on 
behalf of Saskatchewan agriculture in the province as a whole, 
and I will be moving a motion, Mr. Speaker, and I would read 
that into the record now and move it at the end of my remarks. 
And I'm going to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member 
from Morse: 
 
 That this Assembly urge the provincial government to 

press the federal government for fairness to western 
Canadian people in light of the federal government's 
minimal pay-out of the Crow benefit, $7 billion in cuts 
to health care, and failing to defend western Canadian 
producers against railway strikes that are hindering the 
transportation of grain to export and therefore 
significantly increasing cost to producers to transport 
their grain. 

 
Mr. Speaker, with everything that has happened in the last few 
months, certainly I think western Canadians are wondering 
what in the world this federal Liberal government that we've 
been blessed with in this country is really up to. You know they 
had a mandate, Mr. Speaker, a massive mandate given by the 
people of Canada just a short while ago to get on with the job 
of making this country more productive, to use trade, to use the 
tools available to allow western Canadians in particular to reach 
out and seek out new markets, to reach out and develop our 
economy in such a way that we all would contribute to the 
national fabric of our country in a very significant way. 
 
We all understand the issues surrounding debt and deficit, Mr. 
Speaker. We're all taxpayers, and we like to think that when 
issues surrounding fairness to the taxpayers of this country arise 
that they will be dealt with in an even-handed manner. And 
certainly what we've seen transpire in the last few weeks is not 
fairness, and it is not even-handed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes to the method of payment are 
something that we in this party have supported for a long time 
because we saw that as a way of enhancing the agriculture and 
industrial base of this province and indeed western Canada, that 
that historic right that western Canadians have had surrounding 
the issues of transportation would then be passed on to 
individuals. And those individuals  not government, not 
railroads, and not unions  would have the ability to direct 
their own destiny. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, what we're seeing is a pittance  



March 14, 1995 

 
862 

directed at western Canada. And all of those other entities  
railways, unions, and government  will continue to take away 
the ability of individuals in our society in western Canada to 
contribute to the fabric of their provinces and to their national 
government. And we think, Mr. Speaker, that not only is it 
unjust, unfair, but it is going to set this country back decades 
because we will not have the tools available to develop 
ourselves as we know we can. 
 
The newspapers, Mr. Speaker, are full of editorials and articles 
saying that we are now in jeopardy of losing  losing to other 
countries, losing to other trading blocs, and indeed pitting 
province against province to try and sort our way out of this 
mess. 
 
I see in today's paper where the potash people are looking to 
market their potash out of the American port of Portland 
because they have no faith in the transportation system in 
western Canada  a transportation system that I say to you is 
not going to be rationally modernized and the savings passed on 
to the producers of the various commodities in this country, but 
one which will now be chipped away at in a haphazard manner. 
 
And instead of curing the problem, which a payment of some 
$7.2 billion over five to ten years would have done, we are now 
going to have probably wholesale abandonment taking place. 
We will have grain companies picking the spots instead of 
producers, and we will have our railroads simply passing on 
exorbitant fees to the grain and oil-seed producers of western 
Canada. 
 
And it is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, when others contemplate 
following the lead of the potash producers in this country. And 
we know that coal, sulphur, all of the bulk commodities, are 
going to have to look outside of Canada in order to do what 
they need to do to diversify and grow. 
 
We are faced with the fact today, Mr. Speaker, as we speak, that 
there are some 3,200 railway, CP Railway workers, now in a 
strike lockout position. And I wouldn't want anyone in this 
Assembly to say that we lay the blame entirely at the feet of the 
railway unions. These are working men and women who have 
been without a contract in some cases for 18 months, and that is 
simply unacceptable. 
 
This is, I am told, the fourteenth work stoppage in our 
transportation system in the last 15 years or so. Something is 
fundamentally wrong, Mr. Speaker, when we have this happen 
time and time again, and provinces like Saskatchewan, that are 
wholly dependent on the export of goods and materials for their 
very livelihood, are blocked at every opportunity because we pit 
the agriculture producer, the potash producer, and others, 
against other people in our society. 
 
(1630) 
 
I believe at this time the only short-term solution to the problem 
at hand is that we are probably going to have to have federal  

legislation put in place so that we can get past this work 
stoppage. And then hopefully, Mr. Speaker, this federal Liberal 
government will start to listen to reason and provide the tools 
necessary so that this doesn't happen again. 
 
We also see a massive offloading occurring on western Canada 
in other areas. My motion talks about health care. And it's been 
bad enough to be a rural person in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
with what's transpired in the last few years, with the closing of 
our acute care institutions and a lot of our long-term care 
facilities  to have on top of that the federal Liberal 
government offloading $7 billion in cuts onto the very people 
who are absolutely desperate at times in searching out for their 
health requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $1.6 billion paid out in some form to the 
producers of western Canada will not offset one year's 
transportation requirements. And the government, the federal 
government, simply throws out the figure of 1.6 and they don't 
tell us if it's going to be paid to the landowner, if it's going to be 
paid to the producer. Is it going to be paid on cultivated acres or 
is it going to be paid on summerfallow acres? They have simply 
said to the producers in this province and other provinces: go 
out and sow the crop and trust us to come up with a solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely unacceptable. And the responses 
that I've had from the provincial Minister of Agriculture to date 
in this legislature have also been unacceptable. When you think 
that this province has over half the farm land in Canada, you 
would have thought there might have been some thinking going 
on inside this government as to what would be their preferred 
solution if the method of payment ever changed. 
 
And there have been warning signals coming all through the 
winter months in this province, Mr. Speaker. Warning signals 
that should have been apparent to the provincial government 
and that they be prepared to implement a plan that would allow 
our producers the best options. To date that hasn't come 
forward. 
 
So I'm urging in this motion, Mr. Speaker, I'm urging, and 
would be happy to join with the provincial government in 
presenting to the federal Liberal government, a united front 
with options that are acceptable to the people of this province, 
and indeed I believe will be acceptable to western Canadians 
because we are not only the ones with the most to lose, but the 
ones with the most to offer in providing solutions. 
 
And I say to the members of the New Democratic Party 
government here today that it is time to put some of your past 
thinking away. I was very pleased when the Minister of 
Agriculture in debate on his estimates the other day said that he 
would not necessarily be opposed to unlimited running rights in 
the western Canadian rail network. Mr. Speaker, that is a 
tremendous jump, leap of faith, for a New Democrat to take. 
 
And I also say to the people that the men and women that work 
in the rail business in this country, if you don't want to see 
6,000 miles of branch lines and your jobs that go with those  



March 14, 1995 

 
863 

6,000 miles of branch lines disappear in very short order, then 
we had better come up with some ideas and some solutions 
that'll keep some of that steel and ties and roadbed in operation, 
servicing the growing industries and diversification of rural 
Saskatchewan, or your jobs will be gone. Because if that 6,000 
miles disappears and we are down to the main lines and a few 
select branch lines, I can tell you that those jobs are gone. And 
they are gone forever. Because once the steel is gone, those 
railways — I say to you, Mr. Speaker — will never be rebuilt. 
 
So it is time that members of this House and members of the 
various farm organizations and political parties start to put on 
their thinking cap about the ways that we can present a united 
front to the federal government because the next 18 months will 
be absolutely crucial to the make up and social fabric of this 
province and how our future will look for decades to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is only the first federal budget in a long series 
of budgets, I believe, which are going to be aimed directly at 
western Canada. And why do I say that? I say that because there 
are 99 Liberal Members of Parliament in the province of 
Ontario, and there is a Liberal Prime Minister from the province 
of Quebec, and history tells me that the Liberal Party nationally 
wants to retake the province of Quebec because they have 
always been able to govern this country when they've had 
Quebec and Ontario basically behind them. 
 
And western Canada, Mr. Speaker, has felt the impact of that 
type of government for decades, for absolute decades. I mean, 
one of the reasons that the CCF Party, forerunner to the NDP, 
rose in this province, Mr. Speaker, is because of the fact that 
that domination of eastern Canada over the rest of the regions 
and companies like CP Rail drove western Canadian people to 
desperation. 
 
And I say to the members of the NDP, if we think of solutions 
which are not just unique to this province but solutions which 
are applicable to western Canada as a whole, then people of all 
political stripes — whether they be Reformers, NDP, 
Conservatives — can have the opportunity to say to the federal 
government, we won't take any more of this; there has to be 
fairness in how you apply debt and deficit reduction in the 
country of Canada, and you simply cannot pick on one 
particular region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was almost heartening to see former Liberal 
Finance ministers on television a few weeks ago talk about 
some of the past programs which have been utter failures in 
building a national fabric. You know, when you think about the 
national energy program and what it did to this country by 
setting back our ability to coexist with all of our trading 
partners in the world today, you understand that they know the 
problem; they simply don't have the political courage to solve it. 
 
Never again, Mr. Speaker, should we have those types of 
programs imposed upon western Canada. I'm glad to see the 
minister responsible for Fisheries in this country stand up and 
defend the east coast fishery. It's about high time that we  

asserted some sovereignty over a national resource. But by the 
same token we should not stand by, Mr. Speaker, and see that 
same government use western Canada as a way to solve their 
national problems. 
 
So I say to the members of the New Democratic Party, when we 
vote on this motion a little later today, it's time to show a united 
front to the people in Ottawa. It's time to say to the Liberals that 
you're not going to short-change us, that we aren't going to take 
it lying down. And it's also time for all of to say there has to be 
a better way. There has to be a better way to solve our national 
transportation problems instead of pitting citizen against citizen 
and in the end losing all of it to ports and railways in the United 
States of America. 
 
That doesn't solve anything. It doesn't keep one job in this 
province. It doesn't keep one job in western Canada, and it 
doesn't keep one job in Canada. It loses taxpayers to help pay 
down the deficit. All of those jobs that are going to follow 
potash to Portland should be in the country of Canada. 
 
Are Canadians so stupid that they cannot be competitive, that 
they don't realize what can be lost? I don't believe so. I don't 
believe, whether it's the farmer in my home district or my 
friends that work for the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) in 
Moose Jaw . . . are so stupid that we would let this slip away. 
What we need to have is a federal national government that has 
a national transportation policy in place, that allows those 
people to work together instead of being pitted against one 
another, Mr. Speaker, at each and every opportunity. 
 
And that means that political parties in this province and in 
other provinces are going to have to smarten up and not simply 
pander to special interest groups as we have done in the past. 
And whether that be large multinationals or trade unions, the 
pandering has to stop because it is doing nothing, absolutely 
nothing, to do the kind of problem solving that we need. 
 
You know it is going to be an awful bleak picture out there, Mr. 
Speaker, in the rural parts of this province if the worst-case 
scenario happens. There isn't one of us who sits in this 
Assembly today that represents a rural riding that knows parts 
of that riding that will become almost uninhabitable if you don't 
have a few basic services available. 
 
What in the world is the point of gambling every year on 
growing a crop if you have no sure way of turning that crop into 
cash and marketing successfully so that you can continue on 
another year? 
 
I don't know about the rest of the farmers in this legislature, but 
I can tell you that it only takes about one bad year now on my 
farm to put a lot of things in jeopardy. It used to be that you 
could weather two or three or four, that the vagaries of climate 
and markets . . . and you were able to get by it. You could live 
off your depreciation. There was perhaps family members that 
were there with you. But today the costs are such that you get 
one bad year — and I don't care how much money you thought 
you had — you are at risk. 



March 14, 1995 

 
864 

And we have falling land values because of what has transpired 
with the Crow, and we are going to have communities lose the 
major tax base associated with railroads, grain elevators, and 
the corresponding services that rural people used because that 
rail line was there. Those things are all now in question. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, by moving a motion such as this, I believe we 
have the opportunity as a Legislative Assembly to put our 
thinking hats on, to think about ways of solving problems that 
have never been possible before because we all had our own 
cosy little niche to fit into. Well, ladies and gentlemen, the cosy 
little niche disappeared on federal budget day. Jean Chrétien 
and the federal Liberals said, you are not important enough in 
this country to have that cosy little niche there any more. 
 
Well I don't accept it. I want to stand on my own two feet. But I 
also want to prove to Mr. Chrétien and his eastern-based party 
that we're strong enough, that we're resilient enough, and we're 
smart enough to present them an alternative that they can't 
refuse; and if they wish to persevere, that we'll make it 
politically untenable for them to continue on in the way that 
they're doing. 
 
(1645) 
 
And that has to be the message that's sent, Mr. Speaker. And 
that's why I think this motion, sent by this House, to the federal 
government would strengthen the hand of the producers of 
western Canada in their fight to survive in 1995. 
 
And I would read it into the record once more. This is seconded 
. . . moved by myself, seconded by the member from Morse: 
 
 That this Assembly urge the provincial government to 

press the federal government for fairness to western 
Canadian people in light of the federal government's 
minimal pay-out of the Crow benefit, $7 billion in cuts 
to health care, and failing to defend western Canadian 
producers against railway strikes that are hindering the 
transportation of grain to export and therefore 
significantly increasing costs to producers to transport 
their grain. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like 
to join in this debate rather briefly. And at the conclusion of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, I'll be moving an amendment to the 
motion, and the amendment will be: 
 
 That the words "and lockouts" be added after the words 

"against railway strikes". 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to compliment my colleague from 
Thunder Creek on this motion, for I think we all in the House 
here fundamentally agree with the principle of his motion. And 
I think that there's absolutely no doubt at all that the federal 
government, the present federal government in Ottawa, has 
taken some very negative budgetary moves towards the future  

and economic viability of many of agricultural producers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It's almost, Mr. Speaker, as if western Canada and farmers in 
Saskatchewan have been picked out as the whipping boy for the 
federal government to balance their budget on. And that's truly 
sad, Mr. Speaker. Because as my colleague has already 
mentioned, the effects on Saskatchewan and on farm families in 
Saskatchewan as a result of the federal budget and the 
elimination of the Crow benefit will be very devastating — 
without a doubt. 
 
And the overall concern here, Mr. Speaker, is the lack of 
fairness in the federal budget, the lack of fairness as a result of 
that federal budget. I think we all agree as Canadians — and I 
know my farmers in my constituency will be the first to agree 
— that we have to get our financial house in order in this 
country in order to maintain the quality of life that we've 
experienced in the past, and the quality of living. And we want 
that, Mr. Speaker, not only for ourselves, we want that for our 
children and for our grandchildren. And the farmers in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, are prepared to do their share, pay 
their fair price, and join in with all Canadians in addressing the 
financial situation of this country. 
 
But there's a general feeling, Mr. Speaker, throughout my 
constituency and particularly with my farm families, that this 
federal budget is not fair. This federal approach to deficit 
reduction is not fair. And what saddens them even more so, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that what they're seeing happen to the Crow 
rate benefit and to their rural way of life, they're seeing a federal 
Liberal government completing the moves that was started by 
the former Mulroney Conservative government in Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is saddening — saddening to have to be 
here this afternoon and debating this issue, saddening because 
what we will see as a result  soon after August 1  as a 
result of the elimination of the Crow rate benefits, we will see 
some dramatic changes to the trading patterns within our 
province, we will see some dramatic changes and that dramatic 
effects on our towns, our cities and our villages. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all realize that change, change is 
something that comes. And usually change means progress, and 
change is all right if it's planned. But, Mr. Speaker, it's obvious 
that the federal government, through their budget, has had no 
plan — no plan for rural Saskatchewan, no plan for the change 
to the Crow rate benefit, no plans for transportation, and no 
plans for our farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has become very obvious the way they 
suggest that they will assist farm families in making this 
transition with $1.6 billion one-time pay-out — which, Mr. 
Speaker, actually will end up in the landowners' hands and not 
in the hands of the actual farmers out there. Many of these 
landowners, Mr. Speaker, much of the land is owned not by the 
farmers that are operating it, but they lease that land. In a lot of 
cases they're leasing it from financial institutions. 



March 14, 1995 

 
865 

So ultimately, Mr. Speaker, that money ends up back in the 
hands of the banks and not in the hands of the farmers who are 
being impacted upon by the changes to the Crown rate benefit. 
 
That further saddens me, Mr. Speaker, because as we all know, 
the agriculture industry has been under some financial stress 
over the last number of years. And in a lot of these cases, Mr. 
Speaker, in a lot of cases of many farm families out there, this 
particular move by the federal government will mean the end of 
their agricultural career; will mean the end of their agricultural 
business; will mean the end of their ability to make a living on 
the farm; will mean the end of their ability to stay in that 
community, and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, in a lot of 
communities it will mean the end of the community. 
 
It's sad, Mr. Speaker, because there has been no plan to handle 
this situation. We all agree that change is about and agriculture 
is going through its own change, and with the expansion of the 
agricultural markets globally and the impact that global 
marketing has on agriculture, change is inevitable. 
 
And as I said earlier, there's nothing wrong with change when 
there's a planned system of having it to make the transitions, to 
make the system flow, to make it humanistic. But this certainly 
doesn't, Mr. Speaker. In fact what we will see in my 
constituency alone — we will see a number of farmers who I 
believe that by this spring, certainly by this fall, will likely no 
longer be able to pursue their agricultural career. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, we have a federal Liberal Agriculture 
minister who was an MLA in this House a number of years 
back. And if I can quote from Hansard of August 24, 1987, Mr. 
Goodale at that time suggested that what was needed was a 
strong and fully functional rail system to serve our grain and 
potash producers or they're in big trouble. That's when he was 
an MLA in 1987 in this legislature. 
 
Today, as federal Minister of Agriculture, he has eliminated the 
Crow rate benefit, putting many farmers into a financial 
tailspin. And he has also put the CNR (Canadian National 
Railway) on the auction block, eliminating our own nationally 
owned rail system, which would ensure our ability to move our 
product, ensure our ability to move our product to market. 
 
And when I say our product, Mr. Speaker, I don't only mean 
potash and grain, which are probably the two most important. 
 
But there is a number of other products such as, in my 
constituency, forestry. I've had the occasion more than once 
making my way down to Regina here having to wait for the 
train at the Canora crossing, and while there, I've seen countless 
numbers of rail cars loaded with lumber going to export. There's 
just a humongous amount of products moved in and out of this 
province by rail. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, our federal Agriculture minister has 
certainly turned his back on us and, if nothing else, I would say 
betrayed us as has the Liberal federal government. They have 
betrayed Saskatchewan, betrayed rural Saskatchewan in  

particular, and I would say held at hostage the Saskatchewan 
farmer. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an 
amendment to my colleague's motion, seconded by my 
colleague from Melville, and I will read it one more time, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 
 That the words "and lockout" be added after the words 

"against railway strikes". 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:57 p.m. until 4:59 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Lingenfelter Shillington Johnson 
Kowalsky Penner Hagel 
Bradley Teichrob Pringle 
Cline Hamilton Sonntag 
Flavel Langford Scott 
Stanger Harper Keeping 
Carlson Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen Britton 

— 24 
Nays 

— Nil 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I would 
move a motion that we send the motion, along with the 
speeches delivered here in the House today, to the Minister of 
Agriculture in Ottawa, by leave, and with the votes. 
 
And by leave, I would move that motion now. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Transmittal Motion 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I will just read the 
motion as it's now structured, but moved and seconded by the 
member from Morse, by leave: 
 
 Be it resolved that the debate, transcript, and vote of 

rule 16 motion and the private member motion no. 2 be 
forwarded to the federal Minister of Agriculture and the 
Clerk of the House of Commons. 

 
I so move. 



March 14, 1995 

 
866 

The division bells rang from 5:05 p.m. until 5:06 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Lingenfelter Shillington Johnson 
Kowalsky Penner Hagel 
Bradley Teichrob Pringle 
Cline Hamilton Flavel 
Langford Scott Stanger 
Harper Keeping Carlson 
Neudorf Martens Goohsen 
Britton McPherson  

— 23 
Nays 

— Nil 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Government House 
Leader, the motion does not indicate this, but I assumed you 
meant sent by the Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, indeed. 
 
The Speaker: — All right. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 p.m. 
 
 


