
























































May 9, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 9, 1995 

 

 
2083 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from the Gull Lake 
and Maple Creek areas. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
programs towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petition has 
been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 
allocate adequate funding dedicated toward 
double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to draw your attention and that of the members to a group 
that is seated in your gallery. It's a group of 28 grade 11 
students in the native studies exchange program. They're at 
Balfour Collegiate, but I think all or most are from Sandy Bay 
School. And I think that the member for Cumberland may also 
want to add some words to this later. 
 
They're accompanied by their teachers, Ruth Robillard, Ina 
Fietz Ray, and chaperons Paul Walker, Brenda and Michelle 
Bear. 
 
I know that I and certainly the member for Cumberland look 
forward to meeting with this group later on. And we ask all the 
members to make them feel very welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, along with my colleague, I'd 
like to express words of welcome to the students from both 
Balfour Collegiate and Sandy Bay. I know last year, Mr.  

Speaker, the students from Balfour took a trip to Sandy Bay and 
they had an extensive coverage on the Leader-Post. I think it 
was a tremendous experience. And now the exchange, you 
know, has come back to Regina. And I think it is going to be 
not only a success, I think it'll be a tremendous building of 
relationships. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say this in Cree. I would like to say 
that the word for welcome in Cree is Tawow. And so to the 
students, I would like to say Tawow, and hopefully I'll be 
meeting with them later for a discussion. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 85 grade 11 and 12 students from Vanier Collegiate 
in Moose Jaw, who are seated in the west gallery. That's the 
gallery closest to Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of interest too, members may recall that when Vanier 
Collegiate students have visited us in the past, I pointed out that 
they've had a very nice practice over the years, that several of 
the grade 12 classes, as part of their social studies curriculum, 
have had a citizenship reaffirmation, and one of the things that's 
always been a special pleasure to attend. 
 
These students are accompanied today by teachers Ruth 
Schneider, and Nicole Cross, Janie Fries, and Lynn Andreoni. 
And we will be meeting at about 2:15 for a visit, refreshments, 
and photos to follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming them 
here and wishing them all a most enjoyable summer after the 
school year has come to an end. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and to all 
members of the Assembly, Ben Bonsan, the student union 
president at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) Woodland Institute in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Bonsan was recently selected 1995 winner of the 
prestigious national student leadership award. As winner of this 
association of community colleges award, his effective 
leadership at Woodland Institute has now been recognized all 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all members will want to welcome Mr. 
Bonsan here today, and I understand that he is joined by Rob 
Crittenden and John Jordan. So I'd ask everyone to 
acknowledge and congratulate him on this notable 
Saskatchewan achievement. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 9, 1995 

 
2084 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

SIAST Awards 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education 
spoke of Mr. Ben Bonsan from SIAST, Prince Albert, and 
mentioned his prestigious award. In addition to joining her in 
congratulating him, I want to announce to members that SIAST 
has received another award, this one for the Wascana Institute 
in Regina. Wascana Institute is the 1995 winner of the Program 
Excellence Award for its advanced clinical nursing program. 
 
Both awards are given by the Association of Canadian 
Community Colleges to recognize outstanding achievement. 
This national recognition speaks very well for the excellence of 
SIAST staff and programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the award for program excellence is especially 
gratifying because it recognizes the advanced clinical nursing 
program as an innovative distance education program that 
equips registered nurses with additional skills needed to meet 
the changing health concerns of Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the linchpin of economic development, of artistic 
creation, and of modern health care, is education. In 
Saskatchewan we have a proud tradition of innovative teaching, 
and I'm proud to see this tradition continue in my city and in my 
constituency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Development Museum and 
New Careers Partnership 

 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 
give another example of how government and non-profit 
organizations are working together in a sincere effort to create 
jobs. It involves a partnership between the New Careers 
Corporation and the Western Development Museum in North 
Battleford which will create on-the-job training opportunities 
for people on social assistance. The new employees at the 
museum began their first project just over a week ago. They are 
rebuilding a visitor train that will be used to transport people 
around the museum grounds throughout the summer. 
 
The Western Development Museum is an important tourist 
attraction in the city of North Battleford, and this project will 
not only benefit the employees but will benefit the museum and 
the community. 
 
The support of New Careers employment programs over the 
past 10 years has played an important part in the operation and 
expansion of the museum. New Careers recently approved the 
community employment project which will train 15 people over 
20 weeks in clerical work, housekeeping, construction, and 
maintenance. 
 
This year an agreement between the museum, New Careers, and 
Prairie Employment, includes job search skills training to help  

people find permanent jobs. The museum will work with local 
businesses and community organizations to find employment 
opportunities. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to congratulate all the 
people involved in this program. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CP Rail Yards Expansion 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure yesterday 
morning to be riding a train with the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow and the Minister of Economic Development for the 
announcement of some very good news for Moose Jaw and for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
CP (Canadian Pacific) Rail Systems announced it'll be 
double-tracking its main line from Pasqua into Moose Jaw and 
also expanding its diesel locomotive maintenance program in 
Moose Jaw. The double-tracking project, costing $3.7 million, 
will create 30,000 person-days of employment in addition to 
increasing demand for construction materials which means 
more jobs. 
 
The project, Mr. Speaker, will result in operating efficiencies 
which will reduce travel time for freight trains and speed the 
movement of Saskatchewan grain, potash, coal, and other 
products to markets in central Canada and the U.S. (United 
States). 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because much of CP's traffic is in the west 
and because Moose Jaw is a key centre, it makes sense that the 
expanded locomotive maintenance program be located there. 
Fifty new jobs will result in the next five years with perhaps 50 
more over the next decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, among its many other fine attributes, Moose Jaw 
has always been a railroad town. We have a long and proud 
association with this vital part of Saskatchewan life. We're 
delighted with this announcement and the promise of the 
economic activity it brings to our city and to our province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environmental Technology Commercialization 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, more 
good news about jobs. This time, it's also positively enhancing 
the environment. Last week our government announced funding 
of $75,000 for the Canadian Environmental Technology 
Advancement Corporation, or CETAC. 
 
CETAC, Mr. Speaker, is the industry non-profit corporation 
designed to deliver services and programs to develop western 
Canada's environmental industry. It specifically focuses on 
helping firms to finance, develop, and commercialize 
environmental technologies. 
 
Currently in Saskatchewan, there are 72 companies with  



May 9, 1995 

 
2085 

environmental expertise that could benefit from CETAC. Like 
many government projects, Mr. Speaker, this one is a result of 
cooperation. The four western governments worked together to 
produce a study that showed how the environmental industry is 
one of the fastest growing sectors in the western Canadian 
economy. 
 
In Saskatchewan alone, it is estimated that the industry could 
potentially generate $175 million and employ 2,000 workers. 
This makes a small investment of $75,000 extremely 
worthwhile. I want to congratulate CETAC and wish them the 
best of luck. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Macs Compete in Canadian 
Volleyball Championship 

 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
want to mention an exciting example of cross-border and 
cross-town teamwork that is taking place in Yorkton and area. 
 
The Yorkton Macs, a junior boys' volleyball team of 12 players 
of grade 11 and 12, are off to Charlottetown, Prince Edward 
Island, this weekend. And there they will be competing with 12 
other teams for the national championship of the Canadian 
Volleyball Association. They are one of two teams from 
Saskatchewan that will be there. 
 
As I mentioned, the team is a cross-border one because 10 of 
the players are from Yorkton, one is from Canora, and one is 
from Roblin, Manitoba, as well as two of the coaches — Mr. 
Tom Gulak is from Roblin; and from Yorkton, Mr. Dave Baron, 
who is a teacher and a long-time coach at the Yorkton high 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the Yorkton Macs will be representing 
our province well and I am pleased that they are getting to show 
their talents in a part of the country that many of us don't often 
get a chance to visit. 
 
So with that, I wish them well. May they leap high, spike hard, 
and defend vigorously our championship. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Chelation Therapy 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you are 
aware, we've been raising questions to the Premier from 
constituents across the province for the past number of weeks, 
and again we'd like to raise a number of questions that were 
brought to our attention and sent to our office. 
 
And I'd like to begin by asking this question. It comes from 
Doreen Roberts from Govan: Mr. Premier, I want to know why  

I have to travel to another province or state to receive chelation 
therapy. I spent quite a lot of money outside this province and I 
know several others who have done the same. It seems the 
doctors in Saskatchewan do not want us to try to bypass the 
bypass. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to the member and to the 
question. I have received a great deal of correspondence on this 
and have had discussion with many MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) and many individuals across the 
province on the subject of chelation. 
 
As the member does know, chelation is not approved by the 
medical community in Saskatchewan. Nor is the drug therapy 
approved nationally. However, Mr. Speaker, we are working 
with those who have experienced the chelation therapy in the 
province. We are now in discussions, with a study that's being 
held in Calgary, to see if we might participate in that study to 
bring some validity to the procedure, and so we're proceeding 
on a careful but a considered path. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial 90th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Toth: — This question, Mr. Speaker, comes from Alvey 
Clark from Moosomin. Mr. Premier, I want to know why you 
are spending a million dollars on 90th anniversary celebrations. 
This million dollars should have been spent to keep more rural 
hospitals open. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member opposite, and through him to the individual who 
wrote the letter, that the monies being put forward to celebrate 
Saskatchewan's 90th celebration is basically being used to help 
municipalities and organizations and other groups who are 
endeavouring to sponsor events. And so common stationery is 
being provided and services like that. So there is no huge 
birthday party that members of the opposition might want to try 
to promote. 
 
This is a cause for celebration, the 90th birthday of a province. I 
think it's important for the people of Saskatchewan, in terms of 
setting the psychology, for many, many reasons. But I can tell 
you very clearly that the money is being used very, very 
appropriately by organizations and groups who want to support 
their communities during this period of celebration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question comes 
from John Yanchuk from Arran. Mr. Premier, I want to know 
how you could possibly justify charging the Saskatchewan 
residents 9 per cent sales tax when to the east of us Manitoba 
residents pay 7 per cent; and to the west of us, Alberta residents 
pay no sales tax. This sure is good for the retail business in 
Saskatchewan, isn't it? 



May 9, 1995 

 
2086 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, what the member 
knows, the member from Morse knows, I'm sure — perhaps the 
writer does not, but in any event it should be said  in 
Manitoba the percentage of the sales tax covers a lot more items 
than in Saskatchewan, therefore the sums of money which are 
taken in from Manitoba and the tax base is much more broad. In 
the Alberta situation, of course, this has been a long-standing 
problem. It was when you were in government and remains the 
situation currently with us. 
 
We are committed to lowering taxes in a way which is 
sustainable. That is to say, when and if we announce a tax 
reduction, it will be here not only for the election period, but it 
will be here for the election period and after the election period 
and for the people of Saskatchewan. We are, after all, just 
turning the corner and getting ourselves out of the mess of the 
huge debt and deficit which was left behind after nine years of 
the Tory administration. 
 

GRIP Premiums 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
comes from Kelly Mrack from Delisle. Mr. Premier, I want to 
know where is my money from GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program). The money I paid into this program should be 
refunded, not used for the deficit. To pay out 26 or $27 million 
is a far cry from the total amount you have of this program's 
money. Mr. Mrack then ends up his question with an 
unparliamentary phrase that means you have undermined the 
farmer again, just like always. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the chance 
to one more time explain the GRIP surplus situation. While the 
writer may not know, certainly the members opposite have 
heard this explanation several times. The GRIP surplus was 
divided up on the same basis that all tripartite programs are 
divided up. The farmers get back their full $253 million, which 
was their share of the GRIP surplus, based on their contribution 
to the surplus. 
 
The provincial government takes back their share, of which we 
spent over 70 per cent, over $130 million, that went back into 
agricultural programing. I think the members opposite need to 
remember that we got that premium by borrowing the money in 
New York, and to put some small portion of it back to pay 
down the debt because grain prices went up seems to me to be a 
fair way to deal with farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Post-secondary Education Funding 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a question 
for the Premier. This question comes from Mr. Russ Jackson 
from Plato. Mr. Premier, I want to know if the province will 
help university students more if federal funding is cut and 
tuition fees double, or worse. Student loans already take 15 to 
30 years to pay off without more being heaped on. 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think Mr. Jackson has 
put his finger on a very important issue — and that is the 
proposed dramatic and negative change in funding for 
post-secondary education proposed by the federal Liberals and 
presumably supported by the provincial Liberals. 
 
This program will cost Saskatchewan people something in the 
order of $100 million and it'll mean that for an average student 
going to, say, a four-year course at the University of 
Saskatchewan, that student is likely to end up with a debt of 
$60,000, meaning that the first big mortgage is on education 
and not on the house. This is a very bad principle, because in 
Canada we have built this nation on the principle of 
intergenerational transfers and community sharing. 
 
If we force the young people to accept the principle that they 
must pay as they go for their university education, then we 
ought not to be surprised if the young people turn around when 
they get the job market and say to the seniors: ah hah, I had to 
pay as I went; now you pay as you go. And this is the 
Americanization of the education system and the health care 
system and I totally object to this Liberal initiative. I hope the 
member opposite does too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Benefits for Part-time Employees 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 
comes from Dana Ewashko from Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know how you expect the small-business 
man to provide health and dental benefits to the part-time 
employees of Saskatchewan. This sounds great in theory; 
however many full-time staff will lose their benefits because the 
employers feel that the costs are just too high to continue the 
group benefits package. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'd like to thank the member for writing 
in the question that's in place by the member from Maple Creek. 
 
It certainly is a great deal of misinformation there about 
benefits to part-time workers. Saskatchewan is the only 
jurisdiction in Canada that's made some progress in working 
towards a system whereby part-time workers can attain benefits 
from their employer. 
 
We do not believe that the cost is unaffordable. There are not 
very many people who will qualify for the benefit, but it is a 
start. We think that if the members opposite will give the 
chance to let the system work, that all people who work and do 
good diligence for their employers will in fact be able to receive 
benefits for the employment. 
 
We think it's a benefit not only to the employees but to the 
employers of the province, and I think that the fruit will be 
borne out if you let the system develop. We intend as a 
government to work with employers to ensure that it's not an  



May 9, 1995 

 
2087 

unrealistic burden on them. That work is started and we'll 
continue that work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
have a question for the Premier. And I trust that your selectivity 
in choosing as to which questions to answer will extend to this 
one as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member knows that 
comment is out of order and I wish he'd just put his question 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the member doesn't want to 
ask a question, I'll call on another member. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Premier, this letter . . . or this question 
comes from Adolph Nelson from Weyburn: Mr. Premier, I want 
to know why you are so intent on ruining this once beautiful 
province of Saskatchewan by allowing casinos and video lottery 
terminals to invade our province. Is there nothing more 
important to you than money? Does it not bother you that 
countless lives are ruined, homes are broken, and hundreds of 
children are suffering because of your wanton actions? 
 
Mr. Premier, will you select to answer this question? Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think most members of 
the Assembly, if they had the full option available to them, 
would not accept the notion that gambling is a cause or purpose 
that we would want to advance. That's my position. That's the 
position, I'm sure, of many people. 
 
But the reality is that in Conservative Manitoba, in 
Conservative Alberta, in the United States immediately south of 
us, all of the hoteliers in the areas of the South, the reality is it's 
here. The question therefore comes, what do we do? 
 
And what we have to do is we have to make sure that it's open, 
accountable, honest, limited — limited — regulated; that the 
revenues are dispersed back to the communities, that there are 
education programs and prevention programs — by the way, 
our $1.5 million on the gambling addictions is the best of any 
province in Canada to regulate this circumstance. The truth of 
the matter is, if you were in government you would have been 
forced in the same situation. The Liberals would have been. 
And we are, I think, doing the very best that can be done. The 
people would trust us in this circumstance sooner than they 
would you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
few more questions for the minister of gambling. Madam 
Minister, a few weeks ago we heard that the mayor of La Ronge 
was thinking of holding a plebiscite to ban your VLTs (video 
lottery terminal) in that community. You said at that time that  

the mayor was acting on his own and didn't speak for the whole 
community. 
 
Last night, Madam Minister, the community held a public 
meeting on this issue. And as it turned out the majority 
favoured holding a vote to send your government the message 
they don't want VLTs in their town. 
 
Madam Minister, the mayor of La Ronge will be making a 
decision on this vote by the end of the week. Will you honour 
the results of the vote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I understand there was 
a meeting in La Ronge last night and some debate on the issue 
of VLTs. The member will well know that the whole issue of 
VLTs and the placement in communities around the province 
came as a result of the influx of VLTs on the border 
communities of Manitoba, south of us in North Dakota, also in 
Alberta. 
 
And there is a great deal of pressure obviously to have gaming 
policies in western Canada that conform to a certain standard or 
level. And the members opposite will know — particularly the 
members of the Liberal caucus, some of them more involved in 
gaming and attending casinos more than others — will know 
that in order to keep people coming to our province to gamble, 
because there is a big demand . . . And I say this as Minister of 
Tourism: when we look at bus tours of seniors going across 
Canada, across western United States, those communities that 
don't offer a gaming venue are missed by those bus tours. 
 
So it's not only allowing people who want to game in our 
province to have that option, just as people who want to are 
allowed to buy alcohol or cigarettes. Our job here is not to 
exclude that option but to regulate, control, and license. 
 
Now you people opposite may say, if we're elected, we're going 
to involve ourselves in everyone's life, we're going to go in and 
check their liquor cabinet, we're going to do this and we're 
going to do that. That is not our approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you may have made the choice to 
introduce VLTs. People want to have the choice as to whether 
they introduce them to their community. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, or, Mr. Minister, whoever wants to 
answer the question, one of the people who spoke in favour of a 
vote is a worker at the family crisis centre. She said she gets a 
lot of calls from people with gambling addictions and that it's 
easy to become addicted to the machines. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of La Ronge know the damage your 
expanded gambling policies are causing their community and 
they are asking for the right to make a decision regarding their 
own town. In fact, Mr. Minister, that's what most Saskatchewan 
people want: the right to pass judgement on your gambling 
expansion policies. 



May 9, 1995 

 
2088 

Madam Minister, or, Mr. Minister, or, Mr. Premier, will you 
give them that right? Will you hold a vote on your gambling 
policies in conjunction with the upcoming provincial election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what the members are 
offering here to the public of Saskatchewan is absolutely 
ludicrous. This has been tried in days gone by with local 
options for liquor sales. And the reason it was turfed out, 
because it doesn't work. 
 
In the community area of La Ronge you have two other 
communities. If they choose the option of having liquor in one 
town and not in the other, it doesn't stop or hinder people who 
want to go out and use that venue of entertainment. They simply 
go to another community. 
 
This approach has been tried in the past, as it would relate to 
liquor and the sale of liquor in the community of Saskatchewan. 
It doesn't work. So why go back and try to repeat something that 
has already been tried and proven to be a faulty, administrative 
nightmare? 
 
I say to the members opposite that if you're saying to the 
government, that if you were the government again, that you 
would try to control those issues by excluding them from their 
lives so they didn't have the opportunity to make choices, I say 
to you that especially the Leader of the Liberal Party could learn 
by setting an example in what she does. 
 
There are many people who appreciate the opportunity to game 
and gamble. But the idea of today, standing and saying for 
political reasons, that if only we were back in government we 
would do something different than what you did while you were 
in government in expanding bingos, is not believable. Nor is it 
believable by the Leader of the Liberal Party, who lives quite a 
different standard, as it would come to gaming, as she preaches 
for other people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Newsletter 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The priorities 
being demonstrated by the Department of Health are appalling. 
At a time when funds are stretched to the limit just to provide 
basic health services and district health deficits keep growing, 
we see that health update newspapers are being sent out across 
the province. 
 
Like the brochure of two weeks ago, this eight-page newspaper 
which is showing up on people's doorsteps around the province 
. . . And this just a short month after Yorkton had 28 hospital 
beds closed and 10 health care positions eliminated. I'd like to 
table this newsletter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health. Why would you spend 
valuable health care dollars on an extravagant, two-colour  

newspaper just weeks after your department blanketed the 
province with another pre-election pamphlet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, across the province district 
health boards have conducted needs assessments. On the 
highest level identified in my own district, for instance, of 
Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek, was the need for information about 
the health care services available to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this most recent budget we have dramatically 
improved the range of services on community- and home-based 
services for the people of Saskatchewan. The information that is 
being provided to people at a very, very low cost is to provide 
that information that people desire and deserve. 
 
Now the question ought to be . . . the question ought to perhaps 
come from that member from Shaunavon. That's where the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have listened to the member 
from Shaunavon through this whole question period, and 
numerous times today you've been interfering. And I ask the 
member to please refrain from doing so. 
 
Order. Will the Government House Leader now please come to 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons we need 
to do this kind of information provision is because members of 
this legislature, particularly the member from Shaunavon, who 
are on the public purse, provides to at least his constituency a 
whole set of misinformation through his MLA newsletter. 
That's one of the reasons we have to do it. 
 
And point number two, Mr. Speaker, if that member and other 
members of the Liberal caucus want to communicate, they 
should communicate their position. Their position being the 
importation of a Texas-style audit — a Texas-style efficiency 
audit on health care services in Saskatchewan. That's what they 
should be communicating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, I think we now know how the 
government has managed, on one hand, to close 52 hospitals, 
close beds all across the province, and lay off hundreds of 
health care workers, while on the other hand they are spending 
more overall on health care reform than before the reforms. 
 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, it is this type of expenditure that 
demonstrates where this government's priorities on health care 
lie, and that is giving the good news about health care reform 
instead of delivering a good health care system. 
 
To the minister: given that you have an advertising budget of 
200,000-plus for this year, and we have now seen a newspaper 
and a brochure delivered across the province, can you tell us  



May 9, 1995 

 
2089 

how much the production and distribution of this newspaper 
cost taxpayers, and how much of the advertising budget has 
been used up in the first six weeks of the fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the member raises 
an important question. This publication has a total expense of 
about $86,000 — approximately $86,000 to provide 
information to every household in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now maybe she can answer on behalf of her colleague who's 
sitting beside her, how much of the public tax dollar has he 
spent on this MLA communication which is full of 
misinformation — full of misinformation. 
 
Now again I say, if the Liberal caucus and members thereof 
wish to communicate to the . . . Mr. Speaker, perhaps the 
member from Shaunavon could listen for a moment; he may 
learn something. 
 
Now perhaps, Mr. Speaker, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if the Liberal 
caucus wants to communicate, they should communicate more 
fully around their plan, identified now in their platform 
document, that they are going to impose their efficiency 
standards. Not talking about care or quality of care, not 
compassion, but efficiency. They're going to bring into this 
province an army of auditors on a Texas model to reform our 
health care process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you every time — every time — the people 
of Saskatchewan will choose the Saskatchewan-made health 
care opposed to Liberal-American-made health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Apparently, Mr. Speaker, six pages of the 
newspaper was produced centrally with only the cover page 
made to look like it came from each local district. And it's 
promotional, Mr. Speaker. It's all promotional. 
 
We hear that the government has told their own experts that the 
opposition will accuse them of producing political propaganda 
at the expense of the taxpayer. And they're right. It's pretty 
blatant, Mr. Speaker. But apparently the government is willing 
to take the hit because they know that health care reform is a 
disaster in Saskatchewan, and they are desperate to do whatever 
they can to change the people's perception before the election. 
 
So they have taken the unprecedented step of delivering two 
major health care promotion pamphlets to people's doors just 
before an election. To the minister: how can you justify 
spending $122,000 to pay for political propaganda this close to 
an election, instead of putting that money to patient care and 
keeping health care workers employed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 
disaster. I'll tell you what's a disaster, and that's the fortunes of 
the Liberal Party. That's the coming disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that member from Shaunavon, member of  

that caucus representing the Liberal Party, takes tax dollars, 
puts it into his MLA report which is nothing but Liberal 
propaganda — not information — nothing but Liberal 
propaganda, and if they're going to do this, Mr. Speaker, then 
they should start telling the truth about what these folks are 
really about. 
 
Here's the headline in today's press, talking about their cousins 
in Alberta. What's the headline say? "Alberta Grits favour 
health cuts." Talking about Mr. Klein's style. 
 
On this bit of information that the member sent all over the 
constituency of Shaunavon, what do we see on the back page 
here? A nice picture of the member from Shaunavon seated 
with the Minister of Agriculture, federal. Oh, he's whispering in 
his ear. Now what's he whispering in the ear of the Minister of 
Agriculture, federal? Is he saying, carry on, cut the Crow? Is 
that what he's saying? 
 
Is he saying, Mr. Speaker, carry on, cut the payments to health 
and education across Canada? Is he saying, go to this social 
transfer concept that's going to threaten the very foundations of 
the Canada Health Act? Or is he saying, look, we've got a better 
idea; we're going to bring in the experts from Texas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Changes to Labour Standards 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, your 
government has done irreparable harm to the small-business 
environment throughout this province as a result of your high 
taxation, repressive labour laws, and the union preference 
tendering, and job creation is suffering in this province because 
of it. 
 
My questions to you today, Mr. Minister, centre on your 
government's unwillingness to inform small businesses of your 
ill-advised changes to The Labour Standards Act. Businesses 
have been contacting our office, scrambling for information on 
the changes that you have made, because you have left them in 
the dark. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's been several months since you forced this Bill 
through this very House. Why have you not sent out 
information to the thousands of Saskatchewan businesses that 
are affected by these regulations? Mr. Minister, could you 
answer that question for the business people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — In regard to the member's question 
about the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member is getting too 
much competition from his colleague on the other side of the 
House, and I wish she would quit interfering with the minister. 
 



May 9, 1995 

 
2090 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well competition is not necessarily 
always a bad thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to answer the member's question this way. The 
legislation . . . because of some of the misperceptions created 
by your particular party and by the Liberal Party in this House, 
caused this legislation to be controversial as it went through the 
legislature. The legislation finally passed. We had regulations 
that were developed. Those regulations, you continued to 
spread misinformation about some of those regulations. 
 
What we want to do is we want to ensure that there's a 
consultation process that continues with the employers of this 
province to make sure that they are able to in fact work in good 
faith and comply with the labour legislation that exists in 
Saskatchewan. Some of those consultations, Mr. Speaker, are 
taking place at the current time. 
 
In concert with this, the officials within the Department of 
Labour are drafting interpretive bulletins so both labour and 
business can understand exactly how the new legislation 
regulations will work, so that they can go together in harmony 
— employees and employer — to work to create jobs where the 
best place is, is within the private sector, to create jobs in 
working with their employees under the guidance of this 
government. We've done quite well. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Student Summer Employment Program 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to inform the House that we 
have enhanced the funding for Partnerships '95, the 
Saskatchewan student summer employment program, by $1 
million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this allows us to extend 
the application date for employers and students to May 24, 
1995. Response to the program has been absolutely 
overwhelming and tremendous. Employer interest has remained 
constant throughout the application period. We have 
applications on hand to create over 3,700 jobs. This is 1,700 
jobs over our original target of 2,000 and the enhanced funding 
will allow us to fund the eligible applications on hand. 
 
But we're also receiving inquiries from employers who wish to 
take advantage of the program, and given the popularity and the 
benefits of Partnership '95, we are strengthening our 
commitment to enable us to realize its full potential. 
 
Partnership jobs, Mr. Speaker, enable our students to earn 
money to pay for their education while they gain work 
experience and training — skills that will give them a leg up in 
the working world. And employers get the help that they need  

during the busy summer season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government prides itself on creating jobs for 
youth. This is demonstrated not only through the enhanced 
funding for Partnerships '95, but also through JobStart, our 
youth training initiative, which helps Saskatchewan young 
people between the ages of 17 and 25 get jobs right here, at 
home, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, both Partnerships '95 and 
JobStart give our youth the opportunity they need to gain work 
experience and skills training  experience which will benefit 
them throughout their working lives. 
 
The response to these programs is extremely gratifying to the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The people of our 
province can be proud to know that these fine programs give 
our Saskatchewan young people the opportunity to live, work, 
and build their futures, right here at home in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it appears 
that again we have another announcement — either an 
announcement a day or an announcement a minute. But while 
we can certainly compliment the government for the fact that 
they've maintained this program, I find it also interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, that all of a sudden we have an extension of the 
program. 
 
Now one would ask why the government didn't foresee that in 
the past, last year about this time when there were so many 
more applications than there were opportunities available and 
yet they didn't extend the program. They didn't extend it to more 
businesses. And the fact that they've done it at this time seems 
to be almost a little suspicious. 
 
Does it mean that there's another call, another announcement, 
going to come around the corner? Is it just to make sure that 
there are more people, enough people, that will get out there 
and support the government and vote for them in the next 
provincial election, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think it's important that we keep this in perspective, and if the 
minister wanted to raise this issue, it would have been 
appropriate if the minister would've mentioned this even a 
month ago and said that the . . . or even when they brought it 
forward the first time, indicate that due to our past experience, 
as we announced this program, we are going to expand it to 
maybe be 3,700 or 4,000 versus announcing 2,000, saving 
1,700 more positions for just prior to an election. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's important that people have the opportunity 
for job employment. I just find it a little interesting that it's 
announced just prior to what may be an imminent election call. 
Thank you. 



May 9, 1995 

 
2091 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with my 
colleague in some of his concern about the timing of this 
announcement. 
 
And I agree with the government — it's critically important that 
funding for summer jobs be part of government budgeting. And 
this is . . . they are finally raising their summer training budget 
to 1991 levels. And it would have been more appropriate to 
have announced it as the program was announced earlier this 
spring. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1415) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Health Care Reform in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure to begin this debate today with regard 
to basically the Americanization of our health care system. I'll 
move the motion at the end of my remarks. 
 
But I think it's very fitting that I can just hear the new Liberal 
theme song for the campaign. It goes something like this: all my 
experts live in Texas. With the Texas . . . putting the Texas test 
to Saskatchewan. I think the Liberal leader might want to do a 
Saskatchewan reality test instead of the Texas performance 
audit. 
 
Well I can see her going around the province singing that song. 
I hope she doesn't make any . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — In her limousine. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — In her limousine, as the member says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to do a little chronology. I want to do a 
little chronology, Mr. Speaker, of the build-up to the proposal 
by the Liberal leader on the Texas performance audit. And I 
want to start in 1991. 
 
In 1991, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader said, according to the 
Leader-Post: Haverstock said  and I'm quoting  a Liberal 
government would halt hospital construction projects and new 
small town hospitals for basic emergency treatment and 
recuperative and palliative care centres. 
 
Now that's what she said because that's the way health care was 
going, and that's what this government implemented in health 
reform. In 1991 the Leader of the Liberal Party also said, she 
suggested, hospitals should be run like charities. Now I'm not 
sure what that means, Mr. Speaker, running a hospital like a 
charity. 
 
And then we move along to October 1991, and the 
Star-Phoenix and I quote: that part of the party's policy — this  

is referring to the Leader of the Third Party — is to develop a 
network of health care and social services that is community 
and regionally based. Each community should have services 
tailored to meet its specific needs and capacities. 
 
Well if you review what health reform has done in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it has not only done that, it has 
gone further than that. It's with independent health needs study 
of each district. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, we flip over to March 1993 in the Moose 
Jaw Times-Herald. The Leader of the Third Party said health 
reform does have a potential. Now after she said a number of 
things that we've implemented and gone beyond what she said, 
she says, health reform does have a potential for a much larger 
bureaucracy and for a greater intrusion of politics into the 
system. Well now we see a little bit of a difference in the 
Liberal leader's opinions. 
 
But let's continue. A headline in the Star-Phoenix in 1992, Mr. 
Speaker: Prairie provinces should join forces. This is the Leader 
of the Third Party talking about the prairie provinces should be 
prepared to embark on economic joint ventures, Liberal leader 
urges. 
 
And I go on to quote: The economic integration of the prairie 
provinces is a concept whose time has come, says Liberal leader 
Lynda Haverstock. He, referring to Liberal MP (Member of 
Parliament) Lloyd Axworthy, is calling for a western 
consortium of health care that would pool resources for medical 
education, clinical programs, health relations. 
 
Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker. This is where you get a little 
hint of what's starting to happen. Haverstock said Manitoba and 
Minnesota have made some progress on this idea by agreeing to 
share research and development and — get this — harmonizing 
education standards. 
 
Well the question is, Mr. Speaker, whose standards are they 
going to harmonize them to? But we see a little bit of what's 
happening with the attitude, not only I use the education 
example, but what's happening now in health care and the 
Liberal approach to health care. 
 
In September 1994, Mr. Speaker, CKCK radio news quotes: 
Haverstock says socialist policies are preventing the province 
from reaching financial strengths like Alberta — like Alberta. 
Mr. Speaker, we know what's happened in health care of 
Alberta, and that's what the motion refers to, the 
Americanization of our health care system. 
 
So we see a little bit of a switch from in 1991 the Liberal leader 
is talking about how she thinks health care should be run. We 
see the implementation along those lines by our government 
and beyond that. And then all of a sudden we see a little bit of a 
swing away from that line by the Liberal leader when she talks 
about Minnesota in education, when she talks about Alberta and 
the reforms that are going on in Alberta. 
 



May 9, 1995 

 
2092 

I want to add to that, Mr. Speaker, by giving you a quote from 
February 22, 1995, Hansard, page 361. The Liberal leader is 
speaking to this House, and she says: 
 
 The incentives held out in this budget are done in 

desperation — desperation of a government that has 
failed to create the climate being created in Manitoba, in 
New Brunswick, and in Alberta. 

 
So again we see the Liberal leader moving away from the way 
things are done, and always have been done in Saskatchewan, 
to referring to an Alberta system — and I assume that includes 
health care — in where the health care system in Alberta is 
being Americanized. 
 
And if you don't think it's being Americanized, Mr. Speaker, I 
have a headline here. It says, "Medicare as a plain pine box and 
not much else." This is Mr. Klein. I quote: 
 
 Mr. Klein is pushing for a two-tiered health care system. 

He has already closed rural hospitals and wants to 
promote the idea of resort hospitals for the rich. 

 
Resort hospitals for the rich, Mr. Speaker. This is a government 
in Alberta that is supported, evidenced by the quotes that I have 
given you, by the Liberal leader in Saskatchewan. 
 
And then it goes on to say: 
 
 Prime Minister Jean Chrétien has said that two-tiered 

medicine will not be allowed. 
 
So Mr. Chrétien stands up and says, I don't think so, Mr. Klein. 
But what does Mr. Chrétien do, Mr. Speaker? — and not a 
word from the Liberal leader in Saskatchewan — he is cutting 
the health transfer payments. He is throwing out national 
standards. 
 
And let's take that idea of standards again back to what the 
Liberal leader said about the education standards in Alberta and 
Manitoba and Minnesota. We can see the trend developing, Mr. 
Speaker. Despite what the Prime Minister says about a 
two-tiered health care system, the trend to reducing and 
removing standards across this province has been accelerated by 
the Prime Minister; not a word from the third party leader. 
 
I go on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I'm quoting . . . not quoting 
now, but the first thing that we have to do, and if Mr. Chrétien 
and Ms. Haverstock want to stop this Americanization . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member I think full knows 
he can't use the name of the individual in the House. Use her 
constituency, please. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker. I know that, yes, and I 
apologize for doing that. 
 
What I was saying is that if Mr. Chrétien and the Leader of the 
Liberal Party in Saskatchewan wanted to put their heads  

together and try to cut some costs in the health care system, they 
could do it by rescinding the federal patent drug legislation that 
keeps the drugs artificially high. 
 
But this differs very sharply, Mr. Speaker, from the Liberal 
leader's promotion of Alberta and their health care system, 
where Mr. Klein . . . Mr. Klein's idea of health care is theme 
park hospitals. Now a theme park hospital comes complete with 
a casino and an added surcharge for a Rocky Mountain view 
rooms. 
 
Well this is a wonderful health care system that Mr. Klein's 
going to put forward. I don't understand why the Leader of the 
Third Party is trying to advocate that. 
 
And I go on, Mr. Speaker, to say that Alberta supports, and this 
is in The Globe and Mail, April 11, 1995, Alberta supports 
for-profit clinics that charge for services because it believes that 
no other approach is viable. 
 
The Leader-Post, April 21, 1995. There's even been talk of 
selling off surplus hospitals and letting those who can pay jump 
the public queue and seek private care. This is the system that 
the Liberal leader in Saskatchewan is promoting. 
 
 Alberta has talked about selling surplus hospitals to the 

private sector (with the private sector) wanting to offer 
for-profit health care. 

 
Leader-Post, April 15, '95. 
 
 . . . Premier Ralph Klein says he sees nothing wrong 

with private facilities offering essential health care 
services to Canadians willing to pay. 

 
Leader-Post, April 15, 1995. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, it says, a headline in the Star-Phoenix 
of April 5, 1995: "Some Alta. hospitals offer U.S. customers 
deals." 
 
 "We thought there would be an opportunity, it says, to 

bring cash-paying American patients in given that we 
have surplus capacity in the hospital . . . 

 
 This has been a very deliberate effort to go into the 

American marketplace and go head-to-head with 
Americans providing similar services. 

 
This is a quote from Roger Walker of Cardston, Alberta, a 
hospital executive director. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out one other thing that's 
happening in Alberta, as supported by the Leader of the Third 
Party in this province. In Alberta, effective July 1, 1995, 
Albertans family will be paying $816 a year for health care — 
$816 premium. Single people will pay a $408 premium. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the rates have gone up from 1990 to 1996 from 
$552 for a family to $864. It's a 72 per cent increase, and  



May 9, 1995 

 
2093 

they've been moving up every year. For a single person from 
$276 to $432, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that I can prove by the quotes 
that the Liberal leader in this province is strongly supporting the 
Alberta health care system, I think the most diabolical thing that 
I have seen is the approach she is now taking  the approach 
she is now taking with a pamphlet what's called, 
Saskatchewan's Next Step. 
 
This is a Liberal pamphlet, and I've been through this pamphlet, 
Mr. Speaker — It's very recent; I don't know what the date is, 
but it just came out in the last few days, I understand it — and it 
talks about a number of issues: taxation, Saskatchewan's biggest 
problem; tax per capita; it talks about balanced budgets, 
windfall profits, patronage, Saskatchewan not an island; 
robbing communities through VLTs, and government still keeps 
too many secrets from taxpayers. 
 
It goes through a number of issues, Mr. Speaker. And oddly 
enough, there are only two references to health care. In this 
whole Liberal document talking about cutting, it's talking about 
cutting spending right across the board. 
 
There's two references — one to the New Democrats saying that 
we're not saving any money through health care. Which as we 
all know is not true. Had we not done what we did in health 
reform, we would have been spending $2 billion in our budget 
today, not $1.5 billion. 
 
Another reference to the fact that . . . And I want to quote from 
it here. It says: the NDP tells us to ask the district health boards 
because the minister will not answer the questions. 
 
Well I ask the Liberal leader, Mr. Speaker: does this mean a 
Liberal minister would speak for the district health boards? 
Take away that autonomy that they've been given? It's a 
question that remains unanswered. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me get to my point. Not a Liberal idea on 
health care in this province. I don't think the Liberals can say 
health and budget in the same breath. Because they talk about 
cut, cut, cut, cutting budgets right across the board, but that they 
won't talk about health care. 
 
They talk about a sunset clause, Mr. Speaker, in this program 
for all government programs. And every five years or less, the 
government programs would be ended and reviewed and started 
again or maybe not started again. Can you imagine the 
continuity we would have, Mr. Speaker, in that type of a 
program as opposed to continual scrutinizing of the 
departments and programs by the people who are running them 
to try to make them more efficient? I don't think you get much 
continuance there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I'm getting to here is the point that the 
Minister of Health made today in question period. This 
document talks about efficiency audits. It's on the second last 
page of the document. And I want to quote. This is the Liberal  

leader's document, saying: 
 
 Efficiency audits have been used in the U.S. at the state 

level with great success. For instance, Texas was facing 
a $4.6 billion deficit over their two year budget cycle of 
1992 and 1993. To tackle this problem, the state created 
the Texas Performance Review, a team of 102 auditors 
who scrupulously examined and re-examined 195 state 
programs and agencies. 

 
The result was a $4 billion cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can see the Texas test, the Texas audit. The 
Texas audit, Mr. Speaker, is the Liberal program for health care. 
I say to the Liberal leader, let's do a Saskatchewan test. And I 
want to move this motion, Mr. Speaker, that says: 
 
 That this Assembly reject all initiatives to Americanize 

the Saskatchewan health care system, such as 
Texas-style audits, which would violate the four 
principles of medicare — accessibility, 
comprehensiveness, public administration, and 
universality; and which would lead to the destruction of 
Saskatchewan medicare and result in a system which is 
based on providing health care only to those who can 
afford it. 

 
I so move, seconded by, Mr. Speaker, by the member for 
Canora . . . Pelly, sorry. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to second the motion from my 
colleague from Humboldt. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, it 
saddens me that we have to once again have this debate in these 
chambers. 
 
It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, because it's been over 30 years now 
since the introduction of medicare to Saskatchewan; it's been 
over 30 years, Mr. Speaker, of offering to Saskatchewan people 
the latest and most up-to-date medical procedures and 
techniques; it's been 30 years of putting Saskatchewan people 
on the leading edge of health care; and, Mr. Speaker, it's been 
30 years and the members of the Liberal Party haven't learned 
anything yet. 
 
It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, that in 30 years the Liberals haven't 
been able to develop their attitude towards medicare beyond the 
level of destroy. It's ultimately clear, Mr. Speaker, that the 
object of the Liberal Party, whether it be here in Saskatchewan 
or whether it be federally, is to destroy the fundamental pillars 
that support the medicare system. 
 
We've seen that quite evident, Mr. Speaker, recently, with the 
federal government's initiative in their announcements of 
reducing transfer payments for the purposes of supporting 
medicare to the provinces across the piece. As we know, Mr. 
Speaker, they are no longer going to retain the principle of  



May 9, 1995 

 
2094 

universality by allotting block funding for medicare to the 
provinces, which, as you and I both know, Mr. Speaker, will 
develop into a system of a patchwork health care system across 
Canada, which will then eliminate the national standards that 
have been so prominent to maintaining a proper level of health 
care for all Canadians, which in turn, Mr. Speaker, will weaken 
medicare and eventually cause it to be lost to the people of this 
great country. 
 
It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, that a leader of a political party, the 
Leader of the Liberals here in Saskatchewan, after 30 years of 
medicare in this province, is still bound and bent on 
Americanizing Saskatchewan medicare. It saddens me, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Liberals would be so bold as to come out with 
part of their party platform for the next election campaign, 
clearly stating that their intentions are to Americanize the 
Saskatchewan medical system. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, to pick up on a comment made by the 
member from Humboldt as to what possibly could be the theme 
for the Liberals' election campaign about all their experts being 
in Texas, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, another theme would be that all 
the ex-Liberal MLAs will end up in Texas after the next 
election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, an example of what Americanization of the 
Saskatchewan health care system could mean I think can be best 
exemplified by neighbours of mine, Mr. and Mrs. Dwayne 
Johnson. Mr. Johnson and his wife come from Norquay; they 
farm, retired now, but still live on the farm just south of 
Norquay. And they're I guess what you would call our local 
snowbirds. They manage to be able to spend two or three or 
sometimes four months in the U.S. during the winter period 
here and enjoying the warmer weather. And as Dwayne likes to 
say, he goes south where the weather matches his clothes. 
 
But a very unfortunate incident happened to them while in 
Arizona last year. His wife — and I believe that she's about 69 
years of age — was joined with some other ladies and they were 
making their way down to the swimming pool to rest and relax 
and take in some of the sun alongside the pool there. And while 
walking down a series of steps, she misjudged the bottom step, 
slipped, fell, and broke her arm. 
 
Well her husband Dwayne picked her up immediately and 
rushed her to the local hospital in Arizona. And there, Mr. 
Speaker, she was treated for her broken arm. She was in that 
hospital, Mr. Speaker, for less than an hour, according to 
Dwayne, and in the process she had an X-ray taken, a cast put 
on, and all the rest of that stuff. 
 
And some 50 minutes from the time they entered the hospital, 
they were on their way out. And as he passed the admittance 
desk, Mr. Speaker, he was called over by the clerk there and 
asked to settle up his account which came to some $1,400. 
 
Fourteen hundred dollars, Mr. Speaker, for a broken arm. 
Fourteen hundred dollars for treating a broken arm in a hospital 
for 50 minutes. Mr. Speaker, that is what the Liberals'  

intentions are for Saskatchewan's medicare. 
 
And it saddens me, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . after 30 years 
having medicare in this province, that Liberals still seem to 
have a desire to look elsewhere for expertise in this field. Mr. 
Speaker, they suggested that Alberta is doing the right thing in 
its cutting and slashing and hacking systems. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Texas of the North. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague is so ably 
assisting me in suggesting that Alberta is the Liberal's example 
of the Texas of the North. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is the fundamental difference between 
New Democrats and Liberals. Mr. Speaker, Liberals believe that 
Saskatchewan people haven't got the ability — though we've 
demonstrated in the past — still believe that we haven't got the 
ability to be masters of our own destiny. 
 
That's the difference, Mr. Speaker, between Liberals and New 
Democrats, is that we, Mr. Speaker, believe that Saskatchewan 
people have the ability to be masters of their own destiny. We 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people will be able to 
find the ways to meet the challenges that come forward. We 
don't have to go to Alberta; we don't have to go to New 
Brunswick, and we certainly don't have to go to Texas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because my time is soon winding down here, I just 
want to concur with the member from Humboldt in support of 
his motion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that we as a New 
Democratic government have held Saskatchewan on a leading 
edge of health care services in the past and, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that we as a government will make that commitment to 
Saskatchewan people for the future — that we will always be 
on a leading edge of the latest technology, latest service, and the 
latest health care for the people of this great province. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure to take a few moments to enter the debate regarding 
the motion that is before this Assembly: 
 
 That this Assembly reject all initiatives to Americanize 

the Saskatchewan health care system, such as 
Texas-style audits, which would violate the four 
principles of medicare  accessibility, 
comprehensiveness, public administration, and 
universality; and which would lead to the destruction of 
Saskatchewan medicare and result in a system which is 
based on providing health care only to those who can 
afford it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there's been a lot of talk over the past few weeks 
about Texas-style audits. And maybe we should take a minute  



May 9, 1995 

 
2095 

to review what we're basically talking about, or what . . . maybe 
the reality of this Texas-style audit. 
 
It seems the Texas controller of public accounts, Mr. John 
Sharp, came across some startling findings while pouring over 
the state budget one day. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Sharp found 
that officials at the superconducting supercollider in 
Waxahachie planned to buy longhorned cattle and put them in a 
nearby pasture as part of a state-financed plan to create Texas 
ambience at the high-energy research centre. Of course Mr. 
Sharp raised enough awareness that this initiative was kiboshed. 
 
Further, we find that Mr. Sharp got the State Department to stop 
taking care of the plants on government employees' desks, 
figuring it would be good therapy for the people actually at the 
desks to care for the greenery themselves. And this move saved 
the state of Texas $630,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Sharp conducted an exhaustive review three 
years ago of the Texas state government in order to streamline 
services and cut government waste, which is an indication that 
the reduction of government expenditures, trying to streamline 
government, is something that is very popular around the world, 
and certainly Texas was looking for a way to streamline their 
government as well. 
 
More recently we find President Clinton and Vice-President Al 
Gore citing the Texas model for their plan to streamline the 
federal government. 
 
What is that streamlining? What does it mean? What took place 
in Texas? We find that Mr. Sharp's three-year helmsmanship of 
what he calls the Texas Performance Review has unveiled many 
areas that has saved Texas taxpayers quite a sum of money. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, one year Mr. Sharp's package was an 
accounting shift, an accounting shift that managed to save 
Texas taxpayers $1 billion by transferring certain Medicaid 
costs to federal taxpayers. 
 
How ironic that we find the state of Texas found it convenient 
just to shift the load from the state taxpayer to the federal 
taxpayer, and the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that taxpayer is no 
different, whether it's the state or the federal taxpayer. In fact it 
sounds a lot, Mr. Speaker, like what we've seen in 
Saskatchewan over the past two or three years, and now the 
federal Liberal Party is talking of doing. While the 
Saskatchewan government has offloaded its responsibilities and 
services and forced other groups and third parties to make 
decisions regarding the reduction in services in health care or at 
the municipal level, we now see the federal government 
following that example. 
 
So the example that Mr. Sharp found and then Mr. Sharp used 
in Texas seems to be an example that was quite well accepted 
even here in Canada. And I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
taxpayer for one minute is going to see that there is any major 
change because that tax dollar, whether it comes by the federal 
or the provincial, comes out of the same pocket. 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that hundreds of millions of 
dollars in what Mr. Sharp trumpeted as cost-cutting have come 
from a new state lottery or from reductions in pension payments 
that some public employees say will have to be made up later 
on. 
 
Here again, Mr. Speaker, it appears that this province is already 
into the Texas-style audit with the expansion of gambling in 
this province and the fact that they're using it . . . the reasons, 
the arguments are, that it will help us to pay for the health and 
educational needs that people are demanding across this 
province. 
 
And I also note, Mr. Speaker, just from the auditor's statements, 
that the unfunded pension plan is now even more . . . has a 
higher unfunded pension liability than it did three years ago; 
another means where the government is using other people to 
pay for their changes, for their reductions, while at the same 
time making it appear that they are doing so much to assist us. 
 
Richard Murray, a political scientist at the University of 
Houston, said: 
 
 Sharp did a lot of financial maneuvring that clearly, in 

the short run, avoided an income tax. This draws great 
acclaim because voters are bottom-line orientated, and 
the bottom line is they have no income tax. But whether 
he's really been able to reinvent government or set a 
plan for it, since Texas has a remarkably decentralized 
system, that's much more arguable. 

 
Further, the leader in the Texas House of Representatives, Tom 
Craddick of Midland, states that there's a lot of smoke and 
mirrors, shifts, robbing Peter to pay Paul. Sound familiar? It 
seems, Mr. Speaker, that before any such plan is undertaken in 
this province, much more research must be done. 
 
Some initiatives taken by Mr. Sharp include privatization and 
cutting the state workforce. He also implemented the silver 
snout award for government workers or lobbyists found with 
their noses buried deep in the public trough, and other 
measures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as implementing the Texas-style audit in 
Saskatchewan, any proposal or idea that cuts costs yet not 
services is welcomed by Saskatchewan people. The problem is 
that we have experienced just the opposite over the past few 
years in health care reform in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan families have had health services, prescription 
drug coverage, optometric and chiropractic services, slashed, 
while the savings have not been passed on to the taxpayers. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that is what the people want. And 
that's not what we need. Mr. Speaker, we need to stretch our tax 
dollars as far as we can without deteriorating health care in this 
province, and so far that hasn't taken place. Mr. Speaker, people 
in Saskatchewan continue to call for a common sense approach  



May 9, 1995 

 
2096 

to health care services and delivery while reducing government 
spending and inefficiencies.  
 
I therefore would like to move an amendment, seconded by the 
member from Maple Creek: 
 
 That all the words following the word “reject” be 

deleted and the following substituted: 
 
 The Texas Performance Review style of reducing 

government waste, based on its inability to realize 
significant savings for the taxpayer; and further, that this 
government instead endorse a common sense approach 
to reducing government spending inefficiencies. 

 
I so move. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very pleased to 
enter this debate, and I will be speaking against the amendment 
and supporting the original motion of the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
I think that we have to realize this is not a bunch of facts and 
figures, which all of us could quote. In fact I had some lined up 
today. We could stand here in this legislature, all of us, quoting 
facts and figures, when I think what we have to do is look back 
at the facts and the history of how medicare came into being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in this province aren't a bunch of facts and 
figures. We can argue till doomsday in this House whether this 
system or that system or this system or that system will be 
better. What we have to do is look at the proof is in the 
pudding. It always has been. 
 
It took us from 1944 to 1962 — 18 years — to implement 
medicare. Why was medicare implemented in this province in 
the first place? It was because people saw in this province that 
you should be able to have affordable, accessible medicare no 
matter what your financial status was. The people of this 
province laid that foundation for the rest of Canada. This is one 
of the things that makes us very much different than the 
Americans. 
 
We implemented it in 1962 and we financed it alone as a 
government for five years till the federal government was — in 
a minority government — was coaxed to come in with us. We 
financed a system that was accessible and affordable and it 
reached everyone. 
 
I can't tell you, Mr. Speaker, what it's like when you have a 
friend, like I do, that lives in the city of New York, a woman 
who is a legal secretary and struggles with four small children 
daily to make ends meet. She works on contracts for lawyers all 
over Manhattan. She gets a fairly decent wage, but the cost of 
medicare for her is extensive. 
 
These are the kind of people that we are thinking of in 
Saskatchewan — people, ordinary people. We felt that one of  

the basic principles of life is that everyone should be able to 
afford a system, a health system. This is the kind of background 
that we came from, Mr. Speaker. This is why we as a province 
and people from many political parties supported medicare to 
being with. 
 
Now the thing that we have to do today, Mr. Speaker, is take 
some of the politics and rhetoric out of this discussion. The 
thing is that we found when we came into power in 1991 we 
could not sustain the system the way it was. 
 
Now if anybody out there — I don't care if they use a Texas 
audit, if they use any kind of an audit  if anybody could say 
that we could sustain the system that we had in 1991, we could 
not do it, Mr. Speaker. We had to save medicare because that is 
a fundamental belief that all of us in our party have. I am 
54-years-old, Mr. Speaker. I have always believed in the 
principles of medicare, and I always will, and I will do anything 
that I can to sustain and to fight for medicare. 
 
I mean why would you come up with a silly suggestion — 
because to me that's all it is, is silly — of bringing in here 102 
auditors from Texas on the eve of an election. Haverstock has 
adopted as part of her platform a program that comes from, of 
all places, Texas. I mean that country cannot even get its act 
together to get a feasible medical system. For Heaven's sake, 
they spend more of their gross domestic product on medicare — 
that's taxpayers' dollars, Mr. Speaker — and 40 million of their 
people still aren't covered. 
 
And we are going to get advice from people that live in that 
country who cannot even get basic medical coverage to all of 
their citizens in some kind of a constructive way? We are going 
to take advice from people in that country? 
 
The Liberal leader on the eve of an election, as I was saying, 
has adopted as part of her platform a program that comes from, 
of all places, Texas. This document proposes that the 
government hire 102 accountants to audit all departments for 
efficiency. What the Leader of the Third Party and the members 
from the opposition ignore completely is that our government 
has already conducted efficiency audits using a handful of 
people, such as the Gass Commission or the Provincial Auditor, 
not 102 American accountants. 
 
I'll tell you, we've got talented people right here in this 
province. We have made it in this province through thick and 
thin. We do not have to take advice from anybody else in any 
other part of the world. We can do it here. The people of this 
province can do it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tommy Douglas built the first medicare 
system with American professionals. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — I'll tell you one thing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don't even know your own party. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — The member from Shaunavon is chirping from  



May 9, 1995 

 
2097 

his seat. Don't tell me what I know or don't know, Mr. Member 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. Okay. 
 
As I was saying, audits and programs reviews are conducted 
each year as part of the budget process. I have to say really and 
in truth that we have come from the weakest auditing system to 
one of the best in Canada. That isn't my words — those are 
recognized all over this country. 
 
We already have done, we have already done this. Why do need 
102 auditors from Texas? We don't need a 102 auditors from 
Texas to come to do that. Our result has been a balanced budget 
— the first balanced budget in Canada. A plan for four more 
balanced budgets . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I would like 
to again call the member from Shaunavon and the member from 
Pelly to order, please. Simply, this yelling across the floor, first 
of all it's very discourteous to other members who are speaking; 
and secondly, it's simply not parliamentary. 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, we 
have done an audit; we've used Saskatchewan people; we've 
balanced the budget first of any government in the country; 
we've had a balanced budget; we have a plan for four more 
balanced budgets and a long-term strategy to pay off the debt. 
All this will come at the same time as the government applies 
one-third of all budgetary surpluses to tax reduction. 
 
We don't need 102 auditors from Texas to tell us how to do this. 
I can tell you that medicare will be maintained in this province, 
it will be the best care that we can give to anyone in North 
America, and we will be looked on . . . upon after this reform as 
one of the leaders in medicare. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberals are not talking about spending less on health care. We 
are talking about the same thing we have been talking about 
since the last election — spending precious dollars more wisely 
to get quality health care. 
 
The member from Humboldt scoffs at this approach because he 
does not want to dig up the truth about the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) chaotic approach to health reform. The truth 
is their greatest enemy and they do not want to hear it. But 
people want the truth — they deserve the truth and we will give 
them the truth — about the Department of Health and every 
other department in this government. 
 
We have no fear of finding out that there is overspending on 
communications or travel or administration and bureaucracy. 
We did not create the monster so we have no reason to keep it 
alive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has destroyed health care in this province 
by closing 52 hospitals and it's time someone produced the plan 
to rebuild our NDP-devastated system. The  

productivity-efficiency audits, which are part of the process, 
would encourage efficiency, not waste, and productivity. 
 
Actions like mailing out of brochures would be analysed to see 
if this money could be in fact spent more efficiently. An audit 
would seek out administrative duplication and excess, 
redistributing these funds to more integral care requirements. It 
would seek out the oak tables and lavish board rooms. They are 
not a prerequisite for quality health care. 
 
In Texas, three sets of audits have been completed since 1991. 
In contrast to the NDP, the first audit made recommendations to 
increase services by increasing the number of health-related 
positions by more than 300. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Stanger: — To introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
introduce Michael Cohen, our trade officer from our New York 
trade office. He is likely here on some very important business. 
It's nice to see Michael here, and he does a good job for us in 
New York. Thank you very much, Michael. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Health Care Reform in Saskatchewan 
(continued) 

 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the first audit made 
recommendations to increase services by increasing the number 
of health-related positions. They did not attempt to destroy 
health care; they built it up. 
 
One key recommendation of the auditors in the productivity-
efficiency audits focuses on an area that the NDP have all but 
eliminated. The auditors believe that a drug plan is needed to 
supplement the high cost of prescription drugs, especially for 
seniors. 
 
Some of the other original recommendations by the auditing 
team were to improve interagency cooperation for program 
improvements, to expand Medicaid eligibility to cover infants 
and pregnant women, to further expand the use of the Medicaid 
program, to maximize child-protective services. 
 
And the most recent set of audits made recommendations that 
hit even closer to home. Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell 
members some of the recommendations from the audit, and I 
would ask member to decide whether these are negative 
outcomes of this audit. 
 



May 9, 1995 

 
2098 

Recommendation No. 9: "Use Neural Networks to Detect and 
Reduce Fraud in the State Medicaid Program." 
 
No. 14: "Develop a Prevention Approach to Child Welfare in 
Texas." 
 
No. 20: "Use Automated Systems to Reduce Caseworker Time 
in Health and Human Services Agencies." 
 
No. 23: "Improve Texas Immunization System for Children." 
 
No. 25: "Increase Funding for AIDS/HIV Services." 
 
No. 27: "Develop a Pharmaceutical Program for Texans Over 
Age 65." 
 
In health and human services: 
 
No. 1: "Improve Management of State Health (Financing and) 
Purchasing." 
 
No. 2: "Establish a Health Care Information Office." 
 
No. 4: "Increase Local Flexibility in the Delivery of Health and 
Human Services." 
 
No. 5: "Expand Use of the 'One Stop' Concept in Health and 
Human Services Programs." 
 
No. 6: "Improve Coordination of Health and Human Services 
Caseload Estimator." 
 
No. 11: "Improve Mental Health and Mental Retardation 
Services and Reduce Costs." 
 
No. 12: "Increase Funding for Mental Health Care for 
Children." 
 
No. 19: "Reduce Public Assistance Fraud in Texas." 
 
And I ask the members, do you agree or do you not agree that 
these are good outcomes of an audit? 
 
And yet the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster cannot see the 
value in this type of productivity-efficiency audit. After all, why 
would the NDP want to give up the opportunity to build a 
bigger bureaucracy filled with party faithful? Why would they 
want to be held accountable for all of the appointments and 
positions that serve no real purpose to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Why would they want to explain why 
government departments compete with private companies in 
printing and communications, or why every department needs 
its own communications department? 
 
Those are the questions that efficiency audits will ask. And the 
answers will pinpoint where the savings can be had without 
adversely affecting the quality of service people get for their tax 
dollars. This is the '90s answer. It is the answer being employed 
by the private sector and it is the answer being employed by  

forward-thinking governments. It is not to be feared, it is to be 
welcomed, and the only people who will resist are those who 
want big government, high taxes, and inefficiency, to be 
preserved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not support the motion. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm anxious 
to get into this debate today. However I think I could probably 
use about three or four hours debating such a topic, given the 
fact that it was that government opposite that absolutely 
decimated the health care in south-west Saskatchewan — not 
only south-west Saskatchewan but in rural Saskatchewan. But 
they really did a number on the people that are from the 
south-west, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One has to wonder though why it is that this particular 
government would bring in a motion today that is so opposed to 
having anyone take a look at things that they've done or they've 
been involved in; in fact they would rather cover things up. 
 
If the system was working correct, if it was working good, and 
if it was supplying all the services and everything for, you 
know, affordable costs and if people had no complaints and 
they don't believe it can be improved, then well fine, so be it. 
 
But one has to wonder why it is that they're afraid to even have 
a system checked over, to have it looked at. Because surely they 
must realize some of the mistakes they've made, given the fact 
that the Department of Health . . . not the Department of Health 
but the minister's office, I think in a few months, received 
something like 10,000 letters a month when they were doing the 
health care reform because people could actually see what kind 
of decimation that they were going to bring upon rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it was rather interesting when I was listening to some of 
these members speak, and especially rural members, members 
that I'm sure if I asked the question to some of these people, 
how many hospitals were closed down in your areas and how 
many nurses lost their jobs and how many doctors have left, 
you can't even answer those questions of your own 
constituencies. And you're letting on that you somehow 
understand health care in Saskatchewan and in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well you don't like audits, but you know, we don't even have to 
talk about the Texas audit. Let's take a look at what the report of 
the Provincial Auditor has to say and see if there isn't 
something that we could pull out of here that in fact is relevant 
to today's motion. 
 
In the Provincial Auditor's report, the spring report, page 15, the 
Provincial Auditor, he's got a number of recommendations and 
what he sees as several problems that are happening out in the 
district health boards, Mr. Speaker. Financial statements, 
comparison of plan to actual results. And I'm only going to pick  



May 9, 1995 

 
2099 

out the odd one. 
 
Point no. .11, page 15: 
 
 The . . . (district health boards') annual financial 

statements issued to the Minister and the public do not 
include a comparison of planned to actual results. 

 
So to begin with, what he's saying is that your financial 
statements alone are hard for anyone to even get a grasp of 
where you plan to go from one year to the next. 
 
The next statement, financial statements, expenses by programs, 
no. .15: 
 
 The . . . (district health boards') annual financial 

statements do not show expenses by program (e.g., 
acute care and home based care). They show expenses 
by object only (e.g., salaries, utilities, and supplies). 

 
Internal financial reports: 
 
 Four of the six . . . (district health boards) we audited 

have not formally defined and documented their internal 
financial reporting needs. 

 
And this is on . . . And this is pages of what your Provincial 
Auditor is saying just in the district health boards. And you 
people said, oh no, don't take a look at us; there's nothing wrong 
with the way we're doing things. And yet the Provincial Auditor 
is saying, somebody better take a look at you guys because 
you're out of control. 
 
You just can't go out into rural Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Will the member from Biggar 
please come to order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You people just 
can't go out into rural Saskatchewan, shut down without any 
thought of the people that you're affecting in the rural 
communities; without any consideration for the distance that 
some people have to travel, for the geography, the 
demographics, the age of the population in some of those 
communities, that you've shut down the nursing homes and the 
hospitals and made sure that they don't even have active 
ambulance service. 
 
You just go ahead and shut it down because, you know what, 
somebody told you, one of your bean counters, someone in your 
financial department says no, the people won't mind; they'll be 
so impressed that we can actually balance the books of the 
province that they're going to say, well we can do without 
services in rural Saskatchewan. Well it's not working. You 
didn't even . . . you had no thought of a plan let alone a plan in 
place before you attacked the rural areas. 
 
Accounting records. No. .22 on page 16: 
 

 One of the DHBs we audited used inaccurate accounting 
records to prepare financial reports. 

 
And further, in point .23: 
 
 Staff did not maintain the serial continuity of cheques 

issued. For manual cheques, staff sometimes use the 
same cheque number more than once. For computer 
generated cheques, which are pre-numbered, staff did 
not always use them in the proper sequence. As a result, 
it was difficult to reconcile bank account balances to the 
accounting records. 

 
 Staff wrote off accounts receivable identified as 

uncollectible during the year. However, there is no 
process to ensure senior management or the directors 
are informed and approve the write-offs. 

 
Job descriptions and training plan, .25, page 17: 
 
 One of the DHBs we audited did not have specific 

criteria for hiring financial management and 
administrative staff. As a result, (he goes on to say) staff 
. . . (were hired that probably don't have qualifications 
for the job). 

 
In fact in his recommendations he goes on to talk about that the 
district health boards should be establishing some kind of 
criteria for hiring staff and especially the chief financial 
officers. He has concerns that they're not right up to snuff. 
 
And here we go into system development controls: 
 
 Two of the DHBs we audited have not approved 

information . . . development controls. 
 
It goes on to talk about what the minister gets. External 
reporting requirements: 
 
 The six DHBs we audited did not submit to the Minister 

some of the information required by The Health 
Districts Act. 

 
 To control health care costs, and to be accountable for 

these costs to the Minister and the public, DHBs need to 
know the cost of their services and activities, and be 
able to report publicly on these costs. For example, 
DHBs need to be able to report on the cost of 
emergency services, home care services, . . . research 
. . . 

 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. They got pages and pages. 
There must be 10 or 11 pages of recommendations from the 
Provincial Auditor on improving district health boards. In one 
of the sections he talks about how could you actually come up 
with a system and have a system that's working well if in fact 
you don't even know what the cost to run some of your 
components of that system are. And you have no way of 
monitoring. 



May 9, 1995 

 
2100 

And all we're saying, you don't have to call it a Texas audit. 
What's wrong with listening to your own Provincial Auditor? 
He's saying, listen guys, you better shape up. You've really 
messed up a health care system and I think it's time you put 
some kind of control in place to make sure that at least the 
government that's going to replace you soon can in fact repair 
some of the damage that you've already done. 
 
You know I can't for the life of me see what’s the problem with 
having someone take a look, you know, to see whether or not 
what you've done to the people of Saskatchewan is fair or not. 
In fact I have the document, Breaking the Mold — it is the 
Texas document that they are so concerned about . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well let's take a look at some of these things. 
 
Here's one of the points: improved interagency cooperation 
needed for program improvements — I don't know what you 
have wrong with that — maximize child-protective services 
related to federal funding; expand Medicaid eligibility to cover 
infants and pregnant women. These are some of the 
recommendations that these people have. 
 
And you know what was interesting? When you look at all 
these recommendations, what they came up with in the end was 
a requirement, or recommendation, that there be another 331 
medical professional people in the state of Texas — 331. We're 
not talking about letting nurses go in rural Saskatchewan. 
Adding 331 people, and what was the cost? They saved $4 
billion. Four billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, is what they've saved. 
 
But yet these people say no, no we don't want to save money. 
We're far better off just firing people, firing some of these 
nurses that in fact bring home some of the pay to keep our 
farmers viable after the Minister of Agriculture decimated the 
agricultural programs. But, Mr. Speaker, this is some of the 
stuff that they're so opposed to. 
 
Improving child welfare systems. What on earth would you 
have against that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 
from Biggar's chirping from his seat. I wish you could just 
maybe get into the debate and tell us what you're opposed to 
here. 
 
Use neutral networks to detect and reduce fraud in the state 
Medicaid program. They want to do an audit so they can check 
into fraud. Well you're opposed to that, and perhaps the reason 
being, maybe some of the patronage is going to start to show 
that that government is so good at handing out. 
 
Develop a prevention approach to child welfare in Texas. I can 
see why you guys are opposed to it. But we're not, you see. 
That's why we're saying, well let's take a look here and see if we 
can't make this system a little bit better, after it was somewhat 
decimated, and do a few . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today to 
stand and support the motion made by the member from  

Humboldt and oppose the Americanization of our health care 
system. 
 
The thing that I would like to challenge the opposition, I think 
to take to the Saskatchewan public, which is I think key to the 
debate that we're in this afternoon, it's just one question. Would 
they prefer the Saskatchewan health care or a Texas health 
care? 
 
If Texas had the answer, why is the American system still not 
universal, accessible, or affordable? Why are Americans still 
paying more of their gross domestic product on health care with 
still 40 million people not covered? In the United States they 
haven't still been able to implement a universal vaccination 
system or an immunization system. These are just some of the 
kinds of questions that you have to ask if this is the kind of 
system that's supposed to be better than what we have here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When we took government in 1991, we opened the books. The 
Gass Commission did a study, an audit of right through all of 
the government departments. We have now, in health care, set 
up a community-based health care system moving from 400 
boards down to 30 health care districts that have been done 
through a cooperative, community-based way, the 
Saskatchewan way. We're making our changes the 
Saskatchewan way, and it's the way that's going to take us into 
the 21st century with a sustainable, affordable, and universal 
health care system. 
 
And if we look at the Liberal way as seen in the Maritimes, they 
imposed health care districts  but notice the word imposed — 
from the top down onto communities. Or we can look at the 
Conservative way as in Alberta. Their reform of health care is 
by massive cuts, privatization of health care whereby you move 
to the front of the line for treatment if you have enough money 
in your pocket. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And health care premiums. 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Bradley: — And health care premiums, you’re right — 
after the last budget, over $800 for a family for health-care 
premiums in Alberta. 
 
No, we did it the Saskatchewan way. We had communities, 
people, working together across this province to form districts 
on their own. And many said it couldn't be done, but it was 
done, and we're now seeing the second phase of health care 
reform where in these districts they're doing their audits. 
They're doing their needs-based assessment, and they're putting 
the programs in that will be best for the people in their health 
care districts. 
 
The Saskatchewan people know what kind of health care they 
need, and it's Saskatchewan people that will make the 
recommendations and will use the common sense that will 
provide the real health care services that we need in our  



May 9, 1995 

 
2101 

communities and right across this province. 
 
In just reviewing with the health care district in my own area of 
the province, which is a rural area, I can just say some of 
highlights of just what's been happening in the South Central 
Health District. We still have acute care services in two 
facilities in our district. We still have long-term care services 
and we still have emergency services. 
 
There's been no cuts to our ambulance service, but it's been 
enhanced. We still have the same number of ambulances that 
we had before and it's been enhanced with first responders 
being trained in a number of our small towns. 
 
We have seniors using a communications system that they can 
live at home, called the Lifeline. There's 130 people in our 
district that have signed up for that service. 
 
We have a home care office that's just being opened in 
Radville. There's home care services being enhanced right 
throughout our whole district. 
 
We have home intravenous therapy, peritoneal dialysis in the 
home for people with kidney problems, nursing and support 
services in the home, expanded 24-hour palliative and respite 
palliative care in our homes, in our district. 
 
We have wellness clinics that are going to towns where they 
have never had any health services before. People have said to 
me in Avonlea, we have never, ever had people come out. We 
have foot care happening. We have diabetic clinics. This is 
good services in our communities. 
 
We also have health professionals hitting the road. They're 
coming out. We've got diabetic educators, psychiatric nurses, 
occupational therapists, visiting our rural communities. 
 
In Bengough the new health care centre is going to be ready for 
operation sometime in June. They're planning their second 
phase so that they can also have some palliative and respite 
care. 
 
The communities are working together and starting to see the 
fruits of those labours. And they're also going out. What I see in 
health care reform is the board going out, meeting with 
communities, and addressing the real needs. 
 
This is the system that we need in Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan-based system. And there's no one out there 
saying, we want an American two-tiered system. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I see no further speakers on the 65-minute 
limit. There are still two minutes and forty-five seconds 
remaining. That means that there will be a vote on the issue, 
unless there is a further speaker. 
 

If not, we will now then turn to the question and comment 
period. And it's a maximum of up to 10 minutes, if there are any 
questions or comments. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I actually do 
have a question which I find is . . . it's going to be interesting. 
And I'll pose it to the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd because 
she was into the debate, and perhaps if she can't answer that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think that is simply unfair of 
the member. Order, order. If the member wishes to direct a 
question to a member that is in the House, I think that's a fair 
question to ask. Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will direct a 
question then to the member from Bengough-Milestone because 
I just heard that member speak about the great, cooperative, 
community-based approach that they had to the wellness plan. 
 
And it's interesting because the chairperson of the rural health 
care coalition was from her riding. And a lot of the angry 
activity opposed to that style of health reform, which was really 
decimating health care in rural Saskatchewan, initiated in her 
riding. And yet she goes on to talk about the great home 
services that are actually initiated in . . . or going on today in 
her riding . . . tells me that she's maybe not right up to speed on 
what the people are thinking in her riding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I'll get to my question. I would like to ask the member 
from Bengough Milestone that if in fact she is so supportive of 
this health care system that is now in place, can she tell me how 
many health care professionals have lost their jobs since health 
care reform in her riding? 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First comment that I 
want to make on this question is the comment about the 
chairperson of the Radville local hospital board. That person 
. . . we've just had an agreement signed, an affiliation agreement 
signed with Radville. A number of issues have been worked 
out. And like I said earlier, is that there's actually a new office 
for home care actually being opened also in Radville. 
 
The answer as far as also on the employment of people in our 
area, a number of people have had to change physicians and so 
on, but we're really seeing right now . . . actually in Bengough 
just the other day there was more nurses actually being hired 
again. 
 
And I think if the one thing that we could . . . I'd like to admit in 
this answer is that if you could go out and ask anybody in our 
health care district, and even the person that you posed in this 
question . . . is that they want to have local input. And that's 
what they're appreciating right now, and they like the 
community-based, local input. 
 
And people are even saying now that they can see the advantage 
of these 30 districts. They do not want a Texas audit. They do 
not want an imposed solution from the top down. They want to 
be part of the solution. And the people in my area are  



May 9, 1995 

 
2102 

part of the solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened carefully 
to the member from Shaunavon, and the member from 
Shaunavon left the New Democratic Party because the member 
from Shaunavon had problems with the policies of our party 
and our government in terms of health care. Now the member 
from Shaunavon is a member of the Liberal Party and a 
supporter of the federal Liberal government. 
 
And what I'd like to know from the member from Shaunavon is 
how he justifies his support for the Liberal Party when the 
federal Liberal government proposes to gut the medicare system 
next year by cutting about $100 million or more out of the 
medicare budget for Saskatchewan and millions of dollars and 
hundreds of millions of dollars and billions of dollars out of the 
health care system in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the member's 
question is out of order although I will allow the member from 
Shaunavon, if he wishes, to make a comment on it. The member 
should know that the question must be directed on the debate 
that is before us, not on any topic that you wish. And I just don't 
know whether the federal government is cutting health care or 
not; it doesn't make any difference. It has nothing to do with the 
debate that is before the House here today, which is on the 
Texas style audits. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question, I 
believe to the member for Regina North West who entered the 
debate and talked about the Texas efficiency audits. I believe it 
was the member from North West. And I understood you to say 
they've completed three rounds. I may be wrong, and it may be 
the member for Shaunavon, so I'll allow either of you to answer. 
 
They've completed three rounds of efficiency audits in Texas. 
How is it after turning loose 102 auditors through the grand 
state of Texas and saving billions of dollars — to hear you 
describe it — how is it that Texans just the other day cancelled 
their kindergarten program, have committed to building several 
more state prisons, and how is it that they continue to run a 
massive state deficit after all of this efficiency audit? I'd just 
like to know how you square that round circle. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I think that's a . . . where's he from? 
Regina Albert North. No, I think that's a fair question, but you 
know it's dealing with such a mixed bag here if in fact you're 
saying that the problems they're having in Texas are all because 
in fact they've done some audit. Perhaps what this shows is that 
they should do an audit of their educational system because 
they brought up the number of health care workers by 331 in 
the state of Texas, and they had a savings of $4 billion. So 
obviously in their justice system that they have a problem and 
they must have some sort of a problem in their education 
system if in fact they're making these kind of cuts. 
 

But the real question here I think is why are you guys so 
opposed to anyone taking a look at the books to see if we can't 
just do it a little bit better. That's what everyone's sitting back 
saying: there is something really strange going on here with 
why you people are always wanting to cover up the books of 
something. 
 
Just let people go in — let professionals go in. Don't do 
anything because your ideology . . . or you're dogmatic in some 
areas. Let people go in that are professional and see if they can't 
improve a system so that in fact in the end you don't have to 
build more prisons. And you don't have to cancel kindergarten 
programs as in fact Mr. Klein did in Alberta. And I think he'll 
be replacing that program; I suspect he will. 
 
But if in fact a state or a province can improve what they're 
doing, why are you opposed to it? Because this is one province, 
I'm telling you right here, where the people are saying we could 
do this a lot better. And you know that yourself by the amount 
of angry people that are contacting your caucus on a regular 
basis on the health care questions alone. 
 
I know that the Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I think the member's time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to ask a 
question to the member for Regina Albert North. With the 
Texas audit and it's effects on the Texas health care system, I'd 
like to know, first of all, can you use your Visa card, 
Mastercard, and American Express card to pay for your health 
care or any combination of the three? And indeed does the 
quality of your health care in Texas still depend on the 
thickness of your wallet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a very good question I think because he refers to 
medicare being bought with Visa, Mastercard, whatever. 
Because I recall back in 1991 it was that government who said 
we are going to bring back a prescription drug program which is 
second to none. 
 
And in fact I got pills  I had to get some pills a couple of days 
ago  94 bucks a month is what I'm paying, and I paid with my 
Visa card. So you tell me where the difference is between the 
state of Texas if you have to pay for something in medicare 
with Visa, compared to where I bought my prescription drugs 
— which you guys promised to return to that program — in fact 
right on Albert Street in Regina. Is there a difference? Well I 
don't think there is, I really and truly don't. 
 
I think that you guys have made some serious mistakes. You've 
brought in a two-tiered level of health care, especially between 
urban and rural Saskatchewan, but also this drug program 
which you're going to bring back is not working out. We got a 
number of people who are not being covered . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, the member's time . . . 
 



May 9, 1995 

 
2103 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to ask the 
member from Shaunavon . . . He said, why are we so opposed 
to having 102 auditors come in from Texas? Well the thing is 
that mostly people that come from another area really can't tell 
us how to do things our way. 
 
So I want to ask, what has he got against using Saskatchewan 
people to do Saskatchewan audits? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 
the question from the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
And it really shows just how out of touch the member really is. 
Because what we're saying is perhaps a dozen auditors could 
come in and improve our system. I don't know where the 102 
comes. 
 
But I think it really shows perhaps why she was so mistaken on 
some of their campaign programs back in 1991, their promises, 
and why they broke them to the extent that they did break them. 
The facts and the figures just don't jibe as much as they 
possibly, or probably, should. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:31 p.m. until 3:57 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Lingenfelter Shillington Anguish 
Johnson Trew Goulet 
Lautermilch Calvert Carson 
Penner Hagel Bradley 
Koenker Teichrob Pringle 
Cline Murray Hamilton 
Serby Harper Whitmore 
Flavel Stanger Keeping 
Jess Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen Toth 
Britton   

— 34 
Nays 

— Nil 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — On a point of order. Could we have 
the record show that there was one abstention on the part of the 
Liberals. 
 
The Speaker: — The vote and the debate has been dealt with 
by the House. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 8 — Support for Economic Diversification 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to  

place in motion before the Assembly: 
 
 That this Assembly support the modernization and 

diversification of the Saskatchewan economy, as 
demonstrated by the development of Saskatoon as a 
major biotechnology centre, the development of Regina 
as an information technology centre, and by the creation 
of high-tech, value-added industries throughout the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to stand before you and speak to 
this motion because of the number of years of experience that 
I've had in fostering economic growth and opportunity as a 
member of city council, and now as a member of a New 
Democrat team that believes the principles of community, 
cooperation, and fairness will build a strong foundation for 
economic development in our province, embodied in the 
Partnership for Renewal strategy. 
 
The motion before us speaks to those principles in action. And 
why? Well let's look at our sister cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon. Both have experiences with the costs of the 
boom-bust economics of the members of the Tory Party from 
the past, the economics that says big from somewhere else will 
somehow provide sustainable growth. 
 
And we both know that that economics of the past is no longer 
appropriate for Saskatchewan's future. They both know that the 
cost per job created in that kind of a scenario is no longer 
available to governments at any level, be they the municipal 
level or the provincial level. Both have had economic 
development departments settled within a bureaucratic 
structure, and most often a structure that either placed them in 
an adversarial position with their communities or just in a 
position where they were not able to react quickly enough to 
seize the opportunity — to seize an opportunity to be the 
benefit to the community who's vying for the business 
initiatives in a fast-paced, modern world. 
 
This is where I will share with you at this point most of the 
Regina experience because I'm most familiar with it. And at a 
time when I was a member of Regina City Council, we were 
launching our strategy and our new Regina Economic 
Development Authority. 
 
To cooperation, Mr. Speaker, REDA (Regina Economic 
Development Authority) represents the first real coming 
together of governments and the business community — 
coming together around common goals and purposes. It's now 
recognized as Regina's business umbrella. It began taking its 
best from the other models across Canada and looking at what 
we could develop that would suit the community of Regina 
within a Saskatchewan context. It surpassed that now, Mr. 
Speaker, and has grown into a leadership role where others are 
now patterning on the Regina Economic Development 
Authority model. 
 
Well what does this model do? We've heard earlier from a 
speaker that says we're doing it the Saskatchewan way. This is  



May 9, 1995 

 
2104 

exactly what this model does. It brings together in community a 
model of cooperation between all players in the Regina scene 
— business, labour, community leaders, aboriginal leaders — to 
take a close look at their own communities, the strengths and 
weaknesses and what their infrastructure can maintain and then 
plots out an aggressive strategy to seek out opportunities that 
match with their own goals and objectives, the goals and 
objectives they've set for themselves, similar to what we're 
talking about in health care where communities empower their 
own players and empower themselves to set the goal, set the 
strategy, and go after it together in an aggressive way together 
in cooperation and community. 
 
So in Regina, it's called Future Regina. Future Regina brought 
together the players and developed a strategy that says here are 
the things that Regina can sustain. Regina's a Queen City. It's a 
shopping destination. We're known across this country as being 
warm people and hosting fantastic conventions that not only 
have opportunities for the people who are in attendance at the 
conventions but their spouses and partners as well. We have 
cultural opportunities, and we have arts opportunities. We're 
seeing growth now through the expansion of the film industry. 
We now know we can market throughout our communities the 
opportunities we have through our museums and our mosaics 
and our structures in place in arts and culture. 
 
Regina saw opportunities to be a western region for economics 
in banking and worked with the OWEC, an Organization for 
Western Economic Cooperation, to see that Regina would be 
the centre for that cooperative network and to further our goals 
of being a centre of economic development for our western 
region. They came together to speak of the opportunities in the 
aboriginal community and see the possibilities of working in 
partnership to expand the possibilities to have people in our 
communities actively involved in the economy and not taking a 
back seat to anyone. And we're seeing growth in small-business 
industries and opportunities for the aboriginal community as 
well. 
 
But it's in the area of the information technologies that I want to 
highlight and emphasize Regina's opportunities and the way 
that their Future Regina strategy and the Partnership for 
Renewal have worked so well for them. 
 
We see a critical mass in Regina, a critical mass provided by 
organizations such as ISM (Information Systems Management 
Corporation) and CDSL (Co-operators Data Services Limited), 
through our own Crowns in the SaskTel network  a critical 
mass that can vie for call centres, a critical mass that works with 
the University of Regina to vie for a software technology 
centre, the STC. It's helped us to be able to go after 
opportunities like the Sears call centre, the CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) call centre announcements, cancer 
society, and other major advances in information technologies 
and capabilities within the Regina community. 
 
The Future Regina document recognizes the shifts in Regina's 
economic base very quickly, identifies new economic engines 
or drivers for future growth, details strategies to realize growth  

in new and emerging sectors. It's created a major positive 
improvement in how Reginans view and see their community. 
 
We were at the brink of having people who were pitting 
themselves against each other in a tax revolt in the city of 
Regina. That was a catalyst to see the economic development 
authority come together and generate the power that is present 
when you can bring people together and create a positive view 
of not only themselves but their community and be able to take 
that positive exchange to external markets and have other 
people view Regina with the same eyes that we see Regina as a 
city that's one of the best cities in Canada in which to live and 
do business. 
 
REDA promotes harmony amongst all levels of government and 
discourages public discord for the benefits of the media that 
could otherwise be resolved by discussion between the effective 
partners. Most recently some of the things that they've come 
together to talk to us about are their resources and the relevant 
statistical data that they're able to collect, the information 
sources that are pertinent to Regina economic development 
opportunities. They've developed a computer-based bid book 
and data base capability and have been able to then very quickly 
come together with Regina caucus and the caucus as a whole 
and seize the opportunities that are being presented in the areas 
of information technologies and the other areas identified 
within the future Regina strategy. 
 
But how does this change the economic outlook across the 
province? Well soon after Regina developed its economic 
development authority, Saskatoon developed theirs. Their 
strategy is a statement of their potential in biotechnologies, in 
the new agricultural technologies. 
 
There is an impressive list, Mr. Speaker, that I know the 
member who is seconding the motion from Regina 
Sutherland-University will put forward in his discussion. It's an 
impressive list, and it's not in opposition to the Regina strategy, 
but a compliment to its sister city  once again a cooperative 
model and a cooperative mode. 
 
Across this province people are demonstrating the powerful 
force that the principles of community and cooperation and 
fairness can achieve. Once again the people of Saskatchewan 
are demonstrating economic development the Saskatchewan 
way. Communities are coming together to form their own 
REDAs (regional economic development authorities). There's 
10 at present, and 11 shortly going to be announced, and they 
can vocalize to government what opportunities we need to 
facilitate, what areas that we can assist them with our initiatives 
such as those announced in the latest budget speech presented 
by the hon. minister, our minister who says that we will 
continue to implement our economic development plan, the 
Partnership for Renewal which involves working in partnership 
with others in the community to build on our strengths. 
 
This budget provides financial support for regional economic 
development authorities which promote partnerships — a key 
part of our job's plan. This budget provides support for  



May 9, 1995 

 
2105 

Saskatchewan Research Council to help companies in 
developing and marketing their new ideas and technologies. 
We've changed our approach to agriculture to encourage 
diversification and more value added production. 
 
We've provided targeted tax reductions to business to encourage 
investment. Over the last four years, our government has 
reduced by 20 per cent the corporation income tax rate for 
Saskatchewan. Small businesses which create . . . The tax rate 
for Saskatchewan small businesses . . . that will create most of 
the jobs in Saskatchewan because we know that jobs are created 
by the small businesses who have chosen to come here, to live 
here, to support their families here, and return to the community 
some of the benefits of job creation. So we see the small 
business rate is now 8 per cent which is the second lowest 
provincial rate west of Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're committed to processing and manufacturing 
our resources within Saskatchewan rather than exporting the 
processing jobs. An example of the benefits of value added 
processing is Canamino, and I know that the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland-University will also tell you more about 
that. By promoting value added processing, we're finding new 
uses for our agriculture products, and at the same time we are 
creating good, long-term jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
We have eliminated the PST (provincial sales tax) on the 1-800 
numbers and have actively supported SaskTel's involvement in 
international projects like the Chunnel that will help us to 
protect that critical mass of information technology and the 
infrastructure that's needed to further the role of SaskTel and 
the information based technologies in our community. 
 
The strategy is paying dividends. It's paying dividends of 
opportunities for our youth, jobs for Saskatchewan people, and 
a hope for the future. Mr. Speaker, it's paying dividends 
because it's being done the Saskatchewan way, and we're 
providing leadership across this country on the ways that we 
can produce economic growth and jobs for our communities. 
 
Examples of this recent success would be, in Regina alone, the 
announcement of a Sears call centre and the subsequent 
expansion, about 800-plus full-time equivalent jobs; the Royal 
Bank call centre with about 60 jobs; the CIBC call centre with 
close to 500 full-time equivalent jobs; the cancer society call 
centre with about 220 full-time equivalent jobs; and most 
recently the SaskTel partnership with Octel that says this 
service and launch of TalkMail in Saskatchewan is a major step 
toward the availability of universal voice mail services 
throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the strategy is paying dividends. The 
most recently announced monthly employment indicators that 
were released for April 1995 by StatsCanada again indicate 
positive progress related to our economic efforts. Total 
employment is up 6,000 over April last year and an average 
9,000 so far this year. On top of the 7,000 increase between 
1992 and '94, this indicates that goals in the Partnership for 
Renewal strategy are attainable, that goals through regional  

economic development authorities are attainable. 
 
At 7.4 per cent, Saskatchewan continues to have the lowest 
unemployment rate in the country; 7.4 per cent is the lowest 
April rate since 1982. That alone is a statement on what our 
economic development strategy based on our principles can do 
for the province of Saskatchewan. And hope, Mr. Speaker . . . 
Youth employment, ages 15 to 24, posted a 5,000 person 
increase over the same period one year ago. 
 
There's strong construction, manufacturing and transport, 
communications, utility employment. This all reflects the 
widespread strength in the economy. And there's gains in 
wholesale and retail trade employment, and that reflects a 
strong retail sector and wholesale trade data centre. Consumer 
confidence has returned in those areas. 
 
Employment is well ahead of the budget forecast of .9 per cent 
employment growth for 1995 which would mark the third 
consecutive year of increase in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said and as you will see . . . and be supported 
. . . the discussion will be supported by my colleague and 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland-University. The strategy is 
paying dividends. The strategy is providing hope for our youth. 
The strategy is showing that the principles of community, 
cooperation, and fairness the Saskatchewan way are providing 
the way for economic growth and development in our province. 
 
And therefore, I am pleased to move the motion: 
 
 That this Assembly support the modernization and 

diversification of the Saskatchewan economy as 
demonstrated by the development of Saskatoon as a 
major biotechnology centre, the development of Regina 
as an information technology centre, and by the creation 
of high-tech, value-added industries throughout this 
province. 

 
Seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland-University. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It's a 
pleasure to speak to this motion this afternoon although I 
suspect that time won't allow me to say everything that I have to 
say on this subject. 
 
I think it's important for the people of Saskatoon and for the 
people of Saskatchewan to understand that the real impetus 
behind the ag biotech that's taken place in Saskatoon these last 
three or four years, that the key to that success doesn't just start 
with the last three or four years, but it goes back a decade or 
more to the government of Allan Blakeney who created 
Innovation Place through SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) at the University of Saskatchewan  



May 9, 1995 

 
2106 

campus. And it's because of that investment in technology and 
the infrastructure almost two decades ago that we are beginning 
to see the kinds of dividends and rewards in terms of jobs and 
economic development for Saskatchewan people right now. 
 
I'd like to share some information that is actually quite stunning 
in terms of the development of ag biotech in Saskatoon. In 
Saskatoon, ag biotech is now the city's number one growth 
industry. And we need to know that of the province's 27 ag 
biotech companies, 24 are located in Saskatoon, and that makes 
Saskatoon now Canada's major ag biotech centre for ag biotech 
research — in all of Canada. 
 
The cluster of biotech firms that's in Saskatoon is fully 30 per 
cent of the entire Canadian ag biotech industry. Almost a third 
of all biotech in the country is located in Saskatoon at 
Innovation Place and the University of Saskatchewan campus. 
 
The Canadian ag biotech industry has triple the number of 
companies that existed in Saskatoon only four years ago in 
1991. Many of these firms of course are located right in 
Innovation Place. And we now have 700 ag biotech researchers 
working in the public sector in Saskatchewan, spending about 
$80 million annually — that's in the public sector — with 
another 300 people working in private sector ag biotech 
companies which achieve sales of 25 to $30 million annually. 
 
With these facts in mind, we can see that our government is 
well on the road to creating new jobs and new opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. And a lot of it is through a renewal of 
our agricultural sector through ag biotech. Already we have 
seen an increase of 9,000 jobs over a year ago here in the 
province. As was said by my colleague from Regina Wascana 
Plains, Canada's lowest unemployment rate is now here in 
Saskatchewan, and the April rate of 7.4 per cent was the lowest 
rate since April of 1982. 
 
Our government is on a roll, and we're on a roll creating jobs 
and economic opportunities for Saskatchewan people. And I 
want to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the same 
deliberateness and intensity and effort and determination that 
we put into balancing the province's books and dealing with the 
province's financial circumstances and debt, that same initiative 
and industry and drive is now going to be turned to creating 
more jobs and economic opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
We've delivered the goods in terms of financial management, 
now we're going to start to deliver the goods in terms of job 
creation. 
 
But it's important to note here that this isn't going to be job 
creation done simply by government alone, and I've alluded to 
that in some of the statistics that I opened with in terms of ag 
biotech in Saskatoon. 
 
This is economic development that follows a cooperative 
model, that follows the outline put forth by the government in 
1982 — 1992, excuse me — the Partnership for Progress  

model, which is a cooperative model with the private sector and 
the public sector working together in cooperative partnership to 
create jobs and economic activity for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The public sector supports public institutions in Saskatoon such 
as the Plant Biotechnology Institute, the Ag Canada research 
station, the Saskatchewan Research Council, VIDO, the 
Veterinary Infectious Disease Organization, the Crop 
Development Centre at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), the POS (protein/oil/starch) pilot plant, 
Innovation Place itself, the U of S itself. 
 
And as a result of that, there are new companies coming to 
Saskatoon to the ag biotech cluster, and it's drawing companies 
literally from across the world, an international assortment of 
firms, including AgEvro from Germany, Monsanto from the 
United States, Limagrain genetics from France, and Plant 
Genetic Systems from Belgium. All within the last year or two 
have set up their operations in Saskatoon because of the world 
class, worldwide reputation that the province has for ag biotech. 
And the provincial government is committed to facilitating and 
sustaining that strong role of economic development for ag 
biotech in the province. 
 
And I want to conclude by saying that in this sitting of the 
legislature, new legislation has been introduced provincially to 
establish a $27 million ag food innovation fund so that we can 
continue the kind of economic activity and job creation 
measures, in partnership with the private sector, that has 
characterized the best of economic development here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I'll conclude by saying that we're on an exciting crossroads 
in terms of economic development in ag biotech. It's centred in 
Saskatoon. 
 
It provides the province with real opportunities for an industrial 
base in a province that really has very little opportunity for an 
industrial base, using our historic strength in education and in 
agriculture to create opportunities for processing, for research 
and development, right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
 
And that all translates into jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would 
move to Private Members' Bill No. 18. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member repeat that? I didn't hear 
the number of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I believe it's Bill No. 18, second 
reading. 
 
Leave granted. 



May 9, 1995 

 
2107 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 18 - An Act to amend The Health Districts Act 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it wouldn't 
have taken much for Saskatchewan's NDP government to hold 
health board elections last fall in conjunction with municipal 
elections. Mr. Speaker, our caucus believes they could have 
stood in their places in the Legislative Assembly and voted yes 
to the official opposition's Bill No. 53 last session. That Bill 
would have legislated health district board elections last fall as 
promised by the members opposite. One has to ask, why was it 
important to hold health board elections last fall? 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, it would have saved over 700,000 of 
taxpayers' dollars wasted on studying these elections plus the 
cost of holding separate elections for health district boards. 
 
Second, the NDP promised local autonomy and democratically 
elected board members to make vital decisions regarding health 
care in communities, but instead have chose 52 rural . . . closed 
52 rural hospitals, drastically cut health services, and more, 
without the consent of local people elected. That's why it's 
imperative that we have elected boards. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, the suggestion first came from Health 
minister Louise Simard's own department. But most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, it's what Saskatchewan people want 
and what they deserve. Instead we find the NDP government 
refused to support Bill 53 and in doing so ignored the wishes of 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association; the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities  SARM; 
the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses  SUN; and the general 
public of this province. 
 
It seems nothing has changed since that time, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has ignored almost everyone on this issue except 
the health boards themselves. 
 
Why didn't the NDP want health board elections held? Surely, 
Mr. Speaker, they realize that the majority of individuals on 
these hand-picked political boards will be replaced. 
 
Such localized opposition, as the NDP saw it, was one of the 
things that would seriously damage the credibility of the NDP's 
so-called health reform. Newly elected health board members 
would make decisions based on what is best for their 
communities rather than what is best to re-elect an NDP 
government. 
 
Apparently, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite aren't beyond 
playing a little politics to ensure that doesn't happen. 
Unfortunately all of us are paying for it, both in our 
pocketbooks and through further loss of health services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has imposed unilateral changes to 
health care services and facilities across the province without  

public input. They replaced existing hospital boards with 
hand-picked political boards and then refused to allow 
elections. 
 
As well, the NDP's proposal will only hold partial elections, so 
the Health minister is always assured presentation on each 
health district board . . . or representation, pardon me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people have had no voice in this issue, no 
input. Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have a chance 
to change that. They can support Bill No. 18, An Act to amend 
The Health Districts Act, a Bill which will bring about the 
necessary changes to make health district boards fair and 
equitable for the people of this province, a Bill which will hold 
this government true to its promises. 
 
Presently, Mr. Speaker, there are long waiting-lists in hospitals 
because of added pressure from rural people whose hospitals 
have closed. And no matter what the Health minister says in 
this House, everyone knows that there are inadequate 
emergency health services in rural Saskatchewan, while many 
people have fallen between the cracks, namely Saskatchewan 
seniors. 
 
The members opposite now have the opportunity to give 
Saskatchewan families the local representation they deserve. I 
strongly suggest that this Assembly support this legislation. 
And therefore, it's my pleasure to move An Act to amend the 
Health Districts Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to enter this 
debate only to say that members of the government will want to 
review the Bill, and therefore I would beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would 
move that the House move to Bill No. 59, second reading. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Unsolicited Goods and 

Credit Cards Act (Negative-option strategies) 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
move second reading of a Bill to amend The Unsolicited Goods 
and Credit Cards Act (Negative-option strategies). The purpose 
of this amendment is to expand the protection of consumers 
under the existing legislation. To be specific, the amendment 
will prohibit negative-option sales strategies within 
Saskatchewan, and in turn will protect the consumers from civil 
action suits derived from non-payment. 
 
Changes to the existing legislation were motivated by the tactics 
employed by Rogers Cablesystem in British Columbia that 
aroused consumer outrage across the country and drew  



May 9, 1995 

 
2108 

media attention to the problems associated with this marketing 
method. 
 
The fact that Saskatchewan consumers also needed protection 
from such marketing schemes became evident when cable 
consumers in Lumsden were forced to gather names on a 
petition to prevent their cable company from engaging in a 
similar tactic. 
 
Consumers should not be obligated to pay for services that they 
have not explicitly ordered. This legislation would protect 
Saskatchewan residents from negative-option marketing. 
Quebec, Nova Scotia, and British Columbia, all have legislation 
in place to deal with negative-option marketing, and I believe 
that Manitoba is considering such a similar Bill. 
 
I remind the Assembly that the negative-option marketing 
tactics are not an isolated case to the cable industry. Insurance 
companies have also been investigated, and in some instances 
charged, for engaging in this marketing method. Those charges 
added insurance coverages to home-owners' policies without 
the consumer's authorization and without providing details of 
the added coverage. 
 
Some may argue that Saskatchewan doesn't need protection 
from negative-option marketing. The official opposition 
believes that this a proactive legislation and that the issue 
should be dealt with prior to problems springing up in our 
province. 
 
I hope that the government will seriously consider the 
amendments and welcome their cooperation in seeing that this 
Bill passes. I'm happy to move an Act to amend the unsolicited 
goods and services Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure at this 
time to inform the House and to explain that members of 
government will want to take a careful look at Bill No. 59 — 
An Act to amend the Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards Act. 
And I therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I 
would like to move, by leave of the Assembly, we move to 
consideration of estimates. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair: — I'll ask the minister to reintroduce his officials to 
members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, and members of the  

committee, it's my pleasure to introduce to you the deputy 
minister of Economic Development, Pat Youzwa; the associate 
deputy minister, Mr. Bob Perrin, who is seated behind me and 
to my right. Mr. Perrin is the northern affairs and program 
director. And Peter Phillips, who is ADM (assistant deputy 
minister) of policy coordination. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials. It appears that we're not going to have 
a great deal of time today to deal with things, so I'll try and stay 
in some specific areas. 
 
Minister, one of the areas that you have available to you to do 
economic development that is fairly substantial, but I think isn't 
well understood by taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan, 
is an initiative that was begun under the previous 
administration. And it was called the Saskatchewan Growth 
Fund. And my familiarity with that particular fund ended in 
1991. 
 
I'm wondering if you could tell us today the size of that 
particular financial instrument and what it now has for a 
governing body, because I understand that it was removed from 
the auspices of SEDCO some time ago and now is under a 
different mandate. 
 
Could you tell us how much money is currently available 
through the growth fund and how much of that particular fund 
has been disbursed over the last couple of years. And if you 
could give us numbers for 1993 and 1994. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just so the member knows that 
while we are responsible for immigrant investor funds in 
general, and there are a number of immigrant investor funds in 
the province of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Fund actually doesn't fall under the estimates of 
Economic Development. I mean I could try to answer whatever 
questions you have, but just so we know, Mr. Chairman, and 
make it clear that SGGF (Saskatchewan Government Growth 
Fund) is not part of Economic Development. 
 
But in terms of the guidelines as they would apply in a general 
way to immigrant investor funds, I guess that is the 
responsibility of our department. 
 
And I'm not sure how the member wants to handle this because 
I don't want to get outside of the estimates because I think that 
sets a bad precedent. But it's not that I'm trying to not to answer 
the questions, but I want to be careful not to go into an area that 
I'm not responsible for, at least within the confines of this 
committee. 
 
So I wonder if the hon. member could just, for me, re-ask his 
question. If he's insistent that we deal with SGGF, I'll try to 
answer what I can. But I'm not here . . . I don't have officials for 
SGGF. As you know, Mr. Gary Benson is the administrator of 
that program, and it would fall under quite another part of our  



May 9, 1995 

 
2109 

process in government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay. Perhaps I'll start this way, Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Minister, do you have the authority and do you 
spend monies associated with the Saskatchewan Growth Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, not within the Department of 
Economic Development or at the present time in SEDCO. 
SEDCO's relationship with the growth fund has been changed, 
and this is now administered through SGGF itself with a 
number of agents, one of them now not being SEDCO. SEDCO 
has been excluded from that role. And of course the fact that 
SEDCO has been wound down is one of the main reasons that it 
no longer acts as an agent for SGGF. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So the minister's telling the House that in his 
various capacities surrounding economic development in this 
province that he does not at any time access those monies, nor 
does he include them in any potential economic development 
initiatives that the province might undertake which he is the 
minister responsible for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I'm getting off into SGGF 
almost by accident. But the fact of the matter is, is that when it 
comes to the decision making for SGGF, it is a very, very 
independent process whereby a board of directors, of which I'm 
not a member nor do I have influence in terms of the day-to-day 
decision making . . . Or more appropriately I think what the 
member is asking about is decisions on where the loan money 
would actually go and investments would be made. He's 
absolutely right to assume and believe that we have no input. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I find that curious, Mr. Minister, having gone 
through the last few annual reports because there are obviously 
disbursements involving growth fund money that also are 
attached to agencies that businesses . . . people that have done 
business with the government, had loans with things directly 
under your responsibility. And if no government . . . no cabinet 
minister has any authority over these particular funds, are you 
telling me that they are entirely administered in a private way 
now, that government no longer has any ties whatsoever to that 
money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again, Mr. Chairman, my 
hesitation isn't to delay the committee, but just to say that the 
SGGF is in reality a Crown corporation that is managed in such 
a way that it acts on behalf of the government in terms of 
setting the parameters and the management of the corporation. 
But there's actually an administrative board that deals not with 
the government money, because SGGF does not deal with any 
government money; it's fully funded by the private sector, 
namely through immigrant investor funds. 
 
And so I want to say again, and I want to be clear, that what I 
can deal with is the status of the whole immigrant investor fund 
in a general way in the province of Saskatchewan because that 
does fall under the auspices of our department and we deal with 
the federal government and the immigrant investor fund on a 
regular basis. 

Also, you will know that the federal government has had some 
concerns about that fund and has put a process in place for a 
complete review. But at the present time I just don't want to get 
into the actual SGGF fund — Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Fund — because I say again, to the member opposite, I 
don't have officials here to advise. But secondly it simply 
doesn't fit within the realm of scrutiny of the committee we're 
now involved in. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Perhaps the minister can answer this question 
then. How many projects undertaken by the SGGF overlap with 
SEDCO and SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation)? Those are under your purview. And are there any 
particular deals that there would be that overlap between them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There . . . just so the member 
knows, that under SGGF we have at the present time applied for 
and received approval for in total five different funds under 
SGGF. The monies that have been raised in Fund I and II have 
been received and invested. SEDCO has been involved in the 
administration of a portion of this money. I don't have the exact 
amounts or the funds that SEDCO would have administered 
with me, but I can get those for the member and at our next 
session I can share with you the actual role that SEDCO has 
played in those funds. 
 
And the member, I believe at the time that he was minister, was 
in charge of SEDCO when this program was coming into place 
and he will know that in that period, since 1991, there have 
been some fundamental changes to the way the program has in 
fact operated, especially as it would relate to SEDCO, because 
SEDCO's mandate has not only been changed but SEDCO is 
being wound down, no longer has a board of directors. 
 
The assets that were left in that organization have been 
transferred in part or in total to CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). Some of the assets in the 
process were moved to Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. But at the present time, SEDCO is not involved in 
any ongoing process with SGGF. 
 
As it would relate to specific projects, let me go back and I will 
get for you what I can, in terms of detail and projects that 
SEDCO would have been involved in within the past. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister, I appreciate the 
changing role of SEDCO. I also asked you about the new 
Opportunities Corporation. Does it have any current 
relationships with any of the five funds that are invested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, I neglected to mention to the 
member that Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation does not 
have any relationship with the Saskatchewan Government 
Growth Fund. 
 
Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund is now being operated 
within the confines of its own administration, using several  



May 9, 1995 

 
2110 

private sector investment agencies to do investments for the 
entity. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Perhaps, Mr. Chairman, the minister then can 
point me in the right direction. I just noticed, going through the 
annual report, it says: 
 
 Users should refer to the audited financial statements of 

the Funds, for further information on their financial 
position and operating results (of the five funds that the 
minister mentioned). 

 
And I'm not sure where I would look for those or which 
minister I would question. Is it the CIC minister then that 
should answer all of these questions dealing with the growth 
fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just ask for clarification. Which 
report are you referring to? 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, this would be the 1994 annual 
report, year ended December 31, which I believe would be the 
most current report, of the Saskatchewan Government Growth 
Fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member will know that the 
SGGF is a CIC Crown and therefore it would fall under the 
review that would take place when CIC was being dealt with. 
Or on its own as a separate agency. You could ask questions on 
that, I suppose, under CIC because it falls in part under the 
auspices of CIC as a CIC Crown, or in its own right as a Crown 
corporation. And if the member harkens back, I believe actually 
we have appeared before the committee, the Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
And I say again I'm not here trying to avoid the questions; in 
fact I would very much like to explain. But for two reasons, I 
am hesitant. And I'm not asking for a Chair's ruling on this, but 
just to say to you that I think it would be better served to deal 
with the issues surrounding SGGF in Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
And secondly, if I was going to get into that, I would want to 
get staff here from Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund. 
And so for those two reasons I'm simply trying to move on to 
other items that would fall more clearly under the review of 
Economic Development. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I can appreciate, Mr. Chairman, the minister's 
hesitancy to deal with issues that he might not have the best and 
current information at hand, but I'll just give you a for-instance 
of my curiosity. 
 
This particular fund was housed in the SEDCO building over 
on Winnipeg Street for some time, and it was then moved. That 
current building is basically half empty to my understanding. 
There's only about 30 to 35 staff still left there. 
 
The growth fund, if you look at their expenses from '93 to '94,  

have almost doubled the expenditures. They've gone from just a 
tad over a million dollars to just under $2 million in expenses 
and obviously have been very active. I go through the lists of 
things here. For instance their legal fees have gone from 
$86,000 to 485,000; wages from 227 to 365; general 
administration from 112 to 234. There's a whole bunch of 
things obviously going on. They've rented . . . I understand they 
have a lease, an 11-year lease, that they've signed that is far 
more expensive than the space they occupied before, which the 
taxpayer was already paying the lease at the old SEDCO 
building. 
 
And it was while I was actually reviewing the move of the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation out of that building . . 
. And they also leased new space at considerable expense to the 
taxpayer of this province. And that's why I got curious, Mr. 
Chairman, because I know the relationship involving SEDCO, 
or the way it was in the past, and the fact that SEDCO had 
ongoing relationships with parts of these funds, and yet this 
organization has obviously gone on a spending spree when 
government generally has been trying to ratchet back. 
 
And I guess I can take the minister at his word that he isn't 
involved in any of this at all, that these people are off on their 
own agenda. But I'm wondering why, when the administration 
was being provided at a substantially less cost, the housing of 
the unit was at a substantially less cost, and obviously all sorts 
of these other entities that are listed here were provided at 
substantially less cost, why the government would want to see 
this organization spending a million dollars a year more when 
that money probably could have been used by the Minister of 
Economic Development to further economic development or do 
something in the province, rather than spending it on all of 
these things. 
 
And if they're spending all of this money, Mr. Chairman, they 
must be doing something in the way of disbursing funds around 
the province of Saskatchewan to various groups and individuals 
and entities, some of whom I think the Minister of Economic 
Development knows quite well, and I believe there is a 
relationship. 
 
So I won't push it any more today, Mr. Chairman, but there's 
some unanswered questions here that I think it's appropriate that 
need to be answered. That is an incredible jump for an 
organization that was managing tens of millions of dollars 
previous to the minister changing the relationship. And he said 
he changed the relationship for the good of the province. So 
we've gone from low cost housing, low cost administration, and 
all sorts of things to obviously very high cost entities. And I'll 
let the minister think on that for a short while, and perhaps he 
can indicate to the committee how he thinks that that could be 
handled in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member raises an interesting 
point because when we came to government in 1991, one of the 
headaches we had were the huge losses in SEDCO, which is a 
government agency, and the losses in SEDCO went directly to 
the bottom line of the taxpayers. 



May 9, 1995 

 
2111 

I think at the peak, SEDCO was losing $47 million or lost $47 
million, and I want you and the committee to think about this. 
But a government agency losing $47 million a year . . . we 
decided to wind it down and take those losses from 47 million 
down to zero as quickly as we could. 
 
The Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund, you have to 
realize, there is not one penny of taxpayers' money in SGGF. 
This is a private income. These are investors from Hong Kong 
or around the world who, under a federal program, speed up 
their immigration to Canada by investing money in immigrant 
investor funds, one of those being the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund. 
 
So the money goes in. And I believe during the period you're 
talking about, some $200 million were being administered by 
this organization  not $200 million of taxpayers' money, but 
immigrant investor money. You can argue about legal fees or 
cost of rent, but the simple fact is that not a shred of that was 
taxpayers' money. 
 
On the other hand, SEDCO, which was losing $47 million . . . 
you will see the rapid decrease in that amount to where we will 
be able to announce in the very near future that that 
organization does no longer exist; then therefore is not losing 
any money  saving the taxpayers huge, huge amounts of 
money. 
 
 (1700) 
 
In terms of the building that SEDCO has owned — I believe it's 
on Winnipeg Street — we are in the process of selling that 
building. And we would hope in the very near future to 
announce that the staff who are presently working . . . some 35 
people, and that's down from over 100 people while that 
organization was losing $47 million a year. And at the end of 
the day, the taxpayers of the province will end up being in a 
much, much better position, having wound down a corporation 
that was losing that much money and SGGF becoming even 
further removed from government, as I believe it should, 
because really the investors are private sector. And I think while 
government has a role in terms of regulating monitoring, I think 
these decisions are much better left to an agency at very long 
arm’s length from government. 
 
So two issues: one, the loses in SEDCO are going to be reduced 
to zero; and the management of SGGF, which is not taxpayers' 
money, better left to people within the private sector. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, I appreciate the answer, and I 
understand all of those things. And we will get into, at another 
day, how well SEDCO and its successor are doing vis-a-vis the 
transfers of funds and different deals that they've been involved 
in, and we can sort that out another day. 
 
But I was curious about this because I do remember the premiss 
of why the province of Saskatchewan got into the immigrant 
investor business in the first place, and that was competition 
with other provinces who were actively involved in federal  

government. 
 
And I would just want, I guess, some understanding of its 
mandate, I guess. If the mandate has absolutely nothing to do 
with government anymore, I guess they can spend their money 
how they see fit. But they have taken new leases, and they do 
seem to do things that involve government initiatives. And if 
that's not . . . any money that they would spend other than doing 
initiatives I guess would  you're right  come out of the 
pockets of immigrant investors. But they're still under the 
auspices of the Government of Saskatchewan. I mean the 
Government of Saskatchewan has some responsibility, I would 
think, to make sure that those funds do not give us a bad name. 
 
If we were to squander the funds on silly projects or too much 
administration or legal fees or whatever, I would think that 
those investors would take a very dim view of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I would think somebody in government 
would want to know and understand what those expenditures 
were around and why they have doubled in size and what the 
mandate, if you will, of the growth fund is in building the 
economy of our province. 
 
And I would think the Economic Development minister would 
have a mission statement or a mandate clearly defined and 
understood for . . . And I believe the people running it are still 
paid for by the province of Saskatchewan. They're not 
provincial government employees any more. They've been 
removed from the civil service . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well I understand this. 
 
But the Minister of Finance and I had a discussion about the 
casino operation downtown one day in here, Mr. Chairman. 
And the government seems quite prone to be spinning off all of 
these little entities, that when you ask questions about them . . . 
It's very difficult for a member of the legislature to get a 
question. Her answer to me on the casino was, well no, you 
shouldn't ask any questions because it's operating out of cash 
flow of the liquor and gaming corporation, and that's better left 
to another day. 
 
And taxpayers ask questions about . . . My understanding is 
there's over $100 million in immigrant investment money which 
has been directed toward the province of Saskatchewan. That's 
a lot of money. And as a politician and a lawmaker here, I 
would want to think that someone clearly was watching that 
100 million-or-plus investment that people from outside had 
invested here in various things because we've read about the 
horror stories. There's a hotel in downtown Regina here that's in 
the news all the time. 
 
And I'm . . . Maybe the minister can tell me what the mission 
statement is of this particular entity, if it has now been removed 
totally from government auspices, and then maybe I can direct 
questions somewhere else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let me just give the member a brief 
run-down on the immigrant investor program because it has 
been and continues to be an important program but one that has  



May 9, 1995 

 
2112 

been, to say the least, controversial across Canada. 
 
And I will bring for him and for the committee at the next 
sitting a report. And it slips my mind which investment 
magazine it was included in. But it clearly indicated that of all 
the immigrant investor programs across Canada, the 
Saskatchewan government program stood out as a shining 
example of how immigrant investor funds should work. It has a 
very, very high reputation. And far from being tens of millions 
of dollars that have been raised through that program, it's 
actually hundreds of millions of dollars. It has a high reputation 
in Asia Pacific and continues to sell very, very well. That's not 
to say that all the immigrant investor funds that have been 
involved across Canada have been successful. 
 
The other thing I would remind the member, this is a federal 
program and one which presently has a moratorium on because 
some of the problems associated with immigrant investor funds 
that have not been successful like the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund. 
 
But the main purpose of the plan when it was brought in under 
the federal legislation was to allow immigrants coming to 
Canada to speed up the process of immigrating to the country. 
There were two tiers in the initial phase of how you paid for 
your immigration papers. To those more populated areas of 
Canada, the fee was $250,000. And to those less populated, 
being Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and several of the Maritime 
provinces, the fee was $150,000. 
 
Of that money, Saskatchewan has fared far better than any other 
province on a per capita basis. In fact Saskatchewan is second 
highest of all the provinces in total amount of monies being 
raised, second only to Quebec. The total amount — the member 
will be interested of total funds subscribed to this point — is 
$512 million. This is not only in SGGF but in the total program. 
The funds available to invest, as I've mentioned, $512 million. 
The total number of jobs that have been created by the estimate 
is 3,432. 
 
So the intent of the program was to get foreign capital to invest 
for a five-year period to try to return to the investor a reasonable 
return. This has worked in many cases; some it hasn't worked so 
well. And of course the province's role in this has been to 
monitor and supervise the program as instituted by the federal 
government. 
 
But when the member says, what is the mission statement, 
basically it's to get money for investments in Canada, not only 
in the province of Saskatchewan because it's a federal program. 
In terms of investments in Saskatchewan, we have fared very 
well in terms of the total amount of money, and on a per capita 
basis we are far, far ahead of any other province. And we also 
have some of the best and most successful immigrant investor 
funds. And one of those — and I'll bring the article that has 
been written about SGGF — our own government growth fund 
is one of the best examples in Saskatchewan and in fact in 
Canada. 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, see, I'm still not 
convinced of this total separation because in 1994 SEDCO was 
paid $51,039 as an investment adviser by some of these funds. 
That's a lot of money. And if SEDCO was paid as an investment 
adviser, it must have been involving SEDCO undertakings, I 
would presume, who were involved with the funds. 
 
Who would direct that? Was the minister directing that or the 
board of directors or the former president or who would be 
directing this investment adviser role with the growth fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It would be management at that 
time, and I don't have the annual report. But at that time, it 
would have been the management at SEDCO. And when you 
talk about the cost, that is not a cost to the taxpayers but in fact 
income that would have come for services rendered. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I appreciate that, Minister, that this was a fee. 
But I'm wondering why they in the same year they had all of 
this other . . . their investment adviser fees in 1994 were 
$675,818, and then on top of that they had another $51,039 
involvement with SEDCO. Was SEDCO providing that fee for 
service involving their own projects, or were these just any 
piece of property or something out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I mentioned in past years, 
SEDCO has been one of the agents that acted on behalf of 
SGGF. And the fees that were paid to SEDCO would have been 
for due diligence, investment advice to SGGF. And the reason 
being is that at that point in time historically and under your 
administration, the program was set up in such a way that 
SGGF which was set up at arm's length from the government . . 
. that when it came to investment advice and due diligence, 
SEDCO was called on to provide that service, and a fee for 
service was charged. 
 
And there again this is not money, I remind the member, 
flowing from the taxpayers or from SEDCO to SGGF, but quite 
the reverse where a fee for services was being charged by a 
government agency of a private investment pool of capital, 
namely the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund which is 
monies that came in from immigrants coming to Canada. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, it raises other questions in my 
mind because the separation, as I understand it, to its own entity 
took place at the beginning of 1993. In fact this entity has 
issued annual statements for '93 and '94 where it was entirely on 
its own. 
 
And I've heard the minister many times talk about the poor 
performance of SEDCO and that it was not a good agency for 
sound fiscal advice. And yet this entity, which the minister tells 
me now is responsible for $512 million and 3,432 jobs, 
obviously thought that SEDCO was good enough to advise 
them on investment opportunities and how to invest in the 
Saskatchewan economy to the tune of $51,000 in fees. And it 
strikes me as a little strange that this much maligned 
organization, which the minister wanted to shut down because  



May 9, 1995 

 
2113 

of its reputation, would be hired by what he tells me is the most 
pre-eminent growth fund in the country to give them investment 
advice on how to invest their money in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it strikes me a little strange that we get these sort of 
conflicting arguments put forward by the minister. If they're 
good enough to advise the government growth fund on $512 
million and 3,432 jobs, why were they not good enough to 
advise the minister and his appointed people on certain things . 
. . but had to be wound down because they were such poor 
operators? And I just find it a little bit striking that that seems to 
be the fact. And I'm wondering if maybe there was . . . if the 
minister wasn't always giving us the straight goods on the 
ability of SEDCO to manage the province's money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, and to members of 
the committee, when I conclude the short remarks I'm going to 
make, I will intend to have the committee rise and report 
progress. 
 
But I just want to say to the member opposite that I don't want 
to leave the impression with him . . . and I apologize if I left the 
impression with him that the $512 million was Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund or that the 3,432 jobs came as a 
result of investments by SGGF. That's as a result of the eight 
syndicated funds in the province, SGGF being one of them. So I 
just want to clarify that point because I may have caused some 
confusion in my previous answer. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that this was a 
circumstance that we inherited when we came to office. And 
after the analysis that was done on SEDCO, this did not come 
as a result only of a decision being made by the government but 
major, major consultation with business people across the 
province. And I don't want to get into the big debate about 
SEDCO, whether it was good, bad, or indifferent. I think it's 
fairly obvious that it did many good things in the province and 
made some mistakes. But at any rate, the public and the 
business community at large indicated to us that they would 
prefer that SEDCO be wound down in part because of many of 
their investments and what was seen to be an appropriate 
competition on Main Street, Saskatchewan. 
 
And that debate really — and the member opposite I'm sure 
realizes that — is behind us, and probably we should just leave 
it at that, not that I hesitate to get into the debate but just that 
that book is finally closed and probably for the better. 
 
I do want to conclude by telling the member opposite that the 
immigrant investor fund has received very mixed reviews across 
Canada. There have been very good immigrant investor funds, 
and you'll read in the newspaper almost on a monthly basis here 
in the province of Saskatchewan of some of those that where 
the investors from Hong Kong or from Taiwan are concerned 
and feel that the investments that were made don't reflect a 
proper return. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, with that I just say to the members of the  

committee I appreciate their patience, and also that the member 
opposite for his questions, and look forward to return sometime 
in the near future to complete the estimates of Economic 
Development. 
 
But with those comments, I would move the committee rise and 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:18 p.m. 
 
 


