






















































April 25, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 25, 1995 

 

 
1739 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to present 
petitions today on behalf of the people from Gull Lake and area. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the people from Tompkins and Gull Lake area of my 
constituency are happy to have these brought to the attention of 
the Minister of Highways today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The petitioners read: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights) which will benefit all property owners 
in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the White Fox, Codette, Regina, 
Davin, Cabri areas, Abbey. Mr. Speaker, I so present today. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
to present a petition on behalf of more than 100 residents to be 
added to the 10,000 petitions that . . . signatures we brought 
forward in this House previously, of residents of the city of 
Saskatoon and district, who are gravely concerned about the 
possible effects of certain changes to the health care delivery 
system that have been proposed by the Saskatoon District 
Health Board. The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) cause the Minister of 
Health to examine the proposal to close emergency and 
cardiac care at City Hospital, and to involve the medical 
and nursing staff at City Hospital in an open review 
process before any decision is finalized; (2) examine all  

 proposals for alternative approaches with a view to 
seeking a solution to keep the emergency and cardiac 
care units open at City Hospital; (3) to delay any 
renovations at University Hospital needed to 
accommodate the decision to close emergency and 
cardiac care at City Hospital until a full consultation 
with City Hospital nursing staff and medical staff has 
taken place and their alternative proposals have been 
examined; (4) to respect the voices of the thousands of 
taxpayers who have signed this petition to ask that the 
new City Hospital, financed by their tax dollars, will 
provide safe and efficient health care, including the 
components of emergency care and cardiac care which it 
was designed to deliver; and (5), to report to the 
petitioners within three days of this presentation of this 
petition the decision of the minister with respect to the 
requests outlined in this petition. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition I'd like to put forward this afternoon, and I will read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these 100 names were signed up in 10 minutes at a 
banquet that I was MC (Master of Ceremonies) . . . a wildlife 
banquet that I was MC’ing on Friday in Osler. And these folks 
come from Hague, Osler, Saskatoon, Warman, Martensville, 
and Rosthern. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 



April 25, 1995 

 
1740 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day 59 ask the government the following 
question: 
 
 Regarding Saskatchewan Government Insurance: (1) 

how many newspaper advertisements are scheduled for 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance's 50th 
anniversary; (2) what is the cost of those 
advertisements; (3) how many letters and invitations are 
being sent regarding this anniversary; (4) what is the 
cost of producing and mailing those invitations; (5) 
what is the expected cost for all items related to these 
anniversary celebrations, including staff costs, cake 
costs, and memento costs; (6) what promotional items 
are being produced in conjunction with the anniversary, 
what is the cost of those items, and to whom will they 
be given? 

 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day 59 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding SaskTel: (1) what was the cost of sending 

Clay Gegner, Trisha Shearer, Edward Splett, and Patti 
Kindred to the effective executive program at Waskesiu 
in 1992; (2) what was the cost of sending Hank Pulles 
and Rick Tabin to the effective executive program at 
Waskesiu in 1992; (3) what are the names of all Sask 
Tel employees who participated in the effective 
executive program at Waskesiu in 1994; (4) what are all 
costs associated with these employees attending this 
seminar; (5) what are the names of all employees who 
have enrolled in this seminar for the current year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I'd like to introduce through you and to the rest of the 
Assembly, 37 students from the Dillon School. They're seated 
in the Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they come from grade 
6 to 10. They are here with their teachers, Jessie Sylvestre, 
Leona Campbell, Donna Nezcroche, and principal, Don 
Thompson. They are also accompanied by their chaperon, Joan 
Campbell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd just like all members to welcome the students 
and the rest of the group here from Dillon today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, two 
groups of friends here today. First of all, John and Patricia 
McNiven and Jean Beattie, right up here in your gallery. They 
usually watch us, I believe, on TV, but here they are to see us in 
the flesh this afternoon. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, I'd also like to introduce two 
friends who are sitting a little farther up in your gallery. They 
are Irene Wald and Marilyn Rink, long-time friends. And 
they're here to see what we're doing today. I ask the Assembly 
to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you, a constituent, Mr. Cal Erickson, who is also 
greatly involved in the labour movement. I certainly welcome 
Cal here today and I hope that all other MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) will do so also. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — With Mr. Erickson, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Greg 
Eyre, who's a constituent of mine, and even though he's been 
introduced here before, I didn't want him to feel left out. So I 
thought I'd get members to welcome him as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Expansion to Meadow Lake Pulp Mill 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
member from Thunder Creek got the jump on me by 
announcing some very good news from my constituency. I 
understand his desire to be part of the positive economic 
developments happening in our area and I want to join with him 
in his announcement. 
 
I was delighted to be present with the Premier yesterday at the 
official announcement of a major expansion to the Meadow 
Lake pulp mill. The pulp mill is a joint venture between Millar 
Western Industries, which operates the mill, and the Crown 
Investments Corporation. This mill, Mr. Speaker, is the world's 
first zero effluent chemi-thermomechanical pulp mill. That 
means it's environmentally friendly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Presently it employs 196 people with another 170 involved in 
the wood harvesting. The $32.5 million expansion, funded by 
the mill's own cash flow, will install a wood chip handling 
system to improve wood utilization, build new facilities to 
improve product quality, and reduce chemical costs and 
increase overall capacity. Twelve permanent new jobs will be 
created, and there will be an additional 125 construction jobs 
created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this plant is now operating at a profit, employing 
Saskatchewan workers, and doing all this in an environmentally 
responsible manner. My congratulations and thanks to the 
management and workers of the Meadow Lake pulp mill. 
 



April 25, 1995 

 
1741 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Old-fashioned Bunnock Tournament Planned 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a while 
ago I had a two-part statement in which I mentioned two 
elevators. Well they're both up and running. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about something else. 
Every long weekend in August residents of Macklin host the 
world's championship bunnock tournament. And for those of 
you who are not familiar with the bunnock, might not know that 
it was a game started in the early 1800s, then introduced to 
Canadians by Russian-German immigrants. 
 
It consists of two teams using old, dead horse bones as a 
competitive game, Mr. Speaker. In the 1800s, bunnock was a 
free form of entertainment because for years long-dead horses 
were plentiful, and they used bones out of the front leg of a 
horse. 
 
This tradition, Mr. Speaker, is still celebrated today in Macklin 
and about 150 people participate. Besides playing bunnock, the 
celebration includes live bands on Main Street, face painting for 
children, helium balloons, craft and bake tables, food booths, 
beer gardens, and much more. Two years ago, Mr. Speaker, I 
was asked to throw the first bone, and this year the mayor, a 
reeve, and myself, will launch the tournament together. 
 
Commemorating this long-standing tradition, at the junction of 
Highway 31 and Highway 14 stands an interesting landmark. 
The town of Macklin has constructed a 32-foot bunnock made 
out of steel pipe, chicken wire, and fibreglass. This giant 
bunnock, Mr. Speaker, serves as a tourist booth stocked with 
information about the town as well as souvenirs. The local Eye 
Hill tourism committee is planning a grand opening of this 
boon on June 11 in order to tie the opening with the province's 
90th anniversary. And I would like to congratulate all of those 
who have kept this tradition alive and who are working very 
hard to bring more tourist dollars into the town of Macklin and 
our constituency. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Liberator Revisits Utrecht 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From time to time 
in my work as a member of the Assembly, there are touching 
stories involving constituents. And a story that fits into that 
category began some 50 years ago in Holland during the Second 
World War. 
 
The headline in a Dutch newspaper reads: Canadian liberator 
found after 50 years. In April 1945, Roy Armstrong of the 
Regina Rifles and hundreds of other Canadian soldiers were 
responsible for liberating the community of Utrecht in The 
Netherlands. Armstrong became good friends with a young  

boy, C.W. Slinger, and his family and helped them by providing 
food. 
 
Many years passed and this young boy, who is now 62 years 
old, decided to search for his long-lost friend. He wrote 
numerous letters and articles to newspapers and various groups 
and agencies, and finally an article that appeared in the Regina 
Leader-Post found its way to Mr. Armstrong in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Armstrong will be travelling to Utrecht this 
Thursday to be honoured at a special 50th anniversary 
ceremony and to be reunited with the people he helped liberate. 
 
I would like to extend my best wishes to Mr. Armstrong for 
serving his country and helping others, and to his friends in The 
Netherlands who never gave up hope. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
And on a final note, I might add that to see this story visually, 
you might want to tune in the BBS (Baton Broadcasting 
System) TV news at 6 o'clock tonight. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lloydminster Kinsmen Rodeo 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, this week in . . . The 
Lloydminster Kinsmen and a number of event sponsors will 
host the 23rd annual Lloydminster Kinsmen Rodeo. 
Traditionally this is one of the highlights of the year, and this 
show promises to be among the best ever. 
 
Like almost every community event in Saskatchewan, what 
makes this one so special is the way the town gets behind it for 
fun and worthy causes, as if fun were not a worthy cause in 
itself. 
 
This year, in addition to the rodeo, there will be a pancake 
breakfast to raise money for the outdoor pool. There will be a 
first nations art show and sale, designed to showcase emerging 
first nations artists. For those who love to watch horses work in 
more precise ways than the traditional rodeo events, there's a 
cutting horse meet on Saturday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kinsmen are expecting 8,000 spectators this 
weekend. For that number of sponsors, they have gathered 
together probably the finest herd of rodeo stock anywhere and 
the finest group of cowboys to oppose them. I invite all 
members to travel north-west this weekend where the climate is 
dry, the drinks cold and wet, and the excitement first rate. 
Thank you. 
 

Prince Albert Business Awards 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize a number of businesses in Prince Albert which have 
recently been honoured for their leadership in the community. 
 
The fifth annual Samuel McCloud Business Awards were 
presented in Prince Albert on April 19. The Saskatchewan 
government was represented at this event by my colleague, the  



April 25, 1995 

 
1742 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. Mann Motor Products 
Ltd. was presented with the business of the year award for 
demonstrating overall success and performance in the local 
business economy. The Mann family has been involved in the 
automotive business in Prince Albert for more than 40 years. 
 
Mann Motors developed a new marketing and investment 
approach which resulted in a 1994 sales increase of 80 per cent 
over the previous year. The other award winners were: 
Industrial Automated Systems for product development; 
Shuttlecraft International for job creation; Quin Tec Enterprises 
for new business; and community involvement . . . the 
community involvement award went to P.A. Bottlers. Central 
Answering Service won the service industry category, and 
Leon's Furniture won in marketing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize Steve Ruznisky of 
Prince Albert Northern Bus Lines who won the legacy award 
for long-term contribution to the community. 
 
Congratulations to all of these businesses for doing their part in 
helping our Saskatchewan economy grow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ogema Trade Show 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
weekend Ogema's second trade show takes place and it 
promises to be a real success. 
 
Sponsored by the Ogema Economic Development Committee, 
the trade show advertised for 70 inside booths and 10 outside 
displays, and I'm pleased to report the show has sold out and 
even more than sold out with 73 indoor displays. 
 
The trade show has attracted visitors from the United States, 
British Columbia, and all across Saskatchewan. The huge 
variety of displays include plastic recycling, meat processing, 
auto painting, pedigreed seed, and even carpet cleaning. 
 
I'm also happy to note that Saskatchewan's team, the 
Roughriders, will be out in full force with both a booth and 
appearances by players. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there are several health-related displays. 
These include a blood pressure check, medi-chairs, and even a 
mock emergency put on by the Pangman Ambulance Board and 
the local health district. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ogema Trade Show takes place on Friday and 
Saturday this weekend at the Ogema rink complex and regional 
park. Show times are noon to 8 p.m. Friday, and 11 a.m. to 4 
p.m. Saturday. The event wraps up with a cabaret for visitors 
and participants on Saturday night. At this time I want to invite 
all people in the area to the Ogema Trade Show. I also wish to 
congratulate the Ogema Economic Development Committee for 
another successful demonstration of the Saskatchewan spirit. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

100th Anniversary of Salvation Army 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd just 
like to take a moment to acknowledge the work of an 
organization in this province and across Canada for the work 
they do with disadvantaged people, and certainly the work has 
extended to other parts of the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm talking of the Salvation Army. I had the 
privilege this afternoon of attending, along with the Premier, a 
luncheon hosted by the Army in acknowledgement of their 
work and the 100th anniversary they're celebrating of the 
establishment of the Army. 
 
Certainly this group of individuals puts into practice the words 
of our Lord when he said: when I was hungry, you fed me; 
when I was thirsty, you gave me to drink; when I was cold, you 
put clothes on me. 
 
So I want to extend our appreciation, on behalf of the 
Legislative Assembly, to the Salvation Army for the work and 
their endeavours not only in our city but in our province and in 
our country. 
 
Thank you, and God bless. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again our 
caucus is pleased to bring forward these questions sent to us by 
members of the general public. And my question to the Premier 
comes from Larry Prokopetz from White Fox. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why we do not have the legislated 
right to ownership of private property in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It would seem to me that this is a very basic 
right in any democratic society. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course all 
Canadians have the right to own private property. I think though 
that the question is put forward with such obvious good humour 
by the member that he refers to his own legislation which he 
had introduced in the House earlier this session. 
 
The objection that we have to that legislation is that it would 
serve no useful purpose in the gun control debate. Our position 
in respect of any potential or possible constitutional challenge 
to what the federal government is doing must stand on its own 
feet, and there is literally nothing that we can do in this House 
of a legislative nature that will assist us in that fight with 
Ottawa, if indeed we find ourself in that position. 



April 25, 1995 

 
1743 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Post-secondary Education Funding 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, this question comes from E. 
Mikale McDonald from Saskatoon: Mr. Premier, I want to 
know if the federal government cuts cost — excuse me — if the 
federal government cuts post-secondary transfer payments, what 
programs will the provincial government implement to help 
students? As it is now, receiving full students loans, students in 
colleges such as law are not making ends meet. Will you be 
able to help? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for that 
question. As all members will know, we are not yet in a 
position to respond in any substantive way to the proposed 
changes to federal transfers to the province. As you know, we 
have had EPF (established programs financing) post-secondary 
education funding, EPF health funding, and then CAP (Canada 
Assistance Plan). The federal government is proposing to put all 
of these items into one big sum. 
 
Our Finance officials are working with the Finance officials in 
Ottawa so that we have a clear understanding of what in fact the 
impacts will be in the province. So we are not in any way able 
to respond to the question because we do not yet know in any 
precise detail what the download from Ottawa is going to be on 
the provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Closures 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to 
the Premier also. This question comes from Inga Sample from 
Livelong: 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why you are closing so many 
schools. In your election campaign you promised to provide all 
Saskatchewan people with full access to education, based on 
their desire and ability and not their income, gender, race, 
geographic location, or disabilities — well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the member for the 
question. Mr. Speaker, I had our Department of Education go 
back to the late 1960s to look at rural school closures in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I can tell the member that, as 
far back as we can go, there have been rural school closures in 
every year in this province. 
 
Why has that come about? That has come about as a result of a 
demographic shift in the rural population; people moving from 
small towns and villages, small farms, to larger centres. 
 
So I think I can say with some precision that regardless of 
which political party has been in office in the province of 
Saskatchewan, we have always had rural school closures in 
every year in the province of Saskatchewan, as far back as we 
can go. 

School Sex Education Programs 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question comes from Alice Hounjet from Prud'homme: Mr. 
Premier, I want to know why your party is so intent on 
destroying morality and family life. The sexual and 
reproductive health program that you want to mandate in our 
schools is thoroughly disgusting. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well you know, I think part of the 
problem here is that there have been some people in the 
province that have gone around Saskatchewan saying that we 
are going to put compulsory sex education in our province's 
schools. That is simply not true. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has left it up to local people to 
decide whether or not they want to put sex education into their 
health curriculum. It is totally at the discretion of the 
community. 
 
And I can assure the member — and I do hope that he sends 
this answer out to the person that wrote the question — that we 
are not poised to put compulsory sex education into 
Saskatchewan's schools. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to ask a 
question on behalf of a Saskatchewan citizen today, and this is 
Adolph Sushko from Pelly. And Mr. Sushko says: Mr. Premier, 
I want to know why all of us taxpayers have to hurt in lowering 
the deficit, but you and a few others see no reason to remove 
part or all of the pension you will receive. It is strange that the 
burdened have to hurt, but the well-to-do have the massages 
and ointment so as not to hurt. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to 
respond to the question by Mr. Sushko because he raises a 
question which is of concern to him. 
 
I want Mr. Sushko to be reminded, and I'm sure he knows, that 
one of the reasons why we face the dilemma we face in 
Saskatchewan today and why we have had to take some of the 
measures which we have taken — with a great deal of success 
— in balancing . . . being the first province in Canada to 
balance our budget, was because of the 1980s and the almost 
$15 billion debt which was incurred by the former 
administration, which today asks these questions. 
 
But the hope for Mr. Sushko and I think the optimistic news for 
him is, and I'm sure he will appreciate it as well, is that we have 
balanced the budget. We're the first province in Canada to do it. 
We balanced in '94-95, '95-96, and in on until 1999. And in that 
also is a plan to start paying down that tremendous debt which 
was incurred by the Conservative government when it was in 
power in the 1980s. 
 



April 25, 1995 

 
1744 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regional Parks Funding 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question comes from Les Wieler from Riverhurst. Mr. Premier, 
I want to know why the funding for regional parks has been 
withdrawn to the point that many are going to be forced to 
close, when tourism is the greatest part of our economy. On one 
hand we are promoting tourism and on the other hand, taking 
away funding so that the parks have to close. I thought the 
Premier had more smarts than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the 
member opposite for the question. What we have done in the 
process of trying to come to grips with the need to reduce costs 
in the system is to maintain the energy of the regional park 
system while reducing costs. 
 
And as the member opposite may be aware, the capital 
commitments that were in place were maintained and the 
operating support has been withdrawn. But we have asked the 
regional parks association to work with us on designing a new 
program, with the continued expenditure level that's existent in 
the capital program, to design a program that properly meets the 
balance of regional park needs across the province for 
implementation in 1997. 
 

Social Assistance Benefits 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
direct my attention to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. 
Minister, I'm often proud of my communities. But I was 
especially proud recently when the Hague Lutheran church 
helped organize a fund-raising hockey game and other activities 
in order to raise money for Elmer Sawatzky, who is a 
32-year-old man suffering from cystic fibrosis and badly in 
need of a double lung transplant. 
 
Through community efforts, $10,000 was raised to help provide 
for the high cost of living for this family while they will be 
awaiting this occurrence in Toronto. 
 
Unfortunately, as soon as social worker Donna Lawson read in 
the local paper in Rosthern that $10,000 was raised for the 
Sawatzky family, she phoned him to inform him that they 
would be cut off from social services until this money was 
gone. Use it all up before you get a penny more. 
 
Mr. Minister, this money was placed in a trust account over 
which Mr. Elmer Sawatzky has no signing authority, no control 
over whatsoever. 
 
Is it your government's policy to cut social assistance recipients 
off in their greatest time of need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, I know nothing about this  

situation. And as always I have encouraged members to feel 
free to come to my office or contact me if there's anything that 
they're concerned about. And I continue to do that. 
 
I take this question very seriously. I think that the sensitivity of 
this government relative to low income people, the measures of 
which you and the Liberals voted against every single one of 
them, is unparalleled in Canada. 
 
I would be personally willing to talk to this family if you would 
be so kind as to share the information with me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talk about your 
government's desire to help, Mr. Minister. Last year I brought 
up Elmer Sawatzky's cause because then he was in desperate 
need, needing help to help pay for the drug Pulmozyme since it 
cost him about $1,000 a month. And thankfully Mr. Sawatzky 
received help after his case was brought up right here in the 
legislature. 
 
However since that time, Mr. Sawatzky has been unable to 
work, and as a result he and his wife and two small children are 
now relying on social assistance. 
 
Mr. Minister, the community rallied around this need and 
donated funds for Mr. Sawatzky's family. Mr. Minister, don't 
you find it ironic that during National Volunteer Week you are 
negating any benefits this community has provided; that you 
have made it so that the community has been working to save 
the government a few bucks instead of helping a family that 
was depending . . . and in need of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member wants 
to make his political points, he can do that. I've indicated to him 
already that I would be willing to look into this personally 
myself out there. And, Mr. Speaker, I don't know what else to 
say. 
 
I commend the community for rallying around. I think that's the 
Saskatchewan spirit. That's the strength of our people. 
 
I'm telling him, if he's really interested in helping this family, 
let's sit down as soon as this question period's over and go over 
the details, and I'll personally go and see this family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
never, ever doubt the Saskatchewan spirit. It is this 
government's spirit that is in doubt, Mr. Minister. 
 
The social worker told the Sawatzky family that her superiors 
had instructed her to cut the family off. And keep in mind that 
this transplant, the average waiting time is about nine months. 
So some of these trust funds have already gone; $4,000 of this 
trust fund have already had to be spent in getting the family 
poised to go to Toronto. 



April 25, 1995 

 
1745 

Mr. Minister, it's extremely unfair that Elmer Sawatzky does not 
only have to fight for his life, but now he's got to fight for 
something that's even more unfair, and that's fighting your 
government. And his comment to me this morning was, simply, 
what's the point of continuing to fight? That's the seriousness of 
the situation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, Mr. Sawatzky leaves for Toronto in five 
days. I'm asking you now to publicly commit to immediately 
looking into this matter, helping this family which is being 
placed into such needless stress and anxiety by you. 
 
Will you commit not only into looking into this matter, as you 
have already done, but also resolving the issue before Mr. 
Sawatzky leaves for Toronto this Sunday? Will you resolve the 
issue for him favourably, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know what 
else to say. Mr. Speaker, I have already indicated that I would 
look into this personally. If you were really interested . . . You 
know I'm kind of surprised that you're using this case to keep 
getting up and getting up and getting up like this. I don't know 
what you want me to say. I'm willing to meet with him. 
 
Will you also tell him that you voted against, and the Liberals 
with you, you voted against special and differential benefits to 
disabled persons. Would you tell him that you voted, and the 
Liberals with you, voted against the child development and 
nutrition program for low income children? So tell him that as 
well. 
 
I told you, after I will meet with you, get the details, I will 
personally look into it. What else do you want me to say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon City Hospital Emergency Ward Closure 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
questions are for the Minister of Health today. Sir, when you 
are presented with evidence that a district health board decision 
is not in the financial or medical best interest of health care 
delivery, are you prepared to take responsibility to intervene and 
ask the board to justify its decision to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Third Party, the Leader of Liberal Party, here in the House, 
raises what is obviously a hypothetical kind of question. If she 
wants to add some detail to that question, I'll respond to the 
detail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Well that's most interesting, Mr. Speaker, 
because not only has this minister heard this before, the 
previous minister of Health had the meat to the matter and 
decided to do nothing. 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon District Health Board struck a 
committee to prepare a report on the board's proposal to close 
City Hospital emergency ward. The 19 doctors and nurses on 
this committee produced a consensus report which I table today. 
 
The report included their budget calculations, which conclude 
that it is impractical to close emergency because it will cost 
more money to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and threaten the 
ability of City Hospital to provide acute care. 
 
And I brought this issue not only to this minister's attention but 
the previous minister of Health as well. My question to the 
minister this afternoon: are you going to ignore the advice of 
professionals and allow the Saskatchewan district health board 
to implement a plan that will cost the people of this province 
more money and will actually reduce services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows — or 
I believe she knows — the process of decision making is vested 
in the district boards which we work with very, very closely. 
This is not new, Mr. Speaker, that decisions of this nature, 
previously had been taken by hospital boards or ambulance 
boards or home care boards; those decisions are now taken by 
the district boards. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as a province we maintain and enforce the 
highest of standards province-wide. Now I am assured by the 
Saskatoon board that they have been in close communication 
with the medical community in Saskatoon over this decision 
and stand firm that this is the appropriate decision for their 
community and for the needs of their people. 
 
Now we know we have a record in this session, Mr. Speaker, of 
the Liberal leader coming into this House with all sorts of 
charges. We know she came into here with charges regarding 
the Regina District Board, not so many weeks ago, to which the 
Regina District Board had to respond publicly: that's false 
information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again we've seen the Liberal leader bringing 
circumstances into this House, and we will of course be in 
touch with the appropriate authorities and we will check the 
bona fide of her statements. 
 
But if she wants to raise some important issues in the House, 
she may want to talk about the future of medicare in this nation 
under a Liberal government. That may be the subject she wants 
to develop in her next line of questioning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
group and the report that I tabled today, their findings showed 
that the plan to close emergency ward and to create an 
ambulatory assessment unit would actually cost more overall. 
And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, millions will have to be spent 
expanding the emergency ward at Royal University Hospital. 
Now the health board's decision to this first report was to do  



April 25, 1995 

 
1746 

what? Strike a second committee. When the physicians from all 
of Saskatoon and the surrounding areas learned of this attempt 
to ignore the original report, they unanimously supported a 
resolution to ask the board not to make further changes to 
emergency services at Saskatoon hospitals. The district board is 
still on track to implement the plan by January 1, 1996, ignoring 
it. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister — the public and the professionals 
in Saskatoon and district deserve to see evidence of this 
decision. I've tabled more than 10,000 signatures in this House. 
Are you reluctant to conduct an open review of this decision 
because you're afraid of taking responsibility, or because you 
happen to know it's wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want the member to know 
. . . and I wonder if she has raised this with the Saskatoon 
Health Board. I'm sure they would be more than happy to 
discuss it with her. 
 
I would want that member to know that in making this decision, 
the Saskatoon Health Board conducted the most detailed study 
conducted in Canada over emergency services before the 
decision was made. 
 
Now I ask about the credibility of that member. She comes here 
to the House and will raise it, but has she talked to the 
Saskatoon Health Board? And who is it, Mr. Speaker, that she 
would want to have these decisions made by? Would anybody 
in this province want the Leader of the Liberal Party making 
decisions on medicare based on the record of her party, based 
on the record of the party — as we were reminded last night on 
national television — the party that opposed medicare, the party 
that opposed medicare in this province, and the party that is 
dismantling national health-care standards across Canada 
today? 
 
Would they want her making those decisions? I think not, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, everybody in this province 
knows who's been dismantling the health care system in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It most certainly has not been any 
other party except the New Democratic Party. 
 
Yesterday this very minister refused to tell us the total cost of 
the health care pamphlets. He gave us the cost of distribution 
but side-stepped the cost of writing, designing, printing, project 
management, and production. Unfortunately this gives us a 
great deal of insight of how the Department of Health is able to 
distance itself from responsibility, to selectively ignore and 
dismiss valid questions about their priorities in health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you continue to claim ignorance about the full 
costs of something as simple as advertising pamphlets, how can 
anyone trust you to know the full cost of closing an emergency 
department at a major hospital? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the 
House the member was making all sorts of accusations. She 
talked about the federal government giving this province more 
money than we've ever got or more than any other province in 
the country. 
 
Then she went on to say, as I was reminded by members of the 
press, she said that every pamphlet is going to cost $36,000. 
That's what she said yesterday  check the Hansard. Mr. 
Speaker, let me be very clear. The total cost of the pamphlet, 
with the exception of some staff time in the Department of 
Health who wrote it, was $36,000 — 9 cents a copy. That's the 
exact amount. 
 
And if she would . . . Now today she was telling me, I think . . . 
yesterday she was saying we shouldn't be doing that; today she's 
saying we should be doing it. 
 
Again it's a flip-flop and a flip and a flop. Now I'll tell you the 
one thing that isn't a flip-flop is the matter of trust. The 
question, Mr. Speaker, being asked in this province and being 
asked across Canada now: who is it can you trust with the 
future of medicare? And the resounding opinion that I'm getting 
is certainly not Liberals, not Tories, and not the Reformers, then 
certainly not Liberals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we 
saw one of the most deplorable spectacles in the whole gun 
debate, when Allan Rock cited the Oklahoma City bombing as a 
reason to register guns. I thought it was sickening that Rock 
would try and capitalize on the misery of the people in 
Oklahoma City by trying to draw a link between the bombing 
there and his proposed gun registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no evidence that terrorist groups of this 
nature exist in Canada, and Allan Rock seems to be trying to 
suggest that gun ownership ultimately leads to terrorist activity. 
That is an insult to every responsible firearm owner in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
My question is to the Justice minister. Mr. Minister, have you 
been in contact with Allan Rock to let him know that his 
comments are nothing more than fearmongering and the lowest 
kind of political opportunism, and that they detract from the 
legitimate debate on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I heard media reports to 
the effect that the hon. member states, and I must say that, while 
I wouldn't necessarily have used those words, I agree with the 
tone of his characterization and his criticism of it. 
 
It's no surprise to me. This minister has been all over the map in 
trying to defend his proposals. Originally this gun control law 
was supposed to fight crime. Then when he lost that ground, it 
had something to do with the suicide rate in Canada. Well  



April 25, 1995 

 
1747 

nobody could understand why a registered gun would be any 
less dangerous in a suicide situation than an unregistered gun, 
so he abandoned that. 
 
Then he related it to domestic violence. Then he gave that up 
and related it to smuggling, and that didn't seem to go very far 
because he couldn't explain that connection. Now he's on this 
Oklahoma trick. I don't know where the guy is going to land 
next, but this defence of his is getting to be ridiculous, and 
Canadians are beginning to see it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Allan Rock's 
inconsistencies is another reason why we need some action 
here, Mr. Minister. But unfortunately, Allan Rock isn't the only 
Liberal making the link between the gun lobby and Oklahoma 
City. 
 
Yesterday, the Saskatchewan Liberal leader said, and I quote: 
we've seen people make accusations that in fact there is some 
kind of hidden agenda in all this, being confiscation. A new 
quote: I think that does nothing except push people to extreme 
limits, and that's why we see the Oklahoma cities of this world. 
 
Later in the House she said: 
 
 . . . when people try to push emotional buttons, based on 

fabrication, that do nothing except promote extremism, 
and that kind of extremism we've seen in Oklahoma City 
this past week. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure who the Liberal leader is referring to 
when she talks about those who are talking about confiscation 
and promoting extremism. I can only assume she means that 
pro-gun lobby in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
To the Justice minister — this is the mind-set of the Liberal 
Party. Do you really expect to get a fair hearing, a fair hearing 
in Ottawa? Wouldn't it be better to pass our own legislation, 
instead of hoping that the Liberals will come to their senses, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, thanks. I thank the 
member for the question. I don't know whether we'll get a fair 
hearing in Ottawa or not. 
 
I think it was off to a good start yesterday because I thought that 
Mr. Rock's defence of his own legislation was particularly 
weak. I thought the presentation from the Government of the 
Northwest Territories, backed as it was by the aboriginal 
peoples in that region, was particularly strong. And that was 
only day 1. I think as time goes on the heat will increase, the 
media will pick up on it, and Canadians will begin to twig to 
just what is involved in this particular piece of gun legislation 
that they have before parliament. 
 

Now I think that trying to connect this Bill to fighting terrorism 
or to fighting an Oklahoma-style situation or to fighting 
extremism is just a way off the mark. I criticized Mr. Rock for 
it. I criticized the Leader of the Liberal Party for it. I think we've 
got to keep our eye on the ball here. 
 
What's at stake here is not extremism nor is not any kind of car 
bombs or anything like that. What's at stake here is the rights of 
ordinary, law-abiding citizens of this country to enjoy a 
pastime, to enjoy a way of life that they've enjoyed for 
generations in this country and should not be upset. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Five-year Agreement with the Western College of 
Veterinary Medicine 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that Saskatchewan, 
along with Alberta, Manitoba, and British Columbia 
governments, have signed a five-year agreement with the 
Western College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this agreement provides 
funding to maintain a regional university veterinary medicine 
program. The agreement demonstrates the unique model of 
interprovincial cooperation between provincial partners to 
deliver a regional university program. And there is widespread 
support for regional cooperation of this kind. 
 
The four provinces have been partners since 1963. However 
this agreement is especially significant because this is the first 
time the University of Saskatchewan has been actively involved 
in negotiating the terms and conditions of the agreement as well 
as taking a position as a signatory. 
 
I'm pleased that the new agreement will maintain the level of 
funding to the college. The agreement also provides greater cost 
recovery from the other provinces over the five-year term of the 
agreement. The provinces have agreed to share the operating 
costs of educating doctors of veterinary medicine and graduate 
students. 
 
An interprovincial Veterinary Medicine Advisory Council 
advises the college on such matters as enrolment numbers, 
employment demands, and professional development needs. 
The advisory council includes representatives of the University 
of Saskatchewan, the provincial Veterinary Medical 
Association and the provincial departments of Agriculture and 
Education. 
 
The Western College of Veterinary Medicine deserves much 
respect for achieving and maintaining an outstanding 
professional reputation in Canada, and we're extremely proud  



April 25, 1995 

 
1748 

that 20 places out of the possible 66 or 67 places will be 
reserved to train Saskatchewan students to become veterinary 
doctors. 
 
Saskatchewan residents also benefit greatly from the college's 
veterinary services and professional expertise. Farmers and 
veterinarians know they can depend on the college to educate 
students with up-to-date information that will meet today's 
demands of agricultural diversification. The University of 
Saskatchewan is pleased with its involvement in the process 
and its position as signatory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, our government, is proud to be a 
partner in this unique model of cooperation. The people of our 
province are fortunate to reap the benefits of having this 
prestigious institution in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
join with the minister today in welcoming this agreement. The 
thing is, Mr. Speaker, it was announced two days ago and I'm 
glad that the minister has felt free to bring it to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's very important that this veterinary clinic 
continue in the province of Saskatchewan. We're second only to 
Alberta when it comes to the cattle industry. And with the 
expansion of gaming farms and the other exotic animals, Mr. 
Speaker, it's very important that the people of Saskatchewan 
and the livestock industry of Saskatchewan have access to the 
kinds of knowledge, the technologies, and the expertise, that is 
available at the university with the veterinary college. 
 
I know even for myself, Mr. Speaker, I had a dog who was 
injured and I took that opportunity to take the dog up to the 
veterinary clinic at the university, and they managed to perform 
miracles and save that dog for me. So it's very important, not 
just for the hobby industry such as dog breeders, but for the 
main industries of Saskatchewan, which include livestock, to 
have access to this program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we welcome this and we welcome the fact that certain seats 
are set aside for people in Saskatchewan to take advantage of 
veterinary training. We need to develop this college, Mr. 
Speaker, into a centre of excellence which can compete directly 
with Guelph as the pre-eminent veterinary college in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. And we welcome this agreement. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Saskatoon City Hospital Emergency Ward Closure 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today 
I'm bringing forward a motion on behalf of more than 10,000 
signatories in Saskatoon who are deeply concerned about the 
decision by the Saskatoon District Health Board to move 
forward with its plans to close the emergency ward of the  

newly built Saskatoon City Hospital. 
 
There are many members in this Assembly who may not realize 
why this is of such serious concern. And I hope that they will 
listen with open minds today because I'm asking for their 
support, particularly those who represent constituencies from 
Saskatoon and its surrounding area. 
 
What is at issue here is the fact that the Saskatoon District 
Board began, under instructions from the Department of Health, 
to reorganize the delivery of health care in Saskatoon with 
certain cost saving initiatives in mind. Initially each area of care 
was approached and asked to look for efficiencies in their 
operations. 
 
There were a number of working groups established to conduct 
the exercise, and these working groups pulled together 
professionals from Royal University Hospital, from St. Paul's 
Hospital, and from City Hospital. For the most part, there was a 
consensus reached about how services could be delivered most 
effectively. 
 
But there was one area that was much more difficult. It 
concerned the directive to the clinical working group for the 
consolidation of emergency services, which was convened on 
March 1, 1995. The 19 people represented a cross-section of 
professionals who were fully conversant with emergency and 
acute care. 
 
By directive from the Saskatoon District Health Board, the goal 
of this emergency working group, quote: was to develop an 
implementation plan for the Saskatoon District Health Board 
decision of December 17, 1993 to consolidate emergency 
services at two sites. End of quote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was the beginning of a process which was 
doomed from the outset. The only way to gain the support of 
my colleagues today, the only way to convince the members of 
this Assembly that action must be taken, is to tell the story as it 
has been told to me. 
 
But first let me say a few words about the people who have 
come to me with this issue. They are doctors, nurses, patients, 
and families of people who depend on quality care at Saskatoon 
City Hospital. 
 
From the outset, I've been very impressed by the non-partisan 
approach that they have shown. Usually when we see people 
take up a cross against a government decision, it is because they 
have some vested interest, something to gain or lose in 
changing the decision. But this is different. This is not about 
people protecting their own self-interest. 
 
Yes, the ultimate decision, no matter which way it goes, will 
affect some people's jobs, but the people fighting this battle are 
not the ones who stand to lose their jobs. The people who are 
trying to bring some common sense to this process are doing it 
because they care about their hospital, their patients, their 
profession, and Saskatoon and district. 



April 25, 1995 

 
1749 

Before I go into the meat of the matter, let me tell you a little 
about the doctors and nurses I've met with concerning changes 
to the health care system. The most recent meeting I had was 
with Saskatoon City Hospital. The nurses present were there on 
their own time, giving up precious hours of their days off out of 
concern. 
 
As we waited for the chief of medicine to arrive, I listened to 
the nurses tell me of the decimating effect that health care 
reform has had on their morale as a nursing staff. I remembered 
the recent statistics I had heard about the alarming numbers of 
nurses on stress leave and workers' compensation because 
they're simply overworked, burned out, and unable to cope with 
the cumulative effects of physical overwork due to short 
staffing and the emotional stress that has come from a sense of 
losing control over the fast pace of change to their work 
environment. 
 
These were women with nothing to gain; professionals who 
admitted that they could not believe they were talking to a 
politician about health care because they were so desperately 
worried about what was taking place. I remember wondering if 
they knew that most people in this Assembly would probably 
tune me out as soon as I began to speak today because their 
partisan differences would make them deaf to real information 
about real issues. Finally the physician, the surgeon, joined us, 
apologizing for being late, but he'd been involved in a cardiac 
emergency just moments before. 
 
As he caught his breath and launched into the story, I noticed 
the strain on his face, the frustration with telling this tale to yet 
another politician. He is a rather small man in stature, but as he 
spoke I found my gaze fixed on his hands — the skilled hands 
of a man who has saved the lives of many. 
 
As he talked, trickles of perspiration ran down his temples. He 
seemed grateful for the gesture of a nurse who slipped out to 
bring him a cold drink. During our two-hour conference his 
pager summoned at least a dozen times — a signal of how 
much pressure these people endure on a daily basis. Why am I 
telling you all this? What difference does it make? 
 
Well, fellow members, it makes all of the difference in the 
world because it is the human face of health care — the patients 
and the professionals that have been stripped away from our 
health care system by what people deem as bureaucratic moves 
and politicians anxious to achieve goals at any cost. 
 
And what happened to the clinical services emergency working 
group in Saskatoon is not much different, I suspect, from what 
happened to many other professionals across the province in the 
course of health reform. It's not different from what happened 
to surgeons in Regina, who cannot comprehend the logic in the 
plan to move surgery from the Plains to the Pasqua and the 
General. 
 
It is not different from the physicians in the north-west of 
Saskatchewan who watched their entire health care system 
delivery being changed without an opportunity to have input.  

And no, what happened to the clinical services emergency 
working group in Saskatoon is sadly more typical than 
exceptional. 
 
It began, as I said, on December 17, 1993 when the Saskatoon 
District Health Board decreed that there would be a 
consolidation of emergency services between two hospitals. 
And that was the first misstep in the process. 
 
The Saskatoon District Health Board did not ask people 
whether it made sense to have two emergency departments 
instead of three; they did not ask which two hospitals would be 
natural choices if there were only two emergency departments; 
and they did not ask about the effects it has on an acute care 
hospital to close their emergency department. 
 
They did not ask because they had already decided that this was 
to be the outcome of the process, and to predetermine the 
conclusion of a process is to negate the value of the process at 
the outset. 
 
(1430) 
 
But the most interesting and I think the most telling statement, 
is in the bottom line. On one page of the report it states, and I 
quote: a $500,000 reduction in the expenditures was to be 
inherent in this plan. End of quote. So that was it in a nutshell. 
Bring together a group of professionals and ask them in essence 
to create a report that supports the foregone conclusion of the 
Saskatoon District Health Board and make sure that you save 
half a million dollars in the process. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the committee began its work. Weeks and 
weeks of meetings, research, consultations, budgets. The 
diligence this committee showed was exemplary. And they 
didn't do it for money or power or control; they did it because 
they want to deliver quality health care. 
 
The working group did as it was asked. They put forward a plan 
to consolidate emergency services from three hospitals to two 
hospitals, but they also examined the other side of the equation, 
a side that the Saskatoon District Health Board did not expect 
or want them to examine. 
 
They looked, Mr. Speaker, at the consequences of the proposed 
decision to close the emergency at Saskatoon City Hospital. 
They looked at it from a cost-effectiveness perspective and they 
looked at with a view to how it would affect the overall delivery 
of services by the medical staff at that hospital. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, they drew their conclusions. They 
concluded that it was possible to close emergency department at 
City Hospital and devolve responsibilities to University 
Hospital and St. Paul's. They concluded it was only possible to 
achieve $500,000 in savings if the emergency ward closed and 
if City Hospital ceased entirely to be an acute care facility. 
 
And they reached a consensus which said, and I quote from 
page 27: 



April 25, 1995 

 
1750 

 It is the consensus of the clinical working group for 
emergency services that the provision of acute medical 
services in three hospitals requires the support of three 
emergency departments. If in the final analysis the role 
of the Saskatoon City Hospital is determined to exclude 
acute medical services, we would be more likely to 
recommend the implementation of this plan. 

 
 As it stands, (this is another quote) however, we are 

unable to recommend the implementation of this plan in 
its entirely. Although it defines a plan to achieve the 
community provision for emergency services in its 
narrowest sense, it does not support the provision of 
acute in-patient services in all three hospitals. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, was the conclusion, the conclusion reached 
by experienced, educated, committed group of 19 doctors and 
nurses who were asked to prepare the report. It was a 
consensus, as I just quoted from the words in the report 
submitted. 
 
But what happened to that report, Mr. Speaker, is what we must 
concern ourselves with today, and I would suggest that the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland-University pay heed to this. 
What happened to that report is actually a travesty to the 
process of health care consultation. It is a complete dismissal of 
the concerns of the very people who were asked to give their 
learned opinions. The fact is that the Saskatoon District Health 
Board was not willing to accept the consensus conclusions put 
forward by this group. The district health board had already 
decided two things: first, City Hospital was going to remain an 
acute care hospital; and two, City Hospital was not going to 
have an emergency ward. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, they were unwilling to accept the 
professional advice put forward by this group. Despite the years 
and years of combined experience that achieved consensus on 
those recommendations, despite the hundreds of professional 
person-hours that were spent in meetings, despite the research 
and consultation done with other hospitals who do not have 
emergency wards in North America, despite all of those things, 
a group of bureaucrats from the Department of Health and 
appointed board members with virtually no experience in the 
delivery of health care or emergency services decided to dismiss 
those conclusions and recommendations contained in that first 
report. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to dismiss their 
conclusions, and I believe that these people deserve to be heard 
and that what they are trying to say is not only valid, it is critical 
to the future of health care in this province. 
 
We've had numerous exchanges about why specialists are 
leaving Saskatchewan. And politicians argue back and forth 
about the shortage of beds, the waiting-lists, the stress on front-
line care-givers, and so forth. But most people in this Assembly 
really know absolutely nothing about it because none of us have 
even been there, with the exception of one. And we have seen 
the treatment of the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg,  

a medical doctor who chose to become part of the legislature 
because he was concerned about health care. 
 
I want to serve notice, serve notice to the members from 
Saskatoon, I want to hear what they have to say about this 
decision specifically when I finish my remarks — and I'm sure 
that some will comment. And I suggest that they be prepared to 
address this issue because their comments will be sent to those 
10,000 people who signed this. They will be sent to the 
members of this committee, the first committee, and to the 
members of the staff of Saskatoon City Hospital and others 
around the province. 
 
And I appreciate the attentiveness of the members because I 
believe that this issue is just one example of why the wellness 
model is not working. 
 
To continue, I want to walk people through what conclusions 
were reached in the report of that clinical working group for 
emergency and how they were reached. In creating their report, 
everything was examined with a view to eliminating the 
emergency department of City Hospital. The role and function 
of an emergency department was examined and defined. 
Current volumes of emergency traffic at all three hospitals was 
assessed and a model was developed which would divide the 
volume of patients equally between the two remaining 
emergency departments. The next step was to work on the 
creation of an ambulatory assessment unit which was to be the 
replacement of an emergency ward at City Hospital. 
 
In other words, this group created a model that would allow for 
the closure of emergency ward at City Hospital and replacing it 
with a day clinic of sorts. They detailed all of the equipment 
that would be needed in moving, calculating even the space 
requirements, and then they worked out the staffing 
requirements. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, they determined that there 
was a minimal staff reduction for two 24-hour emergency 
departments. And the examination pointed out two realities: 
first, the plan to close one emergency was not turning out to be 
a cost-saving measure; and two, the number of staff on duty in 
emergency is already pared down as finely as it can be. 
 
As it turned out, the budget held the final evidence, and I quote 
from the findings of the report: 
 
 The total projected budget for the two Emergency 

Departments, including both salaried and non-salaried 
expenditures, is $3,735,178 (annually). This amount, 
added to the amount budgeted for the 
Ambulatory/Assessment Unit at . . . City Hospital (to 
replace emergency) is $4,057,038, a figure (Mr. 
Speaker) which is greater than the current budget for the 
Emergency Departments at all three (city) hospitals. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the seconder to this motion is going to go into 
greater detail about this particular document, as well as making 
reference to what the second struck committee was actually  



April 25, 1995 

 
1751 

required to do. 
 
I am very pleased to put forward this motion to the Assembly 
today for everyone to carefully consider: 
 
 That this Assembly strongly urge the Minister of Health 

to intervene in the pending closure of emergency ward 
at Saskatoon City Hospital, and to conduct an open and 
objective review of the report made by the emergency 
working group whose recommendations were ignored 
by the Saskatoon District Health Board. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal leader 
has spoken about the flaw in the process. Mr. Speaker, let's talk 
about what that means in terms of health care. 
 
Today phase 1 of the district health board decision has already 
been acted upon. The emergency department at City Hospital is 
closed from midnight to 8 o'clock a.m. and the complete closure 
of emergency was scheduled for May of 1995. Due to delays in 
the construction, or the onset of an election, or both, the date 
has now been pushed back to January of 1996. Therefore some 
of the consequences have been immediate; some will not take 
place until January. 
 
Well let's have a look at the entire spectrum of effects on health 
care delivery. First, it means a huge change to the health care 
delivery system in Saskatoon, which will actually end up 
costing more money than what was being spent before the 
change took place. You don't need to be a brain surgeon or a 
bureaucrat to figure out that it simply does not make sense. 
 
Second, it means that approximately $6 million will have to be 
spent to renovate the existing emergency ward at Royal 
University in order to accommodate the additional volume from 
City Hospital. 
 
Third, it means that City Hospital will no longer be a teaching 
hospital and the residents and JURSIs (junior undergraduate 
rotating student intern) who used to provide support to the 
medical staff will no longer be available. In essence, it means 
that when the students pulled out, there was no longer any 
physician, no house resident, on duty from 5 o'clock p.m. to 8 
o'clock a.m. — an entire hospital, Mr. Speaker, with no house 
resident on duty. 
 
In the critique section of their report, the working group 
outlined this issue, and I quote: 
 
 Medicine/Family Medicine - It is the position of 

Medical Internists and Family Physicians that Clinical 
Teaching Programs for Medicine and Family Medicine 
will cease to exist at City Hospital with consolidation of 
Emergency Services at the other two sites. 

 
They were right. Imagine what would happen if someone went 
into cardiac arrest at 2 a.m. in the morning. Here we are in one  

of the finest-equipped coronary care unit hospitals in western 
Canada, and thanks to the new wellness model there is no 
resident physician in the hospital to respond to the emergency 
code because emergency is closed and there is no doctor on 
staff. 
 
Dr. Sharma stated that his grave concerns . . . because he and 
most of his colleagues are at least 20 minutes from the hospital 
bedside if called at home. Those concerns were raised and it 
was necessary to create a new position of house resident, which 
added as much to the budget as the closure of the emergency 
ward was saving. 
 
These were the obvious effects, the direct effects on patient 
care. These are the things which do not make sense to even the 
most medically ignorant lay person. 
 
But there are other implications which require an explanation. 
Mr. Speaker, by definition an acute care hospital relies upon a 
complex network of specialists to make it functional and 
effective, capable to respond to any emergency. The emergency 
ward helps to attract and keep quality internal medicine 
specialists practising in the hospital environment because they 
are able to call on one another for patient consults. When the 
emergency ward closes, it is more and more difficult to 
convince the cardiologists, the neurologists, the urologists, and 
many others, to stay. Many patients who arrive in acute care 
come through the emergency department. 
 
In the report this situation is addressed: 
 
 The Ambulatory/Assessment Unit at City Hospital will 

be insufficient to meet the needs of Internal Medicine 
for Emergency resources. The Internists who are 
presently providing services to this site believe they 
need a full complement of Emergency Services on site 
to support patient care. It is their position that the 
practice of Acute Medicine without the presence of an 
Emergency Department may be of serious detriment to 
patient care. 

 
The points brought forward by this group are not only valid 
from a common sense perspective, they are supported by both 
financial evidence and research from other hospitals. 
 
There are serious and legitimate questions raised in the report 
which involve: (1) the unresolved issues about the cost of 
transportation of patients from one site to another; (2) the 
additional travel by physicians from one hospital to another; 
first to assess the patient, then to admit, and then follow up; and 
(3) the liability of the sending physician. The sending physician 
is responsible for the patient on transfer. Who is responsible if 
there is no house officer present to receive the patient? 
 
Overall there are sufficient concerns raised in this report that no 
action should be taken or should have been taken until they 
were addressed. When this evidence was presented to the 
district health board, however, it was not well-received. The 
board had its own foregone conclusions and was simply  



April 25, 1995 

 
1752 

looking for supporting evidence. 
 
(1445) 
 
The report of the clinical working group for emergency services 
built a powerful case against closing emergency if City Hospital 
was to remain an acute care hospital. And that is where the 
critical and unacceptable error was made. Instead of sitting 
down with the committee and reviewing the report and 
accepting their recommendations, the district board chose to 
replace the original emergency working group with a new, 
smaller version and call it the emergency operations working 
group — almost the same name. 
 
The committee opened its report by saying: 
 
 . . . no consensus could be reached by the members of 

the group regarding the . . . model for delivery of these 
services . . . 

 
And the new report was selective in terms of which areas of 
concern were brought forward from the original report. 
 
For instance, on page 26 of the original report, serious concerns 
are expressed about the impact of closing emergency at City 
Hospital will have on the delivery of medicine and family 
medicine. In the revised report it says: 
 
 . . . the impact of this model on clinical teaching of 

medicine is not expected to be great. 
 
The second report indicates that the provision of clinical 
teaching of residents and JURSIs in emergency medicine will 
occur on two sites rather than three. It makes no mention of the 
fact that removal of the clinical teaching aspect will mean there 
will be no doctor on staff overnight at City Hospital. 
 
The most glaring contradiction, however, appears in the bottom 
line. While the first report indicated that it would cost $1,976 
more to operate two emergency departments and an ambulatory 
assessment unit than it would the three emergencies, the second 
report claims to save money. 
 
In the second report, they acknowledge that they can only save 
an additional $139,000 by further reducing the hours for 
emergency at City Hospital. The new report does not include 
the costs of any staff or operations of the ambulatory 
assessment unit, which is to cost about 200,000 to equip and 
operate. It also does not include the costs of patient transfers. 
 
The fact is that the additional cost of the ambulatory assessment 
unit actually outweighs the cost of the emergency ward and 
there is no real demand for such a unit being raised by the 
professionals. It would appear to be a creation designed to fill 
the empty space left by the vacant emergency ward. 
 
When asked about the cost of the ambulatory assessment unit, 
the chief of medicine was told by a person of authority in the 
health board, that cost comes out of the out-patients' budget, so  

don't worry about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he is worried about it. And I am worried about it. 
And more than 10,000 citizens of Saskatoon and district, whose 
names have been laid before this Assembly on petitions 
presented by the caucus, are worried about it. 
 
We have asked the minister to intervene and have an 
independent review of these reports and budgets to verify that 
there are indeed savings. We have had no response. 
 
The second report, Mr. Speaker, recommended that the closure 
of City Hospital be March 31, 1995. Then it was moved to May 
1, 1995. Attached to the report of the emergency operations 
group, there is a memorandum from John Malcom, Chair of the 
implementation group, which says the date for the move of 
emergency services has been adjusted to January 6 to allow for 
completion of sufficient renovations at Royal University 
Hospital. It says the final report of the operations group will be 
circulated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a typical story in this government's health 
reform. For us, it has been a half-hour of history. For the 
professional whose careers, whose ethics, and whose 
commitment to patient care have been undermined and 
dismissed by the foregone conclusions of the few health 
department bureaucrats, this whole thing has been a nightmare. 
The hours and hours of meetings, the careful planning, the long 
and arduous discussions about what would be the best for the 
patients, the doctors, the nurses, and all of the front-line staff 
have been for naught because this government doesn't care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that motion was passed unanimously by almost all 
Saskatoon physicians at their January meeting. Since then, there 
has been no movement by the Saskatchewan district health 
board on this issue. 
 
Today I urge my colleagues to join me in support of the motion, 
and I now second the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want 
to comment on the member from Greystone's motion itself and 
the misrepresentation when she talks about the report made by 
the emergency working group. Not once does she mention that 
there are two reports: a draft report and a final report. I think 
that is deliberately done in order to confuse people and to 
mislead. 
 
Secondly I want to point out, in terms of the motion . . . 
pointing out that the emergency workings group's 
recommendations were ignored by the Saskatoon Health 
District Board. That simply is not true. They were not ignored. 
Maybe they weren't implemented in full, but all of the people 
who were partners to the final report — and she doesn't want to 
talk about the draft report and the final report — all of them 
were members of the final report and the draft report. 
 
Having said that, I want to then say a couple of other things. 
Basically there are only two alternatives available to the  



April 25, 1995 

 
1753 

Government of Saskatchewan at this time with respect to health 
reform. And that is to make changes that either preserve or 
protect the medicare system that we have here in Saskatchewan 
and in Canada and to preserve that system, or the other 
alternative is to allow our health care system to deteriorate and 
drift into an Americanized model: a two-tiered medical care 
system. 
 
That means that change is inevitable. Some kind of change is 
going to be taking place. And either we drift into or we 
deliberately move into an American model, or we work to 
preserve our Saskatchewan and Canadian model of medicare. 
And that's what this government is attempting to do with health 
reform — to protect the system of health care that we have 
come to know and love and cherish. 
 
I now want to speak very directly and review the issue of 
emergency services in Saskatoon. 
 
And we need to begin by saying that the health board has 
tracked emergency department use at all three hospitals over a 
six-week period in January and February 1994. This in itself 
proves that the recommendations made by the physicians and 
staff and people of Saskatoon were not ignored. They were 
taken seriously, or else this sort of review would not have taken 
place — this tracking of actual use. 
 
And if we look at the facts . . . the member from Greystone 
doesn't talk much about the facts. But the facts of this tracking 
reveal that the busy times of day were similar at each of the 
hospitals. Each day, around 47 per cent of the visitors to the 
emergency departments chose St. Paul's Hospital. So right 
there, virtually half of the emergency entrances, visits in 
Saskatoon, are to St. Paul's Hospital. Another 27 per cent went 
to City Hospital. Another 26 per cent went to Royal University 
Hospital. 
 
Another point of fact — in an average 24-hour period, 85 per 
cent of all emergency department visitors did not need 
admitting to a hospital; 15 per cent entered the hospital — that's 
a fact — upon presentation at emergency wards during the 
tracking survey. 
 
Another point of fact — in an average 24-hour period, 85 per 
cent . . . excuse me, I'll go to the next fact. I've just given that 
one. 
 
Between the hours of midnight and 8 a.m., each hospital 
emergency department received about 15 per cent of its total 
daily visits. Another fact — on average, between midnight and 
8 a.m., City Hospital received 10 visits. University Hospital 
received 10 visits, and St. Paul's Hospital received 20 visits. 
Another point of fact — on average, between midnight and 8 
a.m., each emergency hospital department received one visit 
which was a real health emergency. Other visits were not 
threatening to life or limb. 
 
So that we have a situation where during these hours, all the 
people coming into the emergency room, as we might suspect,  

wanted immediate or convenient service. But an average of only 
one person arriving at each hospital emergency department had 
health needs which were health emergencies in these evening 
hours. Surprisingly, even half of the emergency department 
visitors who arrive by ambulance were discharged after being 
served. 
 
Now in changing to a two-location emergency system in 
Saskatoon — and that's the issue that the member raises — this 
changing to a two-location system will maintain the needed 
emergency services that Saskatoon and area people need, that 
the province's people need, in terms of using Royal University 
Hospital as well. 
 
This change will allow for a second staffing team during peak 
hours at both hospitals, which the member conveniently 
chooses to dismiss or not to mention. It also will free up close 
to half a million dollars a year to use for other important, vital 
health services. 
 
And I want to say here that the choice of St. Paul's as one of the 
sites was based on its community hospital role and the fact that 
it presently serves almost half of all the emergency work in the 
district — a sensible choice. Royal University was chosen as 
the second site due to its role as a provincial trauma centre and 
a children's hospital. 
 
And so the decision to consolidate emergency services in St. 
Paul's and Royal University Hospital is not done willy-nilly, has 
not been done — as the member likes to suggest — by Health 
department bureaucrats, but by people in the city of Saskatoon, 
residents of Saskatoon, members of the local health board, and 
yes, doctors and nurses in our city. 
 
And it's a decision that makes good sense. In fact it's a decision 
 contrary to the spirit of the motion which the member puts 
forward, that says the recommendations were ignored by the 
district health board; that simply is not true  it's a decision 
that has been studied and refined and actually there's been a 
delay in the implementation of the decision based on some of 
the concerns that have been raised. 
 
And then the member says, from Greystone, that the 
recommendations have been ignored when the decision or the 
implementation has been delayed. Hardly. I think it's very 
convenient, all too convenient, for the member from Greystone 
not to mention that emergency services will consolidate in '96 
and that an assessment unit will then open at City Hospital to 
provide patients and physicians with direct access to services 
available within the hospital — that an assessment unit is being 
opened. She never mentions that. 
 
It's also important to note that when she talks about acute care 
that many of the services at Saskatoon City Hospital — not all 
of them — but many of them are for geriatric patients and 
rehabilitative services. 
 
Coronary care, for example, is not one of the services found at 
City Hospital but rather at RUH (Royal University Hospital). 



April 25, 1995 

 
1754 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we have a situation where less 
than the full picture has been painted by the member from 
Greystone. The plain, simple truth of the hospital emergency 
situation in Saskatoon shows that Saskatoon does not need 
three complete emergency departments in three separate 
hospitals. Yes it needs two, and yes it can phase one out in City 
Hospital, and this is part of a reform of our health care system. 
 
The member from Greystone can't have it both ways. She can't 
have all existing programs held intact exactly as they have been, 
and yet insist that costs be controlled or contained. She can't 
have her cake and eat it at the same time. She can't have it both 
ways. And we're willing to make the decisions on our side of 
the House to reform the health care system and to keep our 
Saskatchewan medicare system as strong as is possible and not 
to drift or to deliberately move to an American style of health 
care which is unaffordable and does not meet the people who 
deserve to be serviced. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take strong exception to 
the motion that the member from Greystone presents. And 
therefore I would like to move this amendment: 
 
 To delete all words after the "Minister of Health" and to 

add the words: 
 
 and his Department to continue to work closely with the 

Saskatoon Health District to ensure that the emergency 
service health care needs of citizens are met in the best 
manner possible; and further, to continue to work 
towards protecting the Saskatchewan style of medicare 
from eroding to an American-style system. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And this is seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon River Heights. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
some brief remarks to make with respect to this motion and the 
proposed amendment, and then I will be pleased to second the 
amendment. 
 
I'm somewhat saddened that we're having this conversation 
today. This is an issue where the petition was presented and the 
decisions, original decisions made, is almost a year ago. And I 
think that health care for Saskatchewan people and a positive 
and congenial attitude and a consultative mode in involving the 
dedicated health care-givers in this province who work in this 
system is too important to trivialize and play politics with, and I 
certainly don't want to do that. 
 
But for their all their talk and concern about health care the 
Liberals devoted — in 1991, their platform document — a half 
a page, on page 20, to this topic which is the largest expenditure 
of government dollars. And I want to quote from that 
document. This is the Liberal Party's platform in 1991: 

 A Liberal government will focus on effective delivery of 
services rather than construction of new facilities. 
Individuals and families must become more responsible 
and self-reliant in providing for their own health. Health 
services are now very costly, (the Liberal platform 
development, platform document says) partly because 
individuals and families have turned their responsibility 
for their health (care) over to health professionals. 

 
The Liberal platform document goes on: 
 
 Increased self-reliance in health areas will be facilitated by: 
 
 Developing a network of health care and social services 

that is community and regionally-based. Each region 
should have a full range of health care and social 
services, with each community having services tailored 
to their specific needs and capacities. 

 
 Promoting and expanding the cost-effective option of 

Home Care so that more people will have the option to 
remain in their own home for medical treatment rather 
than being placed in a hospital. 

 
 Encouraging communities to explore the comprehensive 

community clinic approach to service delivery. 
 
 Placing a moratorium on capital construction until the 

community regional network is designed . . . 
 
That is almost the total amount of space and comment that 
appeared in the Liberal platform policy in 1991 devoted, Mr. 
Speaker, to the important subject of health care. But what is 
interesting about those excerpts is that their policy is basically 
an endorsement of everything that we have done except that 
there is no notion of citizen involvement or input through local 
health boards. 
 
And I think that with the elections that will be coming up this 
fall, that local control will then be completely in place. The 
transition has been difficult. It certainly hasn't been without 
some problems. Change is always difficult, but the dedicated 
people who work in the health care system have cooperated to a 
very great extent in coming to solutions and moving to a better 
system. 
 
As far as the emergency facilities at City Hospital are 
concerned, fewer emergency rooms are a national, in fact 
international, trend. And I quote from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix of February 11, 1994 where the headline is: 
"Fewer emergency rooms trend." 
 
 But hospitals in Alberta and across Canada are looking 

at making do with fewer emergency rooms, says health 
board president John Malcom. 

 
 He points to the Camp Hill Medical Centre in Halifax as 

an example of how the "one hospital, two site" concept 
can work. 



April 25, 1995 

 
1755 

 In 1987, the 300-bed Halifax infirmary was merged with 
150-bed Camp Hill Hospital. Though the two acute-care 
hospitals are 1.6 kilometres apart, there's only one 
emergency department serving both. 

 
 "I would say it's working very well," Dr. Richard 

MacLachlan, the centre's vice-president of medical 
services, said in a telephone interview Thursday. 

 
 "Certainly it took several years to get the bugs out." 
 
 Though many patients, including psychiatric and 

intensive cardiac care patients, are transported between 
the sites every day, there have been no problems. 

 
Again I talk about local control that I think we want to 
emphasize. And that has always been our approach  to put 
health care in the hands of the local care-givers who are in a 
better position to make the decisions on what the priorities for 
good quality care in a certain region should be. 
 
And on this particular issue, the fate of the emergency facilities 
at City Hospital, of course I have met in the past . . . as I say 
this is not a new issue. I think it's over a year ago since I was 
requested to have a meeting with members of the emergency 
working group, some of whom, most of whom, I believe were 
my constituents. I never met with the whole working group but 
I had requests from my constituents who were members of that 
group to have meetings. 
 
These are reasonable people, Mr. Speaker, people that are 
dedicated health care-givers. They made their points. They also 
approached the health board, and as a result . . . at the time the 
date for the closure had already been announced. And as my 
colleague from Sutherland mentioned, that because of their 
representations they were listened to, and the Saskatoon District 
Health Board made the decision then and announced publicly 
the decision, to delay the closure of the City Hospital 
emergency facilities until other rationalizations could take 
place. 
 
And now, for instance, the cardiac . . . the coronary unit is 
being moved from City Hospital. In the remarks by the member 
from Sutherland, I believe he talked about the percentage of 
admissions to each hospital and so forth. There was also a 
reference to 2 per cent of people who were admitted to City 
Hospital through the emergency that had coronary problems. 
Now it wouldn't make sense to admit those people through 
emergency if there wasn't a cardiac unit in the hospital, which is 
going to be the case once the consolidations take place. 
 
So I do believe that local control is the key here; and because 
the member from Greystone includes in her original motion a 
request for the Minister of Health to intervene, I think that kind 
of intervention, Mr. Speaker, goes against the principle of local 
autonomy that has been the hallmark of the health care reform 
in this province right from the outset. 
 
And as I said, although we recognize that the transition  

sometimes has some rough spots in it, that eventually, by 
listening to those dedicated health care workers at the service 
level, by paying attention to them, by paying attentions to the 
clients of the health care system in this province, we will have 
health care reform that will result in not just financial savings 
 not even financial savings  but a health care system that 
works better and delivers a better quality of care to the people 
in this province, and creates a better, more congenial, more 
productive atmosphere for those health care workers to provide 
their services in. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to second the motion 
. . . or the amendment to the original motion which was moved 
by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start out by 
saying how disappointed I am in the remarks by the member 
from Saskatoon Greystone. I'm disappointed but not surprised. 
She clearly has a very good speech-writer who can pull out all 
the heartthrobs at the appropriate time, but very, very few facts. 
 
Pork-barrel politics, Mr. Speaker, I thought had left this 
province with the election of 1991. Unfortunately, what we see 
is the Leader of the Third Party trying to hold out to people the 
promise that somehow, if they scream loudly enough at her, that 
she will immediately give them whatever they want. 
 
I have to say that threats — threats to mail out a heartthrob 
speech to 10,000 people  and challenges to Saskatoon MLAs 
to defend the actions of a local board are not the appropriate 
way to engage in and to examine matters of very important 
public policy. 
 
The Leader of the Third Party is showing a dog-in-the-manger 
attitude towards health care reform. And I say to her, shame on 
you. 
 
I'm not surprised though that she's showing this attitude. 
Because lately we've seen in the House that she clearly has no 
policy, no substance, no principles. She believes in the 
flavour-of-the-week issues and tries to bring everything down 
to the level of individualistic "what's in it for me, Jack, and the 
rest of you shove off the boat" politics. 
 
That kind of politics is dead and gone in Saskatchewan. That is 
not the sort of politics that the people of Saskatchewan want 
and demand, and she will discover that very, very shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — I say to her, and she had better learn it if she 
wants to even retain her own seat, politics is not about 
championing the mote in the eye of the latest person that you 
talked to. You cannot run responsible government if what you 
are doing is flip-flopping and engaging in will-o'-the-wisp kinds 
of policy approaches. 



April 25, 1995 

 
1756 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in my constituency I had the great 
privilege to chat with a physician, an important specialist at the 
University Hospital in Saskatoon, who said to me, it is 
imperative that the people of Saskatchewan start to look at their 
health care system, start to have a public policy debate about 
what it is they want, demand, and expect, and what they're 
prepared to pay for. He said, I am very pleased that your 
government has begun this discussion. 
 
He then continued and said — which was music to my ears, I 
have to say, Mr. Speaker — he said, I am very pleasantly 
surprised by your government. I've never voted NDP (New 
Democratic Party), but this time around I will be voting for you, 
he said. You did what had to be done. For some people it was a 
bitter pill to swallow. Many people do not cope well with 
change, but at the end of the day people recognize that we do 
need to change. I was pleased to hear that, and I wish that the 
Leader of the Third Party would start to listen to so many 
people who are saying the same kinds of things that that 
physician said. 
 
I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that she is getting exactly 
what she asked for in 1991. In 1991 she said, quote: we should 
stop talking about bricks and mortar and start talking about 
what really counts. Her party, she said, would promote 
specialization in larger hospitals and halt further construction 
and expansion. 
 
But in 1995 what does she want to do? She wants bricks and 
mortar, she wants to halt local planning, and she wants to stop 
specialization. It's a typical, typical flip-flop without any basis 
in facts or health care needs. 
 
There is no consistency to this woman, Mr. Speaker. It's 
apparent that she's trying desperately to discover her political 
principles. What we're seeing here is the politics of desperation. 
No wonder she's talking about emergency services at City 
Hospital in Saskatoon. She's running around the province 
crying emergency, emergency all over the place, as she tries to 
get elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to look at a few of the facts. What is 
actually happening is that the configuration of emergency care 
services in the city of Saskatoon has probably received the most 
detailed study of emergency services in any city in all of 
Canada. Fifty-four per cent of the attendance at emergency 
wards comes to one hospital in Saskatoon. That hospital 
happens to be St. Paul's Hospital, where the Liberal leader has 
not yet gone for her heartthrob visit. 
 
Between midnight and 8 a.m. in the Saskatoon hospitals each 
ward sees, on average, one visit of true emergencies. But even 
more importantly, Mr. Speaker, and what is very startling — 
and the people of Saskatoon and all over this province need to 
attend to this — 25 per cent of people who went to emergency 
wards at the three hospitals in Saskatoon, 25 per cent of them 
saw their own doctor there. Rather than going to the doctor's 
office or having the doctor make a home visit, they went to a 
very expensive emergency ward. 

(1515) 
 
That simply is not efficient use or effective use of public funds, 
and it is not something that this government nor the local health 
board will allow to continue to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to put this into context. There is a need to 
modernize, to change, to reform our health care system. All 
people across Saskatchewan recognize this. Some of them don't 
like it, but they do recognize the need for changes. And there 
are major changes happening all across Saskatchewan. Let's 
take a look at what's happening. In Regina a whole hospital will 
be closed, not simply a ward or a specialized service, but a 
whole hospital will be closed. Similarly Moose Jaw will see the 
closure of a hospital. Prince Albert will see the closure of a 
hospital. And in the rural parts of this province, we've had 52 
hospitals converted to clinics. To date Saskatoon has lost 
nothing. 
 
And what we're seeing now is the Liberal leader saying 
Saskatoon cannot stand to have the closure of an emergency 
ward. I would say to her, this may play well to the 10,000 
people she's going to mail out this debate to, but I think it's very 
ill-advised. It certainly is not a rural vote getter. And I think 
what she generally tends to do is only champion things she 
thinks are going to get her votes rather than championing good, 
long-term public policy. 
 
Her motion says that we strongly urge the Minister of Health to 
intervene in the pending closure of the emergency ward at 
Saskatoon City Hospital. In fact it's not pending. The earliest 
will be January '96. There are ongoing discussions. People, 
health care professionals, are very involved in the long-term 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she challenged and said . . . she attacked the 
credentials of the people on the Saskatoon Health Board, saying 
they didn't know anything about health care. I phoned and 
checked, and of the eight people who are on that health board, 
seven of them have very direct experience with health care 
administration or health care provision as professionals. It is not 
proper to attack them. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, we are very fortunate in Saskatoon. 
Currently we have three emergency wards. It's a largesse. In 
Saskatoon also we likely have the most modern infrastructure of 
any city in the world. We pioneered day surgery at City Hospital 
and same-day surgery at St. Paul's Hospital. We're national 
leaders. Kids from Manitoba are coming to Saskatoon now for 
heart operations. We just opened the most modern pediatric 
intensive care ward in — probably the state of the art — in the 
world. We just put on an addition to the neonatalogy intensive 
care ward. 
 
We see in Saskatoon the first ever out-patient antibiotic 
intravenous use. We're about to open, and I'm very proud of 
this, the first in Saskatchewan, a maternal child care centre. As 
well we have a pediatric care centre where 22 of the 24 
subspecialists are. I think we're very . . . 



April 25, 1995 

 
1757 

The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I thought 
maybe it's time I get in the debate and bring some common 
sense into the debate that we're now having before us this 
afternoon regarding health care. And the members may question 
my sincerity, but I trust by the time I've finished my comments, 
they'll recognize that on this side of the House, we as well are 
quite well aware of some of the problems that our health system 
is facing. 
 
Unfortunately, I've listened with interest to a number of the 
comments being made by different members as they've entered 
the debate. And I find it interesting that while the member from 
Saskatoon Wildwood talked about pork-barrel politics and how 
she was going to change it, I'm not exactly sure that she rose 
above that avenue of politics this afternoon in her speech and in 
the debate. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the question we're facing regarding health 
care, and the motion that was brought forward by the Leader of 
the Liberal Party and the amendment that we're debating as 
well, certainly goes well beyond the debate in this Assembly. I 
can understand the frustrations that people of Saskatoon are 
facing as they look at the possibility of having the emergency 
ward moved from City Hospital and possibly consolidated in 
the other two hospitals. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, may I just add that while health care . . . and 
while the construction of a new hospital or the construction of 
City Hospital in Saskatoon a number of years ago seemed to be 
an appropriate thing to do, I would suggest that my views may 
differ a bit from some of my colleagues and certainly from 
former members of this Assembly in the construction phase of 
health care in this province. 
 
Realistically, when you look back and take a serious look and a 
long overview, or broad overview of health care in this province 
and hospitals in this province, it would seem to me that the 
government of the '80s in fact would have been further ahead to 
put dollars into a couple of hospitals, establish both in Regina 
and in Saskatoon. The fact that maybe two facilities would 
more than facilitate the need of services in those two centres as 
well as amalgamating services, as was done in a number of the 
small rural communities, rather than having a hospital on one 
side of the community and a care home . . . the fact that there 
were amalgamated services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we discuss the uncertainty that many 
people . . . and certainly professionals who are facing as they 
look at the fact that maybe the job . . . and though their 
workplace may change, there's no doubt that change was 
needed. 
 
But I'm not exactly sure that this government has managed . . . 
changed appropriately or properly or in an efficient manner. 
The questions are still out whether or not we've arrived at the  

efficiencies that the government has talked about and their 
discussions as to the necessities and the necessary moves that 
they were talking about, and have made, in health care in this 
province. 
 
I listened with interest to the debate, and I also have followed 
some of the election in Manitoba and that Manitobans are going 
to the polls today. And it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that 
the NDP in Manitoba stood up as the great protectors of health 
care, as the NDP continue to do in this province. And yet, I'm 
not sure if we can say that the NDP and the present government 
have really been protectors as much as possibly dismantlers. 
 
And certainly as I indicated earlier, we needed to see change. 
And the people, in general, across this province will 
acknowledge that change was essential in order to protect 
health care. 
 
The NDP talk about the fact that what our caucus has discussed, 
or even the Liberal caucus, that what we're talking about is 
Americanizing our health care system. Mr. Speaker, I would 
have to ask you if we . . . do we not face a two-tiered health 
care system in the province at this time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you can afford it, you can go out of the province 
and receive eye care much quicker than you can achieve it in 
this province. And yet we've had physicians and specialists who 
are willing to offer those services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also talk . . . this NDP government while they 
were in opposition continued to belittle the former government 
for their drug plan. What do we have in this province? We just 
heard this afternoon in question period about some of the 
problems people are facing in this province regarding the drug 
plan. And the fact that now your deductible is up to $1,700 a 
year. 
 
And I would suggest if you have the privilege of having good, 
solid health and do not need to use substantial drugs, you better 
be thankful. Because there are many people around this 
province who are facing substantial costs that come out of their 
pockets just to attain the drugs that they need to sustain life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about emergency services — 
and again, I come back to the member from Saskatoon 
Wildwood talking about the individuals who maybe have used 
the emergency ward as a means to visit their family physician 
— I would like to suggest that in the community and the 
constituency I represent some of the doctors that have recently 
moved in have publicly placed in the paper ads indicating to 
people that unless it was an emergency they were facing, unless 
they had a slip from the doctor asking them to go to the hospital 
for lab services or X-rays, that they would prefer they took the 
time to make appointments to see their doctors for just a general 
visitation through the office rather than coming to the 
emergency wards. And they indicated the reason they were 
doing that, Mr. Speaker, was because it was much more costly 
to see a doctor, visit a doctor, in an emergency ward, than it was 
to go through the doctor's office. 



April 25, 1995 

 
1758 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think even the professionals in this province 
are quite well aware of some of the difficulties we face and are 
willing to put ideas and suggestions forward themselves to 
attain the efficiencies that our health system needs in order to 
reach into and go into the year 2000. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that we do have people 
who realistically understand the problems. We have individuals 
who are providing the services, be they care-givers like nurses, 
be they doctors. And I think if there is one thing that I hear time 
and time again, it's a feeling from the care-givers of this 
province that they have been left out of the discussion of the 
changes that were needed and the changes that have taken place 
in our health care system. 
 
So I would trust, Mr. Speaker, that as we're debating this issue 
this afternoon, and even as we look at the debate and the 
impending closure of the emergency ward at Saskatoon City 
Hospital, that the government and that the Minister of Health 
indeed do take the time to talk to some of the people that are 
involved. 
 
And while the people of Saskatoon may be alarmed — and 
many people may be alarmed, especially if they happen to be in 
close proximity to City Hospital and realize that if the 
emergency ward is moved out of City Hospital to St. Paul's or 
Royal University, it might be a 15-minute drive versus a 
5-minute drive — maybe they should also recognize the fact 
that in rural Saskatchewan, people have had to cope with 
substantial distances and drives, whether through an ambulance 
or whether just in your own vehicle, to go and see a doctor for 
the last three years, of much greater times and much greater 
distances than certainly our large urban centres. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it behoves us to look at health care in general 
and as a whole and to look at ways and come up with ideas 
whereby we can certainly sustain the health care system as we 
know it today. 
 
And I would go so far as to suggest that there may be avenues 
whereby you can allow specialists or doctors to set up clinics 
that could provide services that are not as essential, and allow 
them to provide those services. If there are areas that we feel 
we're being strangled in in the health field, then maybe we need 
to look at what is the most basic and essential need in providing 
health care — the most essential services that are needed. 
 
And I'm sure that there are medical professionals who would 
indicate that there are services that really aren't totally essential 
to sustaining life. There are services that they provide that are 
maybe cosmetic in nature, or other forms of services that 
possibly are not as essential as the services that we would 
consider the most important and most appropriate. 
 
So while I can feel for the individuals who are concerned about 
the closure of the emergency ward, I can also suggest that I 
think if we all sit down, if we all do our part, if we all work 
together, Mr. Speaker, we will at the end of the day, and we 
can, because Saskatchewan people have shown that they have  

the ability, they have the resolve, the willingness to put the 
resources together to design programs that are people oriented. 
 
And what I'm asking of the government today, I'm asking that 
the government take the time, I'm asking the Minister of Health 
that he actually take the time, and implement some 
people-oriented programs whereby we can sustain and enhance 
health in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The member's time has expired and so has the 
65 minutes of the debate as per our agreement. There now will 
follow up to a 10-minute discussion — comment, discussion, 
and question period. So I will entertain some comments and 
discussions now. 
 
Let me remind members that the first priority will be given to 
members who participated in the debate. 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Saskatoon Sutherland-
University. Regarding the string of facts that you presented, all 
of these facts were actually prepared by the original emergency 
working group, Mr. Member. And it was they who did the 
research upon which they based their recommendations. 
 
The working group acknowledged that emergency service could 
indeed be provided by two hospitals and actually proposed the 
model of how it could be delivered. But they agreed that it 
could not be done without incurring more expense or without 
jeopardizing acute care. 
 
So this is really the issue. Is the member aware that their 
concern was that City Hospital could not continue to provide 
safe, cost-effective acute care without an emergency 
department? 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, that's only one point of view. 
Last September, another study was done, an audit of services — 
how people arrive, at how they're discharged, how they become 
in-patients, and so forth. And that study showed that there was a 
horrendous waste of money occurring under the previous . . . 
under the existing system at the three Saskatoon emergency 
wards. This study then shows that there are additional reasons 
to those cited by me earlier, for reviewing the situation and 
dealing with it. 
 
Quite simply, if you're going to provide leadership, Madam 
Member from Greystone, you have to be able to separate wants 
from needs. 
 
Now that's what our government is doing. People in Saskatoon, 
in the medical community and otherwise, might want three 
emergency wards in Saskatoon. But the truth is, the fact is, that 
we cannot afford that, and nor does it provide the services that 
we want or need. 
 
In fact, you failed to mention how sticking with the status quo  



April 25, 1995 

 
1759 

actually robs Saskatoon people of other health services in the 
community such as home care, mental health care, long-term 
care. And these are needs that have been there and have not 
been addressed. And we intend to address them; we don't intend 
to stick with the old system and just with status quo. We're 
going to reform the system and we're going to be conscious of 
costs. And we're going to improve health care at the same time. 
 
So there you have it, Madam Member. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, my question is going to 
remain the same, and that is, perhaps there's not an 
understanding here that the original emergency working group 
indeed looked at how we could have only two emergency 
departments, Mr. Member, two emergency wards — not three, 
but two. The point is this, that in fact they have indicated that if 
there are going to be two emergency wards, then the request 
from the Saskatoon Health District Board that they remain an 
acute care facility could not be part of that. 
 
They stated that they couldn't meet those two objectives, and 
they indeed went and did surveys of 32 other hospitals as part 
of their research in order to validate this claim — that an acute 
care hospital cannot function properly without emergency 
services. This is not about wanting to keep three emergency 
departments. And you've missed the point entirely. 
 
My question is directed to the member from Saskatoon 
Wildwood. I wonder whether you feel that the unanimous 
request by all Saskatoon physicians to leave emergency services 
unchanged should be ignored, because every one of them voted 
on it. 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate and respect the 
opinions of the working group — they were that though, 
opinions. And the Saskatoon and District Health Board sought 
opinions from a wide range of people; did the most detailed and 
exhaustive study of emergency-care services that's ever 
happened in Canada. 
 
All over the world there are hospitals that function quite 
effectively without emergency wards. Perhaps we might want, 
in days when money flows like oil, to have three very expensive 
emergency wards. In fact those days are long gone; we have to 
reconfigure the health care services in Saskatoon. 
 
More and more people are going to hospital for day surgery, 
rather than for long-term stays. More and more people are 
seeing their physicians in their offices rather than going to 
emergency wards for services that can be carried out quite well 
in a physician's office. And more and more we are seeing home 
care services. I am pleased that Saskatoon is leading the way in 
modernizing our health care system. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this debate, Mr. 
Speaker, the question that's in people's minds is who can be 
trusted to protect medicare and I say, Mr. Speaker, with a 
question to the member from Greystone, that this is an issue of 
her credibility, because her flip-flops are a problem and her  

inaccurate statements are a problem. 
 
And if she wants the 10,000 people who she's going to send this 
statement to believe in her, she should first come clean on some 
errors that she's made in the past. 
 
If she looks at her own statement of March 9, in Hansard, on 
page 756, she made this allegation, that in Regina . . . I quote: 
 
 The administrators have, with the help of an eraser, Mr. 

Speaker, rubbed out 921 of the needed 1,430 operations. 
 
The very next day, Mr. Royce Gill of the Regina District Health 
Board looked; after seeing this statement, said this, Mr. 
Speaker. He said, that's false information. He said that's false 
information. 
 
I ask the member now: will she stand up in the House now, 
withdraw the statement that she made on that day . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I think the member 
knows that the questions that he's going to ask must be on the 
topic that was discussed and not on a discussion that went on in 
some other debate. So I rule the question out of order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
unequivocally do not withdraw, but I will ask the following 
question. My question is as follows. The member from 
Saskatoon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I want the member from 
Humboldt to withdraw that remark. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's not on the record. 
 
The Speaker: — It doesn't matter whether it's on the record if 
the Speaker hears it from the chair. It's unparliamentary and I 
ask the member from Humboldt to withdraw the remark. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I withdraw the remark, Mr. Speaker. A point 
of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the remark that I made was that 
. . . I didn't call the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member knows he's out of order. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
comment made by the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland-University indicated that we have to recognize the 
difference between wants and needs. The original working 
group was concerned that clinical teaching services would be 
discontinued at City Hospital, and with the emergency 
department being closed, there would be no physician of any 
kind on duty — not a resident or JURSI or anyone between the 
hours of 5 p.m. and 8 a.m. 
 



April 25, 1995 

 
1760 

Mr. Member, have you in fact met with and listened to the 
concerns of not just this original group but also the fact that . . . 
We're not talking about simply these people in this research 
group. All Saskatoon physicians had an opportunity to vote on 
the original working group's recommendations. And have you 
listened to them in order to understand what the removal of an 
emergency ward means to the operation of an acute care 
hospital? 
 
It is indeed true that there are many hospitals without 
emergency wards, but they are not acute care hospitals. And it's 
been a requirement of the Saskatoon District Health Board to 
have both an emergency ward removed and remain an acute 
care hospital. 
 
So the differentiation between wants and needs, have you 
listened to their concerns to understand what the removal of an 
emergency ward will mean when they can't provide acute care 
at all, and they will have no physician, no resident, and no 
JURSI, on from 5 p.m. to 8 in the morning? 
 
Mr. Koenker: — With the greatest of respect, Madam 
Member, you're confusing and distorting the situation. You're 
not dealing with facts. You're not dealing with facts. There are 
acute care hospitals that can . . . have emergency services, and 
to suggest otherwise is balderdash. 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry. The 10-minute question and discussion 
period has ended. Let me compliment the members. I think it 
was certainly a very worthwhile discussion and question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. There will be no further 
compliments from the Chair. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 — Support for Canadian Wheat Board 
 

Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
remarks I'm going to be moving a motion: 
 
 That this Assembly reaffirm its support for the Canadian 

Wheat Board monopoly and the concept of a 
single-desk selling, marketing, system that provides 
maximum returns for farmers; and further, that we 
oppose the concept of a dual marketing system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the issue about dual marketing and the role of the 
Canadian Wheat Board and the western grain industry has been 
a debate for some time now and it's still going on, about the role 
of the Canadian Wheat Board and should there be a dual 
marketing system or a single-desk selling system. 
 
I've got a clipping here from the Leader-Post dated April 20, 
and it sort of . . . there's some comments in here I want to read 
out . . . or not comments, but reported about what's been 
happening in Alberta. And that seems to be where the major  

push is coming from to get into a dual marketing system. 
 
Alberta is going to be holding, or is looking at holding, a vote 
next fall on whether they want the Canadian Wheat Board to 
continue its exclusive jurisdiction over wheat and barley. The 
Alberta Minister of Agriculture has now set up a steering 
committee to prepare for that vote. 
 
Our Minister of Agriculture from Saskatchewan said in the 
interview that: 
 
 A dual market(ing) spells the death of the CWB. A dual 

market takes away the defining characteristics of the 
CWB — (which is) single-desk selling and the ability to 
sell at different prices and different markets. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if there's going to be a vote on the role of the 
Canadian Wheat Board and what the Canadian Wheat Board's 
mandate should be in western Canada, I would like to see all 
members within the Canadian Wheat Board district have a vote, 
not just the members of a specific area. 
 
And I would probably like to see that vote not necessarily on 
whether there should be a dual marketing system for the grains 
that are underneath the Canadian Wheat Board at this point in 
time, which is wheat and malt barley, but the possibility of 
branching out into certainly canola, one of our second largest 
production crops in western Canada or certainly Saskatchewan. 
 
I think if we want to start looking at the Canadian Wheat Board 
and the role of the Canadian Wheat Board, we have to go back 
a few years to where the idea of single-desk selling and price 
pooling first started. It was in the late teens and the early 
twenties when farmers, my neighbours, people that I remember 
— one of them was Frank Wotherspoon, and of course another 
one who was not a neighbour but lots of people in the province 
of Saskatchewan will know the name, John Brockelbank — and 
thousands of other people in this province went around prior to 
1924 to school houses, to farm yards, visiting farmers to try and 
set up a pooling system whereby it didn't make any difference in 
what particular day of the year you sold your product, you'd get 
the same price for it. And they were successful. 
 
And in 1924 they were able to have enough contracts that the 
Wheat Pool started up in Saskatchewan, with the principle of 
price pooling. Everything went along quite well from 1924 to 
1929, and then of course the '29 crash hit and the Wheat Pool 
found themselves in a shortfall. They had the price set at a 
particular level, started taking deliveries of grain in the fall, the 
crash come in late fall, and the price of grain dropped 
drastically. And of course they found themselves carrying a 
tremendous debt load. 
 
So the federal government, shortly after that, covered that loss, 
but in the saw-off said that the Wheat Pool could not go into a 
price-pooling system because if there was another downturn in 
the grain economy it would put it into a problem. 
 
And I had mentioned the importance of the pooling, concept  



April 25, 1995 

 
1761 

which the Canadian Wheat Board operates under right now, is 
it's equitable to farmers that are marketing their products that's 
under the Canadian Wheat Board because it doesn't make any 
difference when you sell your product, you're going to get the 
same price and guaranteed the same price. 
 
I remember my father telling a story about an individual who 
was a relatively a small farmer. He combined . . . combining — 
he was threshing in them days — threshed some wheat. He 
didn't have a threshing outfit of his own so he hired this 
neighbour to come in. And when they got done combining, or 
threshing, the guy that owned the outfit said, now don't sell 
your wheat now, he said, because it's too low; you wait till 
spring and you'll get a better price. Well, the farmer said, well 
I'll see what I can do. 
 
So in springtime, of course the price of grain is up substantially. 
The person that did the threshing went over to the guy and said, 
okay now you sell your grain; the price is up; you'll make 
money. Well he says, I haven't got any grain left. Well he says, 
why didn't you save your grain and sell it when the price is 
higher? Well he said, I needed food and I needed clothes for my 
family and, he said, every time I went to town I had to take 
some grain to sell to get some money. 
 
(1545) 
 
So when the price was at its highest or at least going up, he 
didn't have any. So it was harder on the smaller farmers and the 
farmers who did not have the capacity to hang on to try and hit 
the highest markets. They were forced to sell, not necessarily at 
the highest price, but when they needed the money. 
 
I think the Canadian Wheat Board and its single-desk selling 
also helps out in the area of transportation and the efficiencies 
in the transportation system. Our transportation system, Mr. 
Speaker, has to work 365 days a year. We've got a mountain 
barrier on our west side of us; in western Canada we've got a 
mountain barrier to the west. We've got a seaway to the east. 
We've got a port at Churchill to the north. That's sort of our 
three water ports that are within our own shores and they all 
have, you know, sort of bottlenecks. And like I said, the 
mountains, the seaway, and of course the Churchill, Port of 
Churchill, is only open, depending on the season, three or four 
months. 
 
So in order to use our three outlets to the capacity and to the 
best efficiency, it has to be a plan and a plan out of only one 
area. I mean if you have a bunch of different groups trying to 
rush in, it just throws this kibosh out. I mean it has to be well 
planned and well laid out for the system to work efficiently. 
 
And I want to talk a little bit, you know, about trucking too. I 
mean Canadian Wheat Board, they use the rails a fair bit. If we 
decided to start trucking our product . . . some people are saying 
that that's a possibility. Canadian Wheat Board right now loads 
three-and-a-third ships a day, 365 days a year. And if we were 
going to move that product into export position by truck, that 
amount of product, we'd have 2,500 B-train  

unloaded every 24 hours. That's over 100 semi-trailers an hour. 
And I just don't think it's realistic to think that we can even do a 
portion of that by truck. I think we have to look at rail 
movement as much as possible. And of course the Canadian 
Wheat Board, with their single-desk selling, has the capacity to 
work this through the system so that it works much better. 
 
Also if the Canadian Wheat Board . . . And I'll just talk a bit 
about wheat and canola now. They're the two major crops 
certainly in Saskatchewan. Wheat is a board grain; canola is a 
non-board grain. 
 
When the Canadian Wheat Board and the rail system, the train 
companies, are moving our product, our wheat, into export 
position, because it's under the Canadian Wheat Board — 
wheat — they don't have to get the wheat from the United Grain 
Growers or the Cargill to meet a specific sale. Because as soon 
as wheat hit the elevator and it's dumped in the elevator, it is 
automatically the property of the Canadian Wheat Board. So 
they can go out and grab the proper grade; it doesn't have to 
come from specific shipping points or from specific companies. 
 
Whereas canola, they have to get the proper grain companies' 
canola in position for specific sales. And that just makes the 
system that much more cumbersome and a little harder to use 
when they've got to go and get specific canola from specific 
companies, as opposed to wheat, where they can just go in and 
grab the specific grades they need, no matter which company it 
was sold at. 
 
I want to talk a bit about farm-to-elevator movement and some 
of the changes that have happened in that, and how the 
Canadian Wheat Board I believe reacted to a change. 
Remember the old quota system we had where we used to get 
areas opened up with so many bushels per acre you had on your 
permit book on specific crops. And it was a system that worked 
well for many, many years. 
 
But as times changed, the Canadian Wheat Board had to look at 
a different system, and they did that. They reacted to the 
farmers' needs and wants and they come out with a contract 
system. And I know there's been some problems with it, but I 
think as we get a little more used to it, it's going to smoothen 
out a bit better. 
 
It certainly gives the Wheat Board an opportunity to address 
niche markets when they can identify a specific product and call 
for it; if they know it's out there they can get it. It's easier for 
them through the contract system to go out and get niche 
markets and fill that market. And it also gives the Wheat Board 
a better opportunity . . . or better access to specific grades and 
specific quantities of particular types of grain at a given time, 
when they can call and allow farmers to haul in, at a specific 
period of time, a little more grain than they normally would. 
 
Because sometimes, under the old quota system, they might 
call, expecting all farmers to haul, and for some specific 
reasons, maybe weather or health or whatever, they might miss 
a quota or two. And of course the Wheat Board didn't know that  



April 25, 1995 

 
1762 

that was not going to happen, and so there was times they were 
getting short of grain. 
 
So they moved and they changed the quota system from a quota 
system to a contract system, and I think that's worked out very 
well. 
 
A lot of people will say, well the Wheat Board seems to be very 
inefficient and slow to react, and high cost. And I think, you 
know, that's not necessarily true. I talked about the changes in 
the system as far as farm-to-elevator movement. The cost to the 
Canadian Wheat Board, to the individuals who use it, is about 
three and a half cents a bushel, Mr. Speaker. Three and a half 
cents a bushel is not a tremendous amount to pay for the total 
cost of the operations of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
In fact, like I mentioned before, if canola was underneath it, that 
would substantially reduce . . . the more grain they'd handle, it 
would certainly cost . . . the price per bushel would go down. 
 
So with the cost of running the Wheat Board at three and a half 
cents a bushel, so what do we get from that? We have 
commissioners that are appointed, who have specific areas of 
the world that they're in charge of for marketing our grain and 
making contacts in the world, and selling our product. And 
that's paid out of the three and a half cents a bushel. 
 
We have a weather monitoring system that monitors the world 
and the crop . . . weather in the world and the crop conditions 
throughout the world on an hourly basis. And we get all that for 
three and a half cents a bushel. 
 
We get market analysts that sort of try and figure out what's 
going to happen to our markets and when best to sell and when 
best to try and make our sales. 
 
We have a car allocation system within the Canadian Wheat 
Board. The three and a half cents also finances the activities of 
the advisory committee. 
 
And I think most importantly out of what the Canadian Wheat 
Board does — it's not necessarily a known fact, certainly in 
western Canada — is they fund 50 per cent, along with the 
federal government funding 50 per cent, of the Canadian 
International Grains Institute. That's an institute in Winnipeg 
whereby they bring their customers and possible customers, 
probable customers, into Canada, and they can show what our 
product will do. They bring them to Canada, and they show 
what various mixtures of flour and types of breads and buns and 
doughnuts will do for our flour. 
 
So that I think is very important. We bring people from other 
countries, and we show them what our product will do. And 
that's how we have to market our product. We can't just go out 
and say, gee, we've got a nice product. Why don't you buy it? 
We've got to show nowadays exactly what it is, what our 
product will do. And the Canadian Wheat Board is very 
involved in sort of trying to promote what products we do have 
and show their flexibility and how they can contribute to other  

countries' needs. 
 
I want to talk a bit about the Canadian Wheat Board's 
accountability. We hear statements in the country about, well 
the Wheat Board's not accountable. Well I want to mention four 
areas where I think that they are very accountable. 
 
And the one area is, every year within each Canadian Wheat 
Board advisory district there's country meetings where the 
individual that we elect to represent us on the advisory 
committee sponsors a meeting, along with officials that come 
out from the Canadian Wheat Board, and talk about the grain 
industry and give various presentations on where the grain 
industry is at and where it might be going. And it's, you know, 
certainly there to answer questions. These are usually day-long 
meetings, and it's very, very informative. I've been to quite a 
few over the years since they've been happening. It's been about 
15 years now, I believe. 
 
They also put out a production called Grain Matters that goes 
to all Canadian Wheat Board permit book holders that talk 
about — in print — sort of where the grain industry is at and 
sort of what might be coming down in the future. 
 
I think the other, fourth area, that I certainly use is, whenever 
I've got a question or want some information, I pick up the 
phone, and I phone the Canadian Wheat Board in Winnipeg, 
and I say could you mail me out information on . . . And I've 
never been refused anything yet. It usually comes quite quickly, 
and it's easy to get, you know, information about things that the 
Wheat Board are doing — and not necessarily all things 
because some things are market sensitive, and I don't think we 
should expect that sort of information. 
 
And then there's the final report. It's the final report that's due 
yearly at the year end, after the year end. It's an audited report. 
It's not mailed out broadly, but it is available. Some people in 
the industry will certainly get it if they're on a list. It's available 
through the library system, and I guess most importantly it's 
available to anyone on request for no cost. 
 
So I think when I look at the accountability principle, I think we 
soon come to realize that the Canadian Wheat Board has been 
doing a good job for farmers, and they've been answering the 
questions and making changes to make . . . that make the 
Canadian Wheat Board more accountable and more flexible to 
the changing times. 
 
Okay, I guess obviously we wouldn't be having this debate if 
the Canadian Wheat Board wasn't under attack. And who's 
attacking it? First of all, who's attacking it from within Canada? 
It's certainly not the majority of farmers. But I seem to be 
hearing a lot of noise and animosity towards the Canadian 
Wheat Board from what I call by the johnny-come-lately grain 
brokers and some of the trucking industries within the province. 
 
It's the middle person, the person that wants to buy and sell on 
margins, not the farmers, that are out there wanting to dismantle 
the Wheat Board. It's individuals who want to try and make a  



April 25, 1995 

 
1763 

quick buck. And who knows how long they're going to be 
there? 
 
And I want to add, by the way, that some of these brokers are 
prepared to mail out to an individual who's prepared to give 
them about 350 bucks a year — that's sort of the rates that I've 
been finding — up-to-date information on market analysis. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd have to sell 10,000 bushels of grain at 
the cost of the Canadian Wheat Board — at three and a half 
cents. And I'm paying 350 bucks to get this information. I'd 
have to market 10,000 bushels of grain to get the same value for 
my dollar from what the Canadian Wheat Board's giving me, 
plus more. 
 
So where's the pressure coming from, from outside of Canada? 
Well from the media reports we get, it seems to be principally 
from the United States. It seems to be principally from the grain 
industry within the United States. 
 
And why do they want to do away with the Canadian Wheat 
Board, or make it more transparent? If they can make it more 
transparent, I think they believe that they can compete against it 
much better. When I hear them saying that the Wheat Board is 
no good, I think then automatically it must be doing a pretty 
good job for us as farmers if an external force is saying it must 
be done away with. 
 
So I think the Canadian Wheat Board is out in the market-place 
doing a much better job than the marketing systems in other 
countries. And that's why it's under attack and that's why we 
have to fight for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Should the Wheat Board change? Well Ralph 
Goodale promised a year ago a committee of eminent western 
people that would look into the operations of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I've been waiting patiently for — I'm not 
sure it's a year ago, maybe it was last fall — I've been waiting 
patiently now for something to happen. And the board has gone 
through some changes and there's likely more to come and more 
needed. 
 
Back in 1990, Mr. Speaker, there was a complete review of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. Some of the recommendations were 
implemented and some have not yet been implemented. Most 
noticeable within the recommendations was to examine the 
governance, the governance structure, and to look at some 
possible alternatives that we could implement as a governance 
of the way the Canadian Wheat Board operates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that hasn't been looked at yet and I want to spend 
a few minutes today on . . . or just make a few comments on 
governance. I think it's very important that we have a serious  

look at the governance, not necessarily the . . . not the way the 
Canadian Wheat Board operates as far as single-desk selling but 
the governance of it. 
 
I think that the Canadian Wheat Board could be set up where it 
would be much easier to move with the changing times. Right 
now, to set the initial price of wheat, they have to go and submit 
a price, or a price range, to the federal cabinet to get the initial 
price set. And sometimes that's long; sometimes it takes a long 
time to get that to happen. 
 
And of course the earlier you set the initial price . . . years back 
the initial price used to be set in March, April, prior to seeding, 
so it would give the farmers an opportunity to determine what 
types of crops they should seed. And of course we all know it 
wasn't that many years ago the price dipped a fair bit after they 
set it, so now the price is set later on in summer to give more of 
a reality of what's happening as far as the price of grain is going 
out there. 
 
But I think if the Canadian Wheat Board was given more 
flexibility, they could react to pricing; not only an initial price, 
but maybe more importantly, on interim pricing. When the 
initial price has been announced and a new crop year opens and 
by October, November, grain prices have gone up a fair little 
bit, it seems to take some time to get the reaction, get the whole 
system working to get the prices elevated up. It's got to go from 
the Canadian Wheat Board to the federal government; the 
federal government has to approve the changes. 
 
So I would like to see a system whereby the governing body of 
the Canadian Wheat Board would have a little more leeway and 
a little more responsibility, that they could make them 
adjustments as they see fit and as they believe the way the 
market conditions are happening. 
 
So anyway I guess the fact that the study was done . . . and I 
guess my argument is that, you know, it wasn't that long ago. I 
mean 1990 was not that long ago. It wasn't 1960. It wasn't 1950. 
It was only five years ago and that I'm sure that a lot of the 
recommendations that were made at that time were still relevant 
today; they just haven't been acted upon. And so I guess my 
argument is that it wouldn't take a lot of money to at least have 
a look, to at least have a look at some of the recommendations 
that are there and maybe have an opportunity to make some 
changes. 
 
I guess in closing, I'd just like to say that we all know that times 
change, people change, and we need new ideas to meet the new 
realities. But the main principles of the Canadian Wheat Board 
— price pooling, single-desk selling — must be maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I'd like to move, seconded by the 
member from Pelly: 
 
 That this Assembly reaffirm its support for the Canadian 

Wheat Board monopoly and the concept of single-desk 
marketing system that provides maximum returns for 
farmers; and further, that we oppose the concept of dual  



April 25, 1995 

 
1764 

 market system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to second this motion and enter into 
this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to start out by apologizing to you and to my 
fellow members in the House here for my rather raspy voice; I 
unfortunately picked up a cold some place over the weekend, 
and it's settled in my chest. And in the words of my grandfather 
. . . I keep thinking how fortunate I am that it has settled in my 
chest and that I am a New Democrat because, Mr. Speaker, my 
grandfather used to say that a cold will always settle in the 
weakest part of the body. So, Mr. Speaker, if I was a Liberal, I'd 
likely end up with a head cold. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to get back to the issue 
at hand, and that is our government’s support for the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board is 
modelled after an agricultural marketing cooperative. It is a 
commercial marketing agency responsible for the sale of wheat, 
barley, in the international and domestic non-feed markets. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, sort of outlines in a very broad sense the 
importance of the Canadian Wheat Board and why it is 
important to farmers, particularly in western Canada, and 
farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
As you may or may not know, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian 
Wheat Board has a jurisdiction for marketing of wheat and 
barley on behalf of western Canadian farmers. The Wheat 
Board's jurisdiction covers Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, 
and the Peace River districts of British Columbia. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, primarily, is the districts that are 
represented in western Canada, and makes the Canadian Wheat 
Board a very important tool to Saskatchewan farmers in 
particular, as the pooling concept of the Canadian Wheat Board 
allows the return to the Saskatchewan farmers . . . to maximize 
those returns. 
 
That applies I think, Mr. Speaker, to all farmers, young and old, 
but perhaps even plays a little special interest to younger 
farmers, less established farmers, and those farmers starting out 
in the industry in particular. Because as we all know the 
agricultural industry and the business of farming has really 
developed over the last few years from what it was 25 or 30 
years ago, which was basically a way of life, to what it is today, 
a large business. And with a lot of capital, a lot of financing 
involved, and a year-to-year operation of that farm, a lot of 
capital involved in simply putting that crop in and taking it off. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, there is a demand in the fall time by 
farmers to have cash to meet their financial obligations, either 
with the local bank or the suppliers of products that they use  

such as fuel, fertilizer, seed, repairs, etc., that they use on their 
day-to-day operations on their farm. 
 
So when that crop comes in, Mr. Speaker, there is a thrust, a 
movement by farmers, to sell that product as soon as possible to 
start to realize some of this revenue return so that they can meet 
the financial obligations. And this is where the wheat boards 
play such a critical role, Mr. Speaker. It will allow farmers to 
sell their grain into the market-place at that time and take the 
payment they receive that time, the interim payment, and give 
the farmer the comfort and the knowledge that he's not selling 
on a spot market or a one-time market or taking a price for his 
product at a time when there's high supply and perhaps even 
low demand for it, and taking it at the present price, because 
ultimately he will end up, at the end of the day, getting the best 
possible price for that product that he's produced. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? It's simply because the Canadian Wheat 
Board pools the revenues for sales into four separate pool 
accounts — wheat, durum wheat, feed barley, and malting 
barley. And each producer receives an initial payment upon 
delivery of grain to the elevator, and at the end of that year, the 
pool account is closed. The operating expenses are deducted 
and the surplus is sent out to the producers in a final payment. 
And that is done on a proportion based on the amount of 
delivery of each farmer. 
 
That way, Mr. Speaker, the farmer gets a fair return for the 
product he has produced. He knows that even though he has to 
sell it perhaps right from the combine or right after the fall 
harvest is done, and he will not receive the lowest price simply 
because there is the most amount of grain around at that time 
and the least demand. 
 
He knows that that product will be feathered into the 
market-place to the importers and to the domestic use and that 
he will, at the end of the year, receive the best possible price at 
all receivable in that market time frame. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, allows him the opportunity to base his 
financing his farm on a fairly legitimate financial base, because 
he knows the approximation of what his final payments are 
going to be. He has a very good idea of his cash flow for his 
farm that year and he's able to meet his obligations accordingly. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that there has been some 
movement in this country over the last little while to do away 
with the powers of the Wheat Board and bring in a dual 
marketing system. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
we all who are rational and clear-thinking people, realize that a 
dual marketing system simply would not work along with the 
Canadian Wheat Board. It would end up in ultimately the 
demise of the Canadian Wheat Board, which is perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, what certain individuals are after. 
 
They're more interested in short-term politics than they are in 
the long survival of Canadian farmers and Saskatchewan 
farmers in particular. And, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me to see 
that, because history has shown us what agriculture was like in  



April 25, 1995 

 
1765 

this country, what agriculture was like in North America, and 
what happened to farmers in Saskatchewan here and in Canada 
in the 1920s and early '30s before the Canadian Wheat Board 
came along. 
 
I know that there are those in our midst, Mr. Speaker, that are 
suggesting that farmers should have a plebiscite vote on 
whether or not we want to keep the Canadian Wheat Board. 
Well I will suggest to those people, Mr. Speaker, that there was 
a vote taken. The vote was taken in the fall of 1994 when the 
members of the Wheat Board Advisory Committee all stood for 
election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to say that all but one of those 
that were returned and re-elected — all were staunch supporters 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. That, Mr. Speaker, I think speaks 
very clearly as to what Saskatchewan farmers want and western 
Canadian farmers want in representation to the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
I think it's a clear indication the Canadian Wheat Board is a 
strong identity supported by the vast majority of farmers across 
western Canada. And I think it's proven itself over time. I don't 
think there's too many people who will really disagree with that 
when they reassess the benefits of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
There's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that any agency in any 
organization has to be updated and modernized from time to 
time. And I'm not saying that the Canadian Wheat Board doesn't 
have to be updated and modernized from time to time. And I 
believe that there are things that have been done and things that 
can be done and things that will be done to make the Wheat 
Board more responsive to the market-place and more 
responsive to the needs of Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers. 
And those things . . . Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of 
confidence in the history of the Canadian Wheat Board, in the 
fact that changes and responsible moves have been made in the 
past, then they will be made in the future to maintain the 
strength of the Canadian Wheat Board and to maintain its very 
vital role that it plays in the welfare of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
(1615) 
 
I think some of the efficiencies that have been brought into 
place to date, Mr. Speaker, has been the ability for the Canadian 
Wheat Board to call on certain grades of grain and certain 
commodities at different times to meet the market demands. 
This, Mr. Speaker, in turn, identifies greater efficiencies within 
our transportation system so that we have a Canadian Wheat 
Board and a transportation system working much like the hand 
in the glove, working together to create efficiencies in the long 
term which benefit not only Saskatchewan farmers, but benefit 
all people in Saskatchewan by having an even stronger 
agriculture economy and a stronger provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the make-up of the Canadian Wheat Board and the 
principles of it is really quite simple. The farmer or producer, 
farmer, when he delivers his product to the elevator system, 
receives an initial payment for the product he produced.  

It's not a price support. The initial price is a percentage, and 
usually it's about 80 per cent of the expected market returns 
during that crop year. That's the initial price that the farmer 
receives. 
 
Now the other 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker, is paid out at the end 
of the crop year when the pools are closed, and the costs of 
operating the Canadian Wheat Board are deducted. And those 
costs, Mr. Speaker, are approximately three and a half cents a 
bushel. Those costs are deducted, and the balance is paid out to 
the farmer in a final payment. 
 
Now on occasions, Mr. Speaker, but only on four occasions 
since 1935, has there been a deficit in those pool accounts. And 
it is at that time, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government has 
kicked in and supported the Canadian Wheat Board by picking 
up that deficit. That deficit had been picked up the Canadian 
government, Mr. Speaker, where all taxpayers in Canada has 
contributed. But I am proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that that has 
only happened on four times since 1935. And I think that's a 
record that the Canadian Wheat Board can be very proud of and 
a record that Saskatchewan farmers in particular can be very, 
very proud of. 
 
But the Canadian Wheat Board also plays a very major role, not 
only in the marketing of Saskatchewan-grown grain, but also in 
providing information, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian Wheat 
Board provides a considerable and an increasing amount of 
information concerning marketing operations. And unlike the 
private grain companies, the Canadian Wheat Board is 
obligated by law to publish an annual financial statement. And 
its producers receive regular pool returns and gives producers a 
clearer idea of what the final return will be and what they can 
expect for the commodities they have grown. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I say is a very, very efficient 
operation because not only does the Canadian Wheat Board 
supply us with the ability to market our grain into the 
international and domestic markets and giving us as farmers the 
greatest return, but it also provides us with information to allow 
us to make good, honest, business-like decisions on the crops 
and the commodities that we'll be producing in the future. 
 
We'll be able to make those decisions based on the information 
that they clearly outline as to what will be the market signals for 
the crops to produce for the future based on supply and demand 
and weather and so on and so forth and crops being produced in 
other countries, as well as the marketing subsidies that we have 
been impacted upon by other countries such as the United 
States and such as the European Common Market over the last 
number of years, which has put the Canadian Wheat Board in a 
rather unfair situation where we're competing with farmers' 
pocketbooks up against the treasuries of countries such as the 
United States and the European Common Markets. 
 
But despite that, Mr. Speaker, we have fared quite well. And it 
is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that throughout that period 
of time from 1935 until today, the Canadian Wheat Board has 
always been a fair competitor in the market-place although  



April 25, 1995 

 
1766 

some countries such as the United States has on occasions 
suggested that the Canadian Wheat Board is an unfair 
competitor. 
 
But in fact, Mr. Speaker, whenever these accusations have been 
levied against the Canadian Wheat Board, they have been 
vindicated of such accusations. And most recent as 1994, when 
it was suggested that the Canadian Wheat Board's dealing in 
durum product in the U.S. (United States) was unfair 
competition to the U.S., it was vindicated by the Canada-U.S. 
Free Trade Agreement panel that was set up to settle such 
disputes. And that, Mr. Speaker, I think speaks for itself, that 
the Canadian Wheat Board is a very solid, strong, ethical 
organization that deals with the highest of ethics but with the 
best interests of Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers at heart, 
ultimately, Mr. Speaker, delivering to the Saskatchewan farmer 
and the western Canadian farmers the best return for the 
products that they produce. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the previous federal Liberal 
government . . . pardon me, federal government for the Tory 
government altered the powers of the Canadian Wheat Board 
during their term and during their mandate, first by removing 
oats from the Wheat Board's jurisdiction. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
must admit farmers in my constituency . . . and many of those 
farmers up there raise oats on a regular basis, and they do it 
basically more or less as a tradition, Mr. Speaker, because oats 
is very suited to the climatic conditions of particularly the 
northern part of my constituency. And many farmers grow oats 
on a regular basis there and were very, very upset with the 
moves of the former Tory federal government to eliminate oats 
from the Wheat Board without any consultation to the farmers 
at all. I mean they just simply, with the stroke of a pen, removed 
it and left many farmers in my area quite distraught over the 
idea that they were now forced to grow a product that they 
traditionally grow and would now not have the ability and/or 
the protection of the Canadian Wheat Board to market that crop 
through. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, nevertheless it was done. And as a result of 
that, we ended up with the Wheat Board with one less product 
to market. And as a result of that, the oats ended up on the open 
market. And I think over the period of time, Mr. Speaker, we've 
seen oats just bounce all over the place. 
 
I do recall at one point in time, at the fall time, oats was 
something like 68 cents a bushel at the Hyas elevator, and some 
year later it was about $1.70 a bushel at the same elevator. And 
those farmers who were overburdened with the oat crop of that 
year and were forced to sell it into the elevator system that fall, 
they received some 60 cents a bushel for it, and that was it. I 
mean that was it. They get the one shot, and they were done. 
Those farmers who were in a financial position to be able to 
hold that crop longer were able to reap a little better return, 
getting a dollar plus a bushel for it some 6 or 8 or 10 months 
later. 
 
So that's the unfairness of the open market system, Mr. Speaker, 
and that's the joy of the Canadian Wheat Board . . . is that it  

allows the farmer to sell the product into the system and receive 
a good average price, regardless of what time of the year he was 
forced or did make that market decision to sell that product. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, under the term of the former Conservative 
government, we also have seen instituted a short-lived 
continental barley marketing system that would have permitted 
farmers to bypass the Canadian Wheat Board and sell their 
barley directly into the United States. That, Mr. Speaker, was 
short-lived simply because the vast majority of farmers in 
western Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular, didn't want to 
see that happen because they knew that it would simply erode 
further the powers of the Canadian Wheat Board. And 
eventually if you chew away the foundation of any organization 
long enough, Mr. Speaker, the whole house will collapse. And 
that's the concern that many farmers in Saskatchewan have 
today . . . is that if we erode the powers of the Canadian Wheat 
Board to such an extent that its foundations start to crumble, 
then we will lose the Wheat Board in its entirety. 
 
And if that was to happen, Mr. Speaker, we would find 
ourselves in truly an open market system that simply does not 
work in the best interests of the ordinary and average farmer. 
And there are those, I admit, Mr. Speaker, there are those in 
Saskatchewan who would like to see this happen, but they are 
more driven by the political agenda. They are probably more 
driven by the opportunity for them to manipulate farmers, 
manipulate the stocks that are grown by the farmers to their best 
interests rather than the interests of the average cross-the-piece 
farmer throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And through it all, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has been a very vocal supporter of the Canadian 
Wheat Board and the principle of single-desk marketing. For us, 
it is simply a matter of fairness and doing what is the best for 
the largest number of farmers. Through pooling, all farmers 
share in the benefits of the sales into the highest priced 
American market, as well as sharing the pain associated with 
the competition, sometimes head-to-head competition, against 
the Americans and the Europeans on their subsidies. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, has been very evident over the last 
number of years as we've seen the United States with their trade 
enhancement program and the European Common Market with 
their subsidy programs redistort the price of grain 
internationally, forcing Saskatchewan farmers and Canadian 
farmers in general, but Saskatchewan farmers in particular, to 
compete head-to-head with those subsidies. Our farmers found 
themselves in a rather awkward position because they were 
competing with their small pocketbook against the treasuries of 
the United States, treasuries of Germany and France and Great 
Britain and many of those European countries that subsidize 
their farmers quite substantially. 
 
And I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that . . . during that same 
period of time that Saskatchewan farmers were able to resist 
and adapt to the challenges at hand. And throughout this 
process, Mr. Speaker, painful as it was, very painful in some 
cases . . . but throughout this whole process, Saskatchewan  



April 25, 1995 

 
1767 

farmers emerged as the most efficient farmers in the world. 
They identified ways and means to survive and to meet the 
challenges of the European Common Market and to meet the 
challenges of the United States trade enhancement program and 
develop their farm to withstand those international market 
pressures. 
 
And it is that efficiencies, Mr. Speaker, and the determination 
by Saskatchewan farmers that has built an even stronger 
agricultural industry in this province. They've looked at 
diversification. They've looked at growing alternative crops. 
They've looked at ways and means to stabilize their operations 
and get the greatest return from the market-place. Ultimately, 
Mr. Speaker, any industry has to be able to survive on its own, 
and agriculture is no different than any other industry. 
Agriculture has to be able to change with the changing times, 
change with the globalization of agriculture and the globalizing 
of markets. And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say the 
Saskatchewan farmers have risen and met that challenge, and 
they have been able to develop a farm that is strong and being 
able to withstand the buffeting of the international 
market-place. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board 
has played a very important role there, a very important role in 
allowing them the security of knowledge that they would, by 
selling their products through the Canadian Wheat Board, that 
they would get the greatest return available to them in the 
market-place that year. And that's why, Mr. Speaker, vast 
majority of farmers right across this country, the vast majority 
of farmers in my constituency are very, very much in favour of 
retaining the Canadian Wheat Board as the identity that it is, by 
retaining the Canadian Wheat Board as a single-desk marketing 
agent so that it works in their best interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's position is that the Canadian 
Wheat Board's mandate or structure should not be altered 
without the involvement and approval of the Canadian Wheat 
Board clients. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Canadian 
Wheat Board clients, the farmers of this great province of ours, 
spoke very loudly last fall when they went to the polls and 
returned the advisory committee in the massive numbers that 
they did with a clear, clear message that they were interested in 
retaining a Canadian Wheat Board in its present form as a 
single-desk agency to marketing our product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan supports the 
current structure of the Canadian Wheat Board, and we 
recognize that, like in any other large bureaucracy, there are 
problems related to efficiencies and sometimes needs to be 
addressed. For example, the organic grain producers and other 
niche marketers want more workable system through which 
they can market their products, and that's understandable, Mr. 
Speaker, and to that ends the Canadian Wheat Board has been 
able to handle those and set up a systems and set up branches of 
its own operations to help handle those specialty crops, those 
niche crops, and be able to satisfy the niche markets as they 
appear around the world and particularly in North America. 
 

(1630) 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that we can all be very, very 
pleased with the ability of the Canadian Wheat Board to adapt 
to the changing market-place and to adapt to changing times, to 
adapt to a changing market demands. And with that, we're 
seeing those things happen basically as we speak, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the efficiencies of the Canadian Wheat Board, I think, is 
second to none. What really pleases me, Mr. Speaker, is that it's 
an organization which represents all farmers, and that we all, 
through our advisory committee representatives, have input into 
the system. And if we have an idea of how we can make it more 
efficient or if we have some suggestions to some of the 
problems that we believe that they're having, we have a system 
of getting those thoughts through to where they can come to 
some real benefit to all of us. 
 
But in all these instances, while problems evidently work 
themselves out, public confidence in the Wheat Board is, I 
think, quite strong, Mr. Speaker. I know that there are those 
people who are calling for a so-called free market system. And 
that system, Mr. Speaker, is something that has been, like I said, 
more profit-driven or personal-driven or politically-driven than 
really the driving of the average wants and needs of the average 
farmer across Saskatchewan. 
 
And there is, Mr. Speaker, an interesting quote that I would like 
to share with my colleagues here in regards to the wishes or the 
demands of certain individuals in regards to the free market 
system. When I hear complaints about the bureaucracy of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, I usually reply by quoting Dwayne 
Andreas, the head of Archer Daniels & Midland who told The 
Financial Post, and I quote: We'll never have free trade in 
farming. And that's a statement that he represents would be . . . 
when presented, rather, Mr. Speaker, that when suggested and 
made to him as to how the international market-place in 
agriculture commodities could be best adapted to meet not only 
the producers' demands but the consumers' demands, he 
suggested the Canadian Wheat Board is well-run, well-
governed, and a well-organized Canadian organization. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, that speaks quite loudly for the merits 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. And I think it has not only 
served the Canadian farmers and Saskatchewan producers real 
well; it has served the market-place real well internationally. It 
has met the demands of the importers of our products that we 
produce here in Saskatchewan: wheat, barley, etc. And most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, it has set forward a very strong 
reputation — reputation for being able to provide quality 
products in quality time in an atmosphere, Mr. Speaker, that is 
competitive to any other where in the world. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I can't help but continue to sing the 
praises of the Canadian Wheat Board, and to, without a doubt, 
extend my support for this motion. And I want to close, Mr. 
Speaker, simply by saying that the Canadian Wheat Board has 
served us well in the past, and I know it will serve us well in the 
future. 



April 25, 1995 

 
1768 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, as time goes on, changes happen, 
circumstances change, but principles stay the same. There's no 
doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian Wheat Board will 
continue to go through change to adopt itself to the changing 
market-place, but I know, Mr. Speaker, that the principle of the 
Canadian Wheat Board will always stay the same. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I've listened with a great deal of interest to the two members of 
the government who've given us their version of the history of 
the Canadian Wheat Board and why we should all have such a 
vile subservience to that particular organization. And I guess it 
speaks volumes, Mr. Speaker, about what's wrong with the 
system today. 
 
These government members — and the last one that spoke is a 
farmer himself so he should know better than to stand up and 
tell the kind of story he just did — know full well that farming 
in this province is changing dramatically. In his part of the 
world up there, red spring wheat and durum is non-existent, and 
barley, sometimes because of market forces, isn't planted a lot, 
but lots of canola and peas and mustard and lentils. There's all 
sorts of things going on, Mr. Speaker, in the world today that 
have gotten absolutely nothing to do with the Canadian Wheat 
Board — absolutely nothing to do with the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
So then he comes in here and he tells us that we have to bow 
down and worship the Canadian Wheat Board because 
otherwise we're doing something wrong. That it's always either 
black or white; that there's nothing ever in between. It simply 
allows this large bureaucracy that I and other farmers in this 
province have to pay every red cent to maintain in Winnipeg, 
and yet I let the government of the day appoint the people that 
run it. I don't have any say in the governance of that 
organization at all, but I'm simply supposed to bow down and 
let the Canadian Wheat Board do whatever they wish, keep my 
money for the better part of a year before they pay it out to me, 
and not ask any questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I describe that, that sounds like a 
classic New Democrat. I would just simply allow them to take 
my money, not say anything, not ask any questions because it's 
part of my philosophical rhetoric that I spouted for so darn long 
that I don't know any different. That's a typical New Democrat, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that's why we can't have a reasonable discussion in this 
Assembly about what the role of the Canadian Wheat Board 
should be. There's no one in my party, Mr. Speaker, said we 
should do away with it. Canadian Wheat Board plays a very 
valuable role. 
 
I've been in China when the Canadian Wheat Board was over 
there selling grain. Often times you have to have 
government-to-government relationships in order to sell  

product. Everybody knows that, understands it. Nobody's 
saying, do away with the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
But there's an awful lot of people in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
say, I need options. Today the cash flow requirements of 
farming mean that your cash flow requirements are different 
than they were when my father farmed, my grandfather farmed, 
because the needs to service your operation aren't the same 
today. And that's why you've seen this explosion of acres 
around canola, around peas, around the various other 
diversified crops in this province. 
 
Why the push? The Minister of Economic Development stands 
in this Assembly every time he gets on his feet and he tells us 
we've got to diversify, we've got value add, we've got to have 
more things manufactured here. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that if I mill flour in this province, I 
can't sell it outside the boundary? If I want to sell outside the 
boundary of this province, I got to go to the Canadian Wheat 
Board and I got to pay world price for it, take it back to my 
farm and mill it, and then ship it around. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that's absolutely ludicrous. Absolutely ludicrous. 
 
But what do I hear out of these people, the member from 
Melville and the one from Pelly? The same old vile 
subservience. Never discuss the issues at hand; just the same 
old political rhetoric. There's an election going to happen and I 
got to talk to those goofy old NFUers (National Farmers Union) 
in my riding and I got to tell them that I stood up and I fought 
on their behalf for the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these members know full well the Canadian 
Wheat Board was brought in in 1934-35 by a Conservative 
government and it did not have a monopoly. It did not have a 
monopoly at that time. The monopoly was put in place during 
the Second World War. And, Mr. Minister, was that monopoly 
put in place to help farmers? No. That monopoly was put in 
place to help two things: one was Great Britain, who did not 
have money to pay for wheat for bread; and the other was to 
feed the people working in the war industries in eastern Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within a week of the Canadian Wheat Board being 
given a monopoly, the price of wheat to the western Canadian 
farmer dropped over 60 cents a bushel — 60 cents a bushel 
from what he was getting before the monopoly and afterwards. 
That's why the Canadian Wheat Board today has that monopoly. 
That was imposed by order in council, order in council of the 
federal Liberal government of the time — didn't even go 
through the legislature; imposed from on high by politicians, 
Mr. Speaker, not farmers. If you'd held a vote at that time 
during the Second World War, I'm not sure that you would have 
had the results, Mr. Speaker, that these guys so proudly crow 
about today. 
 
I mean, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, UGG (United Grain 
Growers), all of these pooling groups that had developed in the 
'20s and the '30s to protect farmers, were operating quite nice, 
thank you, when the Canadian Wheat Board was not a  



April 25, 1995 

 
1769 

monopoly. And these members know it full well. These 
members know it full well. And yet they have the gall to stand 
in this Assembly and tell us an entirely different story, an 
entirely different story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue before Saskatchewan in 1995 is one of 
how do we maximize return for the people that work the land in 
this province — the province with the most arable land in all of 
Canada. Sixty per cent of arable land in this country is in this 
province. 
 
How do we maximize returns? How do we keep people on the 
farm? How do we keep our rural communities alive? How do 
we keep our schools alive? How do we keep the hospital there? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question is that you have 
to have more productivity and you have to have more return and 
more cash flow in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there isn't a farmer out there today that puts 
all his eggs in one basket, because you simply can't afford to. 
You cannot afford to simply haul your wheat to the elevator, let 
the Wheat Board give you an initial payment and then say, 
many months down the road I'll give you the rest of your 
money. And I won't pay you any interest on it — I won't pay 
you any interest on it; you have to trust me with your money. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that trust, that trust in the Canadian Wheat 
Board — which I have no direct control over, by the way — has 
made people question certain things. They question the size of 
it, they question the policies that it implements, and they 
question why today Ralph Goodale and his federal Liberal 
friends can appoint all of the folks that run the Canadian Wheat 
Board without consulting farmers in this province. 
 
We have dramatic change coming, Mr. Speaker. The Crow rate 
is gone. Transportation and grain-related issues are going to be 
high on the agenda. And yet this same minister who has trashed 
the Crow rate has the power to appoint all of the individuals 
who govern the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And I would have thought somewhere in this mix I would have 
heard a New Democrat speak up and say that's not right; that 
the farmer should have control of the Wheat Board; the farmer 
should have control over how much money the Wheat Board 
spends; and the farmer should have control over the policies of 
the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Have I heard that from any New Democrats? No. They simply 
say that we should bow down and not ask questions, because it 
salutes our political philosophy. Well that's not good enough in 
1995, Mr. Speaker, not good enough at all. 
 
What this Assembly needs is a good, honest debate about how 
we return control of the Canadian Wheat Board to the farmers 
of this province. That's what this Assembly should be debating. 
And there are a number of issues, Mr. Speaker, surrounding 
that. 
 
Can the Canadian Wheat Board exist as a single-desk seller to  

overseas markets and yet have domestic sales in North America 
open? That's a legitimate question. You've got a free trade 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, that began with the United States and 
Canada and now includes Mexico, is going to include Chile. 
You have whole hemispheres now involved in trading 
relationships where they're drawing down tariff barriers. 
 
One of the reasons that we now have a tariff barrier again with 
the United States on grain exports is because of the monopoly 
of the Canadian Wheat Board — the monopoly. 
 
(1645) 
 
Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that New Democrats are so fearful of 
asking those questions? Why is it? It always amazes me that the 
farmers of that caucus do not have the gumption, do not have 
the fortitude to stand on their feet and talk about those issues, 
ask those questions. It always amazes me that they would rather 
be sheep instead of leaders. That they would rather not ask 
those questions. That they would simply stand up and parrot 
some line that's been around for the last 50 years that quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, in today's world might not have quite as 
much relevance as it had in the 1930s. 
 
But instead we've just been subjected to an hour and a half of 
the same old story. Mr. Speaker, I believe, as a farmer, as a 
fourth generation farmer in this province, that the Canadian 
Wheat Board can exist quite well, thank you very much, in 
competition with whoever else is in the grain business. 
 
And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that the experience 
prior to 1943, ’44 was that they did quite well, because there 
are farmers out there who do not want to undertake the 
necessary expenditure, the necessary expenditure and time 
involved with marketing all of their crop. 
 
And you can tell that this stuff bothers them, Mr. Speaker, 
because pretty soon you hear them chirping from their seats. 
And these are people that obviously don't have the courage to 
stand up and ask the real questions of 1995. Because they'd 
rather hide behind the rhetoric of the past — hide behind the 
rhetoric of the past instead of asking the questions that have to 
be answered. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there have been examples all over western 
Canada of individuals who have gone out, sought out, and often 
paid for market development all on their own. And one of the 
reasons we don't have a pasta plant in this province is because 
how can you reasonably ask farmers to invest their own money 
in a pasta plant if they cannot be in the line-up to deliver durum 
wheat to that plant. 
 
If they have to go and dump it in some company's elevator, who 
then charges elevation and handling charges — for their bottom 
line, by the way — and then turns around and directs it to the 
pasta plant, how in the world can you ask a farmer to invest in 
it? It makes no sense. 
 
And that's one reason that we don't have pasta plants here but  



April 25, 1995 

 
1770 

they have them everywhere else in the world, Mr. Speaker. Why 
in the world should a farmer go out and do all of this market 
development, spend his own money, in many cases, when the 
Wheat Board turns around and says, no, you can't do that; I 
have monopoly jurisdiction; you'll have to play by my rules or 
you won't play at all. 
 
How in the world does that encourage diversification that the 
member from Elphinstone is always yapping about in this 
Assembly? I don't understand it. 
 
This province, Mr. Speaker, has all sorts of value added 
enterprises around rural Saskatchewan today because 
individuals went out and found markets and convinced their 
neighbours to grow specialty crops, clean that product, bag that 
product, move it into export position, put it in a container. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we all had the mentality of the members 
opposite, the New Democrats, there's none of that would have 
happened. They would simply have said, no, goodness, I can't 
mess up the system at all; I've got to just stay in my own little 
niche here; and I've got to drive my two-ton truck to the 
elevator and I've got to open the end gate and I've got to dump 
my wheat in the pit, and then hope — hope, Mr. Speaker — at 
the end of the day that I get a fair return for my product. 
 
Now that's a real system, Mr. Speaker. That's what built this 
country, isn't it? You know when people came out here and 
broke the land and they didn't have a railroad, they didn't have 
anything, but they were willing to take a chance to build 
something new. They weren't prepared to adhere to the system 
of the countries where they came from, or eastern Canada. No, 
they were going to do something new. 
 
But you know, this party here, they don't want to do anything 
new. They don't want to see us develop. They simply say, 
you've got to let the Canadian Wheat Board, unquestioned — 
unquestioned — proceed along on its glorious path. 
 
I don't know how a farmer, any farmer, would not want to have 
control of the marketing agency that he pays for. It just boggles 
my mind why I would want to support several hundred 
bureaucrats who are governed by appointments from Ottawa, 
and I have to pay every cent. You know, if the Canadian 
taxpayer were paying their damned salaries, Mr. Speaker, I 
would feel good about it. But they aren't; I'm paying. I have to 
pay every thin dime of their wages, of their expenses, of their 
trips, of their administration, of their computers — every thin 
dime I pay for. It isn't the taxpayers, it's me. And I don't know 
why these people would want to perpetuate that system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should not be electing an advisory committee; 
we should be electing the committee. The board of directors of 
the Canadian Wheat Board should be elected by farmers. But 
do I hear that coming from New Democrats? Not one word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the employees of that organization should have to 
go through a process where they justify their job. They should 
be able to justify their job and their performance for me, the  

shareholder of the company. And instead, you know who they 
listen to? Multinational grain companies, multinational 
railroads. You know, between the big grain companies and the 
big railroads all deciding what they want, that's who the 
Canadian Wheat Board listens to today. You know, I want my 
cars allocated over here, and I want to make sure my terminal in 
Vancouver is doing all right over there. And I want to move 
some grain down to Montreal, and I don't care what it costs. I'm 
going to do it in the winter shipping season when I've got to put 
every last bushel over a railroad instead of down the seaway. 
And what happens? I pay the cost, Mr. Speaker. The farmer 
pays the cost, with no accountability back at all. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we should ask these questions if for no other 
reason, no other reason, that a little bit of competition for the 
Canadian Wheat Board just might smarten a few people up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't want to see the demise of the Canadian 
Wheat Board because I believe that organization has the 
expertise and the knowledge to sell my product in 
market-places around the world that I as an individual or a 
company can't do. I believe that. I fundamentally believe that. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board has got the connections and the 
expertise and the backing of the Canadian government, and they 
can sell on my behalf in places that I could never dream of 
selling as an individual, as an inland terminal association, or as 
a large grain company. And I need that service, Mr. Speaker. 
Every farmer in Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba, and the 
Peace River district needs that. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? If what's good for the goose 
is good for the gander, maybe farmers in Ontario who have 
never been subjected to the Canadian Wheat Board or farmers 
in the Maritimes or farmers in Quebec, maybe we should all 
play on a level playing-field. 
 
You know, why is the Canadian Wheat Board area restricted to 
the Prairies? Well I'll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. When that 
monopoly was put in place it was for the benefit of eastern 
Canada, of factory workers, of people in Toronto and Montreal 
and Halifax. It wasn't put there for the benefit of us out here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the same problems exist today as they did 
then. And I for one as a practising farmer, as a permit book 
holder, who's going to seed his 25th crop this spring, don't like 
the fact that I don't have any control over that organization and 
yet I have to pay every dime that goes into it. And that's unfair, 
it's undemocratic, and it's not something I would expect for 
social democrats to stand up and defend. I would not expect 
social democrats to stand up and defend a system that deprives 
individuals the right to control their own destiny. 
 
I mean that's like saying your local board of your co-op should 
be able to hire and fire and do whatever it wants, and you can't 
go to the board meeting and have your piece because you're a 
member. That's what's happened to the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And it's the truth and they know it's the truth. And you know  



April 25, 1995 

 
1771 

what? If they checked their own polling they would find that the 
majority of people in this province agree that something's 
wrong. And they know it, they know it. 
 
Because you know what, Mr. Speaker, their pollster probably 
cost more than ours does, and they probably paid for them 
through taxpayers’ money. And they know what the figures say; 
they know what the figures say. 
 
And it's a very clear majority of people believe that a dual 
market could work in western Canada if it is structured 
properly. And no one is saying that the Canadian Wheat Board 
should be destroyed. That's an absolute fallacy. And nor should 
it be destroyed. And we as farmers should do everything we can 
to make sure that it survives, but under our direction and our 
leadership; not Ralph Goodale in Ottawa appointing the people 
that run that organization. 
 
And until those changes are made, Mr. Speaker, until those 
changes are made we will not have a Wheat Board that's 
responsive to the needs of the people that it's suppose to serve. 
For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Maple Creek: 
 
 That all words following the word “board” be deleted 

and replaced by the following: 
 
 and support a dual marketing system for wheat, barley, 

and durum. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm really happy to 
enter the debate here this afternoon and to second the motion by 
the member from Thunder Creek. Because in listening to his 
comments, it makes eminent sense that at this period in time 
after so many years of a monopoly controlled by the Canadian 
Wheat Board, that we would suddenly face the reality of the 
need to talk about the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
I want the members opposite and the people of this province to 
know that we are not advocating the end of the Canadian Wheat 
Board. We're advocating here that we take a look at how it 
works, that we talk too about some responsibility to the people 
that are being served by the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
We want the Canadian Wheat Board to be opened up to the 
people that it serves. We want the books opened up and we 
want some competition in this area so that people can make 
some decisions for themselves. 
 
We want an elected board. There's nothing wrong for asking for 
elections to determine who does our business for us. We want 
farmers to be in control of the Canadian Wheat Board. There's 
nothing wrong with that. I don't think any farmer in 
Saskatchewan would be against having elections to elect people 
to do what has to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quite simply put, it's time to examine the  

Canadian Wheat Board. It's time for the people of this province 
to have a look at the business that is operating their business. 
We've got to have an open, accountable look at what the 
Canadian Wheat Board does. It's finally time to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that we do now adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


