






















































March 15, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 15, 1995 

 

 
867 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present a petition on behalf of the people from the Richmound 
community of Saskatchewan and also from the area of Hilda, 
Alberta. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these on behalf of the folks from out in 
my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased as well to present a petition to the Assembly and 
reading of the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This petition is signed by individuals from the Maple Creek, 
Consul, and Walsh, Alberta areas. I so present. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I also have a petition 
pertaining to the same subject. I will read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and that further, the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning of Highway No. 1, 
rather than allocating these funds towards capital 
construction projects in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And these are also from the Maple Creek, Calgary . . . even up 
as far as Calgary, Mr. Speaker, so there's quite a lot of interest 
in this project. I will now table. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
from citizens of Saskatchewan today and I'll simply read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from Maple Creek; Consul, 
Saskatchewan; Regina, Saskatchewan; Medicine Hat, Alberta; 
Calgary, Alberta; users of No. 1 Highway from all over, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition reads 
this way: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Today they're from Golden Prairie, Maple Creek, Saskatoon, 
Tompkins, Consul, and Walsh, Alberta. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated toward 
the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to  



March 15, 1995 

 
868 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, 21 grade 7, 8, and 9 students from the community of 
Prud'homme. They are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, here 
today. They are accompanied by their teacher and I believe 
principal, Mr. Stephen Kemp, as well chaperons Terry Maton, 
Lyn Maton, and Gilbert Leray, a very good friend of mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're here today to partake in the functioning of 
the House. They're going to be in for question period and then 
I'm going to meet with them after to answer any questions they 
may have about the proceedings they've witnessed here today. 
 
I want to tell you that I truly appreciate them being here today, 
and as well I appreciate the community of Prud'homme in 
particular because of its rich cultural diversity. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all the members of the House to 
welcome our special guests here. and a very heartfelt welcome 
to you. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 18 women who are seated in the west gallery. They 
are spouses and a part of the Saskatchewan public works 
conference that's being held in Regina on March 14 to 17. The 
Saskatchewan public works association is a non-profit 
organization that's involved in the areas of public works, 
administration, operation, and maintenance. 
 
And there will be approximately 220 delegates at the 
conference who are representatives from urban municipalities 
throughout Saskatchewan, so the women that are here this 
afternoon will be from throughout the province. And their 
spouses were perhaps city or town councillors, administrators, 
engineers, or town foremen. 
 
I'm hoping that while the husbands are at work, they have 
finally a chance to relax and a bit of a chance to play and that 
they enjoy their afternoon with us during question period and 
the tour that will follow. 
 
I would like to ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
the women who are part of the spouses program for the 
Saskatchewan public works conference. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Bedford Road Collegiate Renovations 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
extend my congratulations to Bedford Road Collegiate in 
Saskatoon on the completion of its renovation project. 
Ceremonies to celebrate the school's $6.5 million reconstruction 
were held yesterday. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the completion of this project is not only 
significant for the staff and students at Bedford Road 
Collegiate, but it is also important to our Hon. Premier and to 
me. We were in the same home classroom at Bedford Road in 
the '50s, dare I say, and there are very many fond memories of 
being educated at this school and making many lifelong friends. 
 
At that time I can remember when the ceiling of the physics lab 
fell in, but fortunately there were no students in the classroom 
when this happened. 
 
I join with the Premier in giving credit to Bedford Road 
Collegiate for providing us and other classmates with a 
thorough academic program, inspirational teachers, and 
exposure to a wide variety of cultural, athletic, and social 
activities. 
 
I think it is appropriate to recognize this high school during 
Education Week in Saskatchewan and I couldn't say it any 
better than the Premier did when he indicated that the 
renovation to Bedford Road has produced a school that 
preserves the best of the old while offering the benefits of the 
new. 
 
Congratulations and best wishes to the staff and students of 
Bedford Road Collegiate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden 90th Birthday 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is a very special day in my home town. March 15, 1995 is 
the 90th birthday of the town of Lumsden. Last night, Mr. 
Speaker, we had a birthday party to celebrate the anniversary of 
the town's incorporation. 
 
By 1905, Mr. Speaker, Lumsden — once known as Happy 
Valley — was well established and a flourishing trade centre 
for the surrounding area. There were four grain elevators and a 
flour mill and a full complement of businesses. Between 1901 
and 1911 the town grew rapidly as an agricultural service centre 
with a population increase of 418 per cent. You know in those 
days it was much easier for people to shop in Lumsden than to 
make the long trip to Regina. 
 
1905 to 1911 were boom years in Lumsden. Horseless carriages 
were gaining in popularity; passenger and freight trains — at 
least four a day — stopped at our train station; and people were 
complaining even then about streets, drainage, and sidewalks. 
In 1911 an electric power plant was built to put in street 
lighting and beef was 9 cents a pound. 
 
Last night we celebrated our birthday with the community 
choir, the Lumsden grade 10 drama troupe, and the Lumsden 
community adult band providing the entertainment. It's my 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to play flute in the band. We also 
welcomed three honoured guests representing the three levels of 
government. The mayor of Lumsden, Mr. Duane Klippenstine,  



March 15, 1995 

 
869 

received greetings and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I'm sorry but the member's time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Award of Teaching Excellence 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just want 
to take a moment today in recognition of Education Week and 
the work and dedication of teachers across our province and 
their commitment to a vital educational program in teaching our 
young people. As the Prime Minister recently said at a major 
awards presentation he made, teachers like the ones we honour 
today play a vital role in students' academic achievement and in 
shaping overall attitudes, career choices, and commitment to 
lifelong learning. 
 
And in that respect, I'd like to congratulate Mr. Howard Baker 
of the Kennedy-Langbank High School, a high school of just 
under 100 students, for the prestigious award he received. He 
received the award of teaching excellence in science, 
technology, and mathematics, at a ceremony in honour of 
national level recipients. And I want to acknowledge Mr. Baker 
for that. It's because of his hard work and his dedication that we 
have had a couple of students who have received major awards 
in the area in the past couple of years. 
 
One has placed . . . they've placed in the top 10 of 
Saskatchewan senior mathematics contests, while another won 
a provincial physics award. Not bad, it says, for a school of 
under 100 people. And at this time we certainly want to 
acknowledge the work of teachers and as well individuals like 
Mr. Baker and their commitment to education in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden 90th Birthday 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like 
to join with my colleague, the member from Regina North 
West, in congratulating the town of Lumsden on its 90th 
birthday which they celebrate today. 
 
In most towns in the world where they count their anniversaries 
by the century, a 90th birthday is not something to notice. 
Compared to other places, Saskatchewan is in its infancy. But if 
our province and our towns are young now, they will not always 
be, and now is the time to begin placing our markers, time to 
acknowledge our past so our move into the future will be 
confident. To illustrate my point, last night I was pleased to take 
part in the 90th anniversary celebration of the town of Lumsden 
in my constituency. 
 
The program was sponsored by the Lumsden Historical Society 
and by the Lumsden Parks and Recreation Board. It included 
performances by the Lumsden community choir, the grade 10 
students of Lumsden High School and the Lumsden community 
adult band. 

If you will not be too surprised at a non-partisan comment, Mr. 
Speaker, it was just confirmed that the Lumsden band featured 
an excellent flute player who looked suspiciously like the 
member from Regina North West. 
 
Lumsden is a vibrant, growing community with much to be 
proud of in its brief history. Its next 90 years will, I am sure, 
fulfil the promise of its first. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Ides of March 

 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the ides of 
March. Ides is a pre-Latin Etruscan word meaning divided. In 
the Roman calendar, the months were divided into halves and 
the ides of March means the middle. It was on this day in 44 
BC (before Christ) that Julius Caesar was assassinated in the 
Legislative Assembly of his day — the Roman Senate. Hence 
the famous phrase, "beware the ides of March." 
 
Any application of this prophecy to us today, Mr. Speaker? Can 
ancient times speak to us? Well remember the leader of the 
bloody palace coup — Cassius. We might also remember 
Caesar's line about Cassius: 
 
 Let me have men about me that are fat . . . yond' Cassius 

has a lean and hungry look;/he thinks too much: such 
men are dangerous. 

 
Well I look around this legislature for lean and hungry men and 
I don't see any relevancy here, Mr. Speaker. Most people 
assume Caesar's last words were the ones that Shakespeare 
wrote: “et tu Brute!” In fact, he said in classical Greek, Kai su 
teknon. Loosely translated, that means, you'll get yours, bud. 
That sounds like a warning to all politicians, both fat and lean, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Accreditation Award to Rosetown-Lucky Lake Health 
Centres 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, today I'm proud to announce 
that in my constituency of Rosetown-Elrose, two health care 
facilities, the Rosetown Health Centre and the Lucky Lake 
Health Centre have both sought and received a three-year 
accreditation award from the Canadian Council of Health 
Accreditation. 
 
I want to congratulate both facilities and Midwest Health 
District for having met this series of very strict standards laid 
out by the CCHFA (Canadian Council on Health Facilities 
Accreditation). These standards were evaluated by an 
independent team consisting of a registered nurse and a 
physician. 
 
As Midwest Health District CEO (chief executive officer) Doug 
Ball said, it is because of the hard work and commitment of all  



March 15, 1995 

 
870 

staff that we have achieved this very high standard. 
 
Linda Wasko-Lacey, director of facilities and emergency 
services, said that receiving this award was like being named a 
five-star hotel. 
 
Midwest Health District was the first district to be established 
in Saskatchewan and its success in Lucky Lake and Rosetown 
demonstrates the achievement of the goals we aimed for in 
launching health care reform in Saskatchewan. What we had 
hoped for and planned for and worked for has now been 
achieved. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Greg Illerbrun Receives Wildlife Conservation Award 
 
Mr. Penner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize an individual from Swift Current who has made a 
significant contribution in the area of wildlife conservation. 
Greg Illerbrun was presented with the Gordon Lund Memorial 
Conservation Award at the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation's 
annual meeting in Regina in February. This award is presented 
to the person who makes the highest contribution to 
conservation in the province. 
 
Mr. Illerbrun, who is president of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, has a list of accomplishments. He established a 
working relationship with the Saskatchewan stock growers, 
enabling the remaining critical Crown lands to be enshrined in 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 
 
The Wawota wildlife group, which nominated Mr. Illerbrun, 
cited his persistence and dedication in handling the difficult 
question of a wildlife diversification unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some things which sometimes are taken 
for granted, but without the efforts of individuals like Mr. 
Illerbrun, those things that we enjoy today may not be there for 
the future. 
 
I want to personally thank Mr. Illerbrun for his dedication and 
the excellent work he has done in the area of wildlife 
conservation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rail Strike 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, it appears that your 
government has out-flip-flopped the Liberal leader, and that's a 
difficult role to follow. Your Minister of Agriculture on March 
13 in questioning about the rail dispute said that it simply 
wasn't appropriate to back to back-to-work legislation; there  

had to be a better way to solve it. 
 
The next day the Minister of Economic Development told this 
Assembly basically the same thing, that he preferred other 
methods of settlement — the same day, Premier, that you were 
at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) saying that back-to-work legislation should be 
brought in sooner than later. Matter of fact, you said, there is no 
use waiting. Well welcome to the real world, Mr. Premier. 
 
I'm wondering if you could repeat your flip-flop for the 
Assembly, just to make sure that you're not doing your usual tap 
dance — you know, one thing for the farm folk and another for 
your union leader friends. Would you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 
for Thunder Creek for that question. The position of the 
provincial government has been clear throughout the piece. We 
obviously favour a negotiated settlement in any industrial 
dispute because that is a settlement which is likely to have the 
longest lasting benefit for the parties, and in this particular case, 
for the country. I might also add that the transportation system 
is under enough stress as it is, given the decision by the Liberals 
to do away with the Crow rate. 
 
But speaking specifically to the issue that the member raises, if 
there is no settlement possible, if the parties have reached an 
impasse — which appears to be the case — then the public 
interest is what is paramount. And the public interest in this 
case means that the grains should move. 
 
It means therefore that the federal government must take its 
responsibility and take the appropriate action in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Premier, I'm not surprised by that 
answer. And after the attack that you and your government have 
brought on rural Saskatchewan, rural families over the last three 
and a half years, when you turn around and attack the federal 
Liberals, it sort of rings hollow, just like those ships waiting at 
the terminal in Vancouver, Mr. Premier. 
 
I mean the feds and the reds have been a real dynamite 
combination for rural Saskatchewan. And I think that's what 
people are telling you all across this province. They certainly 
did at SARM yesterday. 
 
If you truly believe that it's now time to act, will you agree to a 
rule 42 emergency debate in this Legislative Assembly to 
support the passage of Bill C-262, a private member's Bill 
introduced into the House of Commons by Reform MP 
(Member of Parliament), Ray Speaker? 
 
Are you prepared to stand and deliver, Mr. Premier, on behalf 
of rural Saskatchewan for a change? Are you willing to do that, 
sir? 



March 15, 1995 

 
871 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, there is no 
rule 42 motion before us, as the hon. member obviously knows, 
and he's asking me to give an answer on a "what if" situation. If 
this motion is presented, I'll have to make my choice, as all the 
members of the House will make the choice. 
 
But I would say to the hon. member, if he would divorce 
himself from politics for just a moment in this regard, I've given 
an answer which I think is the correct one. I think he would 
support it in substance; at least I get the feeling that this is the 
case. I don't know about the position of the Liberal Party. The 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party seems to be very much singing the 
Hallelujah Chorus of the federal Liberal Party. 
 
I repeat my answer: if a negotiated settlement cannot be arrived 
at, and that certainly seems to be the case  in fact it indicates 
now, according to a Canadian Press bulletin which I have just 
received on my desk, that as of Wednesday, March 15, at 1 p.m. 
I think it is, there is a lock-out conducted by management. 
Obviously there's a very big impasse here  it is incumbent 
upon the federal Liberal government and the Liberals to act in 
the public interest, and that means if necessary to bring back-to-
work legislation in order to solve the dispute. 
 
Bill 42 . . . or rule 42 debate may or may not be desirable; that's 
for the members to state. But as Premier and as the Leader of 
the Government, I've stated our position and I hope that you 
agree with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Premier, it is time to stand. That 
strike grows by the hour. Yesterday the Liberal members of this 
House walked out rather than vote on the very topic that you 
and I are discussing today. So don't you walk out on the people 
in rural Saskatchewan. Have more courage than the Grits 
showed yesterday, Mr. Premier. 
 
If we bring in a Bill . . . or bring in a motion to support a Bill 
before the House of Commons to end this strike, will you 
support it? Will your caucus support it? And we send a message 
down to Ottawa for a change that we stand together, rather than 
this wishy-washy stance of you and your ministers. Will you do 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Thunder Creek can stay in question period for ever and attribute 
whatever descriptions he wants to my answer, but I think the 
answer is very clear. I shall repeat it again. 
 
If there is an impasse, and there appears to be an impasse, it is 
the responsibility of the federal government to act in the public 
interest. No private interest, whether it's the railway’s interest or 
the trade unions’ interests, should supersede the public interest. 
It is in the public interest of Saskatchewan farmers of the  

western Canadian region, in fact I would say of all of Canada, 
for this to be settled as expeditiously as possible, as quickly as 
possible. And if it can't be done by settlement — it seems like it 
can't be — then it should be done by legislation. 
 
Now the hon. member says, will you do it by a resolution in this 
House which would endorse support for a Bill in the House of 
Commons introduced by some Reform Party member? I haven't 
seen that Reform Party member's Bill. I doubt that the member 
from Thunder Creek either has. Maybe he has. I have not. I 
would want to render, at least, my judgement after I've had an 
opportunity to see what's in the form and the nature of the Bill. 
 
But leave the detail of the Bill aside; the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan is the grain must move. It's not 
only grain. It's the other commodities of western Canada must 
move — potash. We're an exporting province. That's the public 
interest. That's the national interest. And it's the job of the 
federal Liberals and the provincial Liberals to get on with 
getting this thing resolved quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporation Construction Agreement 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), and while it is not as 
immediately pressing as the issue of the strike, it is 
nevertheless, Minister, an important one. Mr. Minister, 80 per 
cent of the construction workers in Saskatchewan do not belong 
to a union. Yet you have implemented a policy that 
discriminates against all of those workers. Mr. Minister, if you 
don't have a union card, you are now prohibited from applying 
for three-quarters of the jobs on Crown construction sites. 
That's discrimination, pure and simple. 
 
In some situations, employers may actually have to lay off the 
existing workers in order to fill union quotas. Those quotas are 
quotas that you, in your government, have imposed, Mr. 
Minister. Your union-preference tendering policy will prevent 
non-unionized workers from applying for most Crown 
construction jobs. Why are you discriminating against non-
union workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
knows very well that there's no discrimination here. The policy 
that is in place here is no different than the policy that was in 
place for the Shand project, the policy that was in place for the 
NewGrade upgrader, policy that has been in place in the private 
sector on a Cameco project. And in fact very recently another 
private sector company signed almost exactly the same kind of 
agreement with a Communications, Energy and Paperworkers 
unit, so this is not something that's breaking new ground. 
 
It in fact does, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member opposite,  



March 15, 1995 

 
872 

if he would look at the facts of the way the policy works, 
provides a level playing-field for everybody. It's going to 
provide an opportunity where all of the tenders of the Crown 
corporations above a certain amount — depending on where 
they are — will be now on free and open tendering based on the 
lowest bid and the capability of doing the work. 
 
I see nothing wrong with that, Mr. Speaker. That's for the first 
time where we have a policy that is that clear, where the lowest 
qualified bidder is going to be the person who's going to . . . or 
the construction outfit that's going to do the work, and that is 
eminently fair, Mr. Speaker, and even-handed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, the 
operative word there is “almost the same”. And that's how you 
always sidestep the reality and the truth, by throwing a rider in. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is 
designed to protect Saskatchewan people against discrimination 
in the workplace. In fact your government fought to ensure 
sexual orientation was included so employers could not 
discriminate on that basis, yet now you are implementing a 
policy that not only allows discrimination, it imposes 
discrimination. 
 
Mr. Minister, employers are not allowed to discriminate on the 
basis of race, creed, religion, colour, sex, sexual orientation, 
family status, marital status, disability, age, nationality, 
ancestry, place of origin, or receipt of public assistance. Yet 
discrimination based on union membership is now being 
promoted by your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, aren't you violating the Human Rights Code 
through this discriminatory policy that you've placed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, simply is 
no. There is no discrimination here. In fact it provides more 
fairness than there has ever been in this construction field for 
many, many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will allow all contractors, both union and non-
union, to bid for the contracts, and lowest qualified bidder will 
get the work. It will award contracts on the basis of lowest 
qualified bidder. It will ensure that all workers are treated 
equally and fairly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most important of all, or at least just as 
important, everybody in Saskatchewan will get . . . who is a 
worker in the construction field will get first shot at the work, 
and it will maximize the number of Saskatchewan people who 
are working the projects. And that's also important, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is a good policy. We didn't invent it. It's been existing in 
Saskatchewan in other situations before, including the private  

sector, and across Canada and in other provinces, and is here 
today because it has been proven to be able to work very well. 
And it will prove that it will work well here in Saskatchewan as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, 
obviously you are misleading us again a little bit here because 
you say the lowest bidder, and there can be no such thing in this 
whole process. You've automatically attached 21 cents per hour 
work to every project that there is, and the taxpayers paying 
their utility bills are the ones that are going to have to pay for 
that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the opposition caucus believes that this is a 
discriminatory policy and we're going to see just how effective 
your Human Rights Commission is in protecting workers 
against discrimination. Earlier today I sent a letter to the Human 
Rights Commission. I asked for a ruling on whether this policy 
is discriminatory under section 16(1) of the Human Rights 
Code which prohibits discrimination in the workplace. 
 
Mr. Minister, we're going to see which is stronger, your 
government's commitment to fight discrimination or your 
government's commitment to pay off the unions. I suspect it's 
the latter. Mr. Minister, would you admit that your union-
preference policy clearly violates the spirit of the Human Rights 
Code by discriminating against non-union workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I suppose, Mr. Speaker, one 
could say that since the member has taken it upon himself to 
ask the Human Rights Commission that question that one 
should not comment further on the issue. 
 
But I want to say very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the policy that 
is in place, that was announced some time ago, is a policy that 
will provide equal work for everybody in Saskatchewan; it's 
going to be a policy that is going to award contracts on the basis 
of lowest qualified bidder — nobody can argue about that, Mr. 
Speaker — and is going to be fair to all workers whether they 
are unionized or whether they are not unionized. And that has 
not always been the case under the former administration which 
indeed did show discrimination from their own particular 
philosophical perspective. 
 
That's not the way that this government operates. We make sure 
that everybody is treated equally and this policy helps to assure 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Workers Survey 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, it is hard to understand why 
the government thinks everything is fine in health care. Things 
are not fine, Mr. Speaker. 



March 15, 1995 

 
873 

The CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) series, vital 
signs, is getting to the real story on health care. Last year, the 
Regina District reluctantly commissioned a study of health care 
workers' responses to reforms. I would like to table some of 
those survey results in the House today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over 2,500 health care workers responded and the results show 
that nurses, doctors, and front-line workers were not consulted 
in Regina, and there is similar evidence around the province. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health: will the minister admit 
that this government has failed miserably in consulting with 
health care workers during this period of reform? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the member's 
question and I appreciate her concern for health workers. The 
report that she lays on the Table today, of course, was 
conducted a year ago, and it was commissioned and it's been 
begun by the Regina District Board who are also concerned 
about the morale of health workers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I'm concerned about in this House 
today is the Liberal caucus coming into this House almost on a 
daily basis and misleading the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to illustrate if you'll give me but a moment. 
 
On March 7, Tuesday, March 7, the Leader of the Liberal 
caucus came into this House and said, and I quote from 
Hansard: 
 
 I'd like to table today financial statements for Midwest 

and Living Sky health districts for the last fiscal year. 
They show operating deficits for both boards of over 
$100,000 each. These deficits mean lay-offs, and they 
mean cuts to services. 

 
That's the statement of the Liberal leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of her misinformation in this House and 
across the province of Saskatchewan, compounded by news 
releases to the same, the Midwest Board has had to memo every 
one of their staff members with this memo, and let me quote it, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 
 The district did not have a cash deficit for the year 

ending March 31, 1994. The district in fact had a cash 
surplus of $439,000. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this quote, listen to this quote: 
 
 It is quite evident that those responsible for the release 

of this information were wanting to create a 
smokescreen and did not look at the details of the 
report. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will they stand up and apologize for the leader and 
apologize for their conduct. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, this minister is handling my 
questions in the same way that he has handled the health care 
workers around the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning on CBC AM . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning on 
CBC AM Dr. Suresh Kassett expressed his frustration with this 
widespread lack of consultation. He said: it has been 18 months 
and we have not seen a board member. His district board 
chairman in Rolling Hills explained that, we have been so busy 
with office space, furniture, and employees, we just didn't have 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the survey done last year in Regina pointed to the 
same lack of concern. One employee in the document I tabled 
today called the health district the largest rolling arm of 
government with absolutely no vision. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health: what kind of plan is it 
that has district boards putting decisions about offices and 
furniture ahead of dialogue with doctors and nurses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member quotes radio 
programing this morning. She obviously does not quote other 
doctors who were featured on that radio programing talking 
about the very good working relationship they're having with 
their district board. She doesn't want to quote that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She lays today an important survey that was done of Regina 
district health workers, an effort initiated by the Regina District 
Board because, I believe, we're all concerned about health 
workers across our province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that this member now has to 
stand when the member from Shaunavon and his leader has 
stood consistently in this House over the last few days 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan. The Liberal leader 
comes in here, Leader of the Third Party comes in here and 
attempts to mislead — and if the member would be quiet from 
his seat and listen he might stop this misleading — the Liberal 
leader comes into the House and tries to mislead the public 
about waiting-lists. She was wrong. He comes into the House, 
they make a claim that the Midwest Board is running a huge 
deficit; it's absolutely wrong. 
 
I think that that member from Shaunavon, who shouts from his 
seat continually, should stand up on his feet and apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, health workers are not being 
consulted, and in many cases they are afraid to speak their 
mind. The task force that administered the survey stated today 
that fear of expressing opinions and anxiety over change has  



March 15, 1995 

 
874 

contributed to low morale in the organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister and his predecessor say they value 
and listen to the input of the people who deliver health care 
services. But these employees are afraid to speak up. Why has 
the minister created a system that creates fear and not 
consultation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, and again I would remind 
members that the survey work that the member is referring to 
here today was conducted last year. And I know there have been 
efforts made in the local community to improve those 
relationships. And I know some of them have been significantly 
done. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. If the member from Shaunavon 
has a question, I would wish that he'd ask his caucus to permit 
him to ask his question. The Minister of Health is on his feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member from Shaunavon doesn't 
want to stand in this House today. The member from 
Shaunavon doesn't want to stand in this House because the last 
time he stood in this House he misled the people of our 
province. And I fear that every time he does stand he misleads 
the people, as does his leader. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Regina who raises the 
serious questions today about health care workers, this has been 
a traumatic period for health care workers, for people involved 
in health care. We've gone through a significant restructuring. 
Mr. Speaker, in this process we have worked with health care 
unions and with health care workers at every level. I submit that 
I have spoken to literally hundreds if not thousands of health 
care workers, both individually and in large groups. It has not 
been easy, Mr. Speaker, but they have been part of the process 
and a great help in the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Correctional Centres Work Programs 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I direct my question to the new Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you explain your government's policy 
regarding the type of work done by inmates at provincial 
correctional centres? Do you believe, for example, that 
correctional centres should compete, should compete for work 
that would normally be done by private sector businesses and 
private sector workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is not a new 
issue nor is it a new program. Virtually since the time prisons 
have been established by society some centuries ago, prison 
officials have sought to find work for prison inmates which will 
assist in rehabilitating them. Society has an interest in 
rehabilitating prisoners and work which they do is a part of that  

rehabilitation. If what they do is useful and can be sold, it (a) 
gives the prisoners a sense of self-worth and gives them a small 
amount of money with which to re-establish themselves — and 
I repeat, a small amount of money. 
 
Every effort is made by prison officials to avoid entering into 
unfair competition with private businesses. Every effort is 
made, and these policies haven't changed from the times when 
your government was in office. Every effort is made to avoid 
competition which is unfair. But society does have an interest in 
seeing these people rehabilitated and useful work is a part of 
that rehabilitation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, we do not have any objection to 
getting these people to do some constructive work. But at the 
same time it is paramount that it be not intrusive in business. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I'm going to give you an example of what 
happens when that policy is not followed. For many years the 
Warman Home Centre has built grain bin floors for a company 
called Flaman Sales, which all members in rural Saskatchewan 
are familiar with. This year, the Warman Home Centre lost that 
contract, Mr. Minister. Flaman purchased their entire stock of 
floors from the Saskatoon Correctional Centre who are using 
inmate labour. 
 
Mr. Minister, the manager of Warman Home Centre says: it's 
hard enough to compete in today's market with the economy the 
way it is without competing with the government charging 
nothing for labour and picking up the tab for everything else. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are correctional centres taking jobs away 
from small businesses like the Warman Home Centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to tell the member opposite that the policy hasn't changed 
nor has the practice changed from a few short years ago when 
you were minister of Social Services. The same officials, the 
same policy, and the same practice. 
 
Every effort is made, and I believe they're successful, in not 
undercutting, in not price cutting. They attempt to have their 
prices as competitive but society has an interest in seeing these 
people do useful work, and this policy hasn't changed from the 
time when you administered it. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — But, Mr. Minister, the impact has changed. 
That's what I'm concerned about today. The impact has 
changed. We did the same thing with SARCAN but we chose 
an area that was not intrusive in the market-place, Mr. Minister. 
The way your government operates, the next thing you know 
you'll be unionizing those inmates and guaranteeing them 75 
per cent of the jobs on Crown construction. That's what I'm 
afraid of. Mr. Minister. We agree that inmates must do useful 
work. However, you should not be using this captive labour 
pool that you have by taking away jobs from Saskatchewan 
workers. 



March 15, 1995 

 
875 

The manager of the Warman Home Centre says: it's no small 
wonder that this province has trouble attracting businesses. Not 
only do they charge us taxes but they find a way to take 
business away from us unfairly. Only a government would get 
away with that. Or should I say, only our government. Unquote. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you prepared to do to rectify this 
situation? Will you ensure that correctional centres are not 
taking on contracts that directly compete with the private 
business community? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker. hon. members opposite 
do really see bogymen under every bed when they believe we're 
going to unionize the inmates in the prison. I want to say to the 
member opposite that it's true it's a captive audience, and also 
seems to me it's a captured audience. At least it has been when 
this government was in office. I remember when members 
opposite were in office, they had a bit of problem with people 
walking out uninvited, walking out of the jails. At least now, 
they're there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Why is the 
member from Moosomin on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity of 
introducing to you and through you, a gentleman who's joined 
us this afternoon, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Dale Johanson. 
He's a dairy farmer from the Kipling area, a very active 
producer in the area. 
 
And I think the members would like to join me in welcoming 
Dale to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — With leave, for the introduction of guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my honour 
today to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly, two distinguished guests in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Phillip Baynes, president and CEO of the 
Nuclear Energy Institute of Washington, D.C. (District of 
Columbia); and Mr. Walter Keys, chairman of the Canadian 
Nuclear Society. 

Mr. Baynes is visiting Saskatchewan as a guest of the Canadian 
Nuclear Society and he is speaking to groups throughout 
Saskatchewan. I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, along with 
other members, to attend a luncheon today where Mr. Baynes 
spoke most convincingly for the need for world energy policies 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member knows full 
well that he can't go into detailed debate. He introduces his 
guest to the members and welcomes them here. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I then would 
like to say that because the United States is Saskatchewan's 
largest uranium customer, I would then ask that all members 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
join with the member from Shaunavon in welcoming our guests 
to the legislature. I was unavailable to attend the meeting today. 
Two of my staff members attended to the meeting. 
 
And I want to say to the gentlemen, welcome them to the 
legislature on behalf of all government members. They certainly 
are an important part of our industry, and we welcome them 
here today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 
 

Grain Handlers’ Strike 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day, with leave of the Assembly, I would like to ask permission 
to engage in a debate under rule 42, Mr. Speaker, regarding the 
grain handlers' strike and the lockout of Canadian National 
Railways and Canadian Pacific Railways, and how this situation 
will affect Saskatchewan producers and our province's 
agriculture industry and the economy as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion reads as follows, with your permission: 
 
 That this Assembly join together in urging the federal 

government to expediently pass private members' Bill 
C-262, which has been introduced into the House of 
Commons, which will protect the viability of 
Saskatchewan's agriculture and potash industry, as well 
as the provincial economy as a whole, as well as 
providing fair and equitable solutions for all parties 
involved; and further, that the verbatims of this debate  



March 15, 1995 

 
876 

be forwarded to the Prime Minister and the federal Labour 
minister, Lucienne Robillard, for immediate attention 
and consideration. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Does the member have leave? 
 
An Hon. Member: — On a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that 
this is a very serious issue, and also in light of the fact that the 
motion being put forward here relates to a private members' Bill 
in the House of Commons as opposed to a government Bill  
it's not that we're opposed to debating the issue in the House  
and therefore I don't want to refuse leave, but what I would ask 
is that we take a five-minute recess to negotiate the wording of 
a motion between the opposition parties as well as the 
government, that would strengthen the wording of the motion to 
make sure that we are relating it to the House here as opposed 
to a private members' Bill in Ottawa, which would actually 
strengthen the purpose and intent. And then after the debate, 
forward it on to the House of Commons. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, if I could respond to the House 
Leader's point of order. The intention of the opposition is to 
bring forward to the people of this province and to the federal 
government a very, very serious issue that is descending upon 
the people of Saskatchewan in whole and the farmers in 
particular. 
 
So if the only way, as I interpret it, that the opposition will be 
allowed to have the freedom to debate this issue is by 
compromising on the words, Mr. Speaker, I am quite willing to 
take a five-minute recess and pursue the matter further. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think, by leave of the 
Assembly, if leave is granted to do this, to take a five-minute 
recess — is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — We'll take a five-minute recess. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the members come to order. This House 
will reconvene. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 
Assembly, I would ask permission to engage in a debate under 
rule 42, Mr. Speaker, regarding the grain handlers' strike and 
lockout of the Canadian National Railways and the Canadian 
Pacific Railways, and how this situation will affect 
Saskatchewan producers and our province's agricultural 
industry and economy as a whole. And the motion reads, Mr. 
Speaker, moved by myself and seconded by the member for  

Humboldt: 
 
 That this Assembly urge the federal government to 

demonstrate national leadership in an effort to facilitate 
a negotiated settlement between employees and 
employers involved in the transportation industry; where 
the public interest is threatened, the federal government 
move to end this dispute by legislating a process which 
will result in a fair and equitable solution for both 
employers and employees and which will protect the 
viability of Saskatchewan's agriculture industry, potash 
industry and the Canadian transportation system. 

 
So move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I have to assume that the member . . . 
that this motion takes the place of the one you previously asked 
permission by leave. Does the member have leave? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan producers have paid a dear price over the years 
for disruptions in the movement of grain caused by work 
stoppage; in fact 14 times these work stoppages have happened 
in the last 29 years. 
 
This morning grain and potash movement out at the west coast 
abruptly stopped when a lockout strike of longshoremen 
foremen closed terminals in Vancouver and Prince Rupert. 
Already agricultural groups, producers, and elevator companies 
are frustrated by the grain shipment delays caused by the 
railway strike. 
 
But the situation in Vancouver and Prince Rupert adds greatly 
to their concerns. Mr. Speaker, our grain handling and 
transportation systems are already straining to meet strong 
export sales commitments. This disruption will result in lost 
sales and increased demurrage bills for farmers. And we all 
know farmers cannot afford to take any more blows from their 
industry, Mr. Speaker, and neither can the provincial economy. 
 
The federal government must act and must act now to deal with 
this situation. A private members' Bill has been introduced into 
the House of Commons, Bill C-262, Mr. Speaker, which would 
deal fairly with all parties, and we are supportive of that piece 
of legislation brought in by a Reform MP from Alberta, Mr. 
Ray Speaker. We are very supportive of that piece of 
legislation. 
 
The Bill, in those cases where in negotiated settlement could 
not be reached, would institute a binding arbitration process 
including final offer selection. This addition would mean that a 
strike could be averted, and the parties could continue to pursue 
collective bargaining without crippling the grains industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely important piece of legislation 
that is needed immediately to promote the industry, the  



March 15, 1995 

 
877 

agricultural industry, and the transportation system across this 
country. 
 
If the parties can't . . . there's no time to waste on this either, Mr. 
Speaker. It's costing literally millions of dollars. I heard on 
Canada AM this morning, Mr. Speaker, it's costing the Port of 
Vancouver something in the magnitude of a million dollars a 
year, and that is just the Port of Vancouver. It has nothing to do 
with the grain industry across this country. The amount of costs 
to the agricultural producers probably is in the tens of millions 
of dollars on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. And it's mounting up 
quickly. 
 
If the parties can't settle this dispute within days, the economic 
impact to our province will be devastating. Saskatchewan 
producers have paid millions and millions of dollars over the 
years as a result of being held hostage. At this time, we believe 
stopping this will . . . Saskatchewan will bear the brunt of this 
labour disruption, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The agriculture sector isn't the only industry in our province to 
suffer as a result of such labour disputes. In the case of the 
potash industry, most of our province's potash head offices are 
in Saskatchewan; offshore throughout the Neptune Bulk 
Terminals in Vancouver, and those shipments are currently 
being tied up as well. 
 
Of grave concern is the delivery of about 500,000 tonnes of 
potash destined for China, about half of which is already loaded 
but not shipped. Depending on how long the labour dispute ties 
up the port, we could be bearing much higher costs and lost 
sales which again will result in a severe impact on the economy 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
After all, Mr. Speaker, when countries sign agreements to buy 
commodities such as potash, they examine everything, from the 
quality of the goods to the disruptions in delivery. And there are 
window clauses within these contracts that will allow countries 
to break the agreement if need be, Mr. Speaker. And that's an 
important thing to keep in mind — that the contracts that the 
Canadian Wheat Board is making with other jurisdictions, other 
countries, as well as the potash industry, generally speaking 
have those kinds of agreements within them. If you can't supply 
over a certain period of time, the country is let out of that 
agreement. We simply can't afford that. We're in a very, very 
competitive industry in agriculture and the potash industries 
with other producers around the world. We can't afford to let 
sales go uncommitted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And don't think that China and other countries won't exercise 
their right to use the window clauses, because they need the 
potash. They need the potash for their farmers in China just as 
much as we need the sales for our potash producers in 
Saskatchewan. We cannot afford to let this happen. 
 
Bud Knudtson of the Saskatchewan Potash Producers 
Association Inc. says . . . stated in today's Leader-Post, and I 
quote: 
 

 . . . a plan to build a $40-million US export terminal in 
Portland, Ore. for handling Saskatchewan potash "is 
really the result of . . . (situations like this labour 
dispute)". 

 
And I think that pretty much tells all, that our transportation 
system is in some degree of chaos at the moment as a result of 
these strikes, Mr. Speaker. There needs to be a legislated 
solution to this, and the sooner the better, Mr. Speaker. We 
cannot afford as a country, and particularly as a province, to let 
this thing go on at all. 
 
The Minister of Labour the other day, I understand in the 
legislature here, commented that not one dime of impact should 
happen to the Saskatchewan farmers or the Saskatchewan 
potash producers of Saskatchewan as a whole. And he is right 
in that regard — he is right in that regard. And we are 
concerned when the Minister of Agriculture says that in this 
province that he's not in favour of legislating them back to 
work, only as a last resort. 
 
Well we do not support that, Mr. Speaker. We believe that the 
potash producers and the farmers of this province need a 
legislated solution to this, and right now they need that solution, 
Mr. Speaker. We're in a period in the year when grain 
transportation forms a critical part of the farmers' planning for 
their upcoming crop prospects, Mr. Speaker. They are looking 
at all avenues right now. All of the things relative to 
transportation — delivery, prices, all of those kinds of things  
are on the minds of agriculture producers across this province. 
 
Last evening I was in Melville and had the occasion, Mr. 
Speaker, to talk to a number of farmers. And they were 
extremely concerned about this labour disruption, this labour 
problem right now — very, very concerned — because they 
recognize immediately the impact, where grain cars are sitting 
on the sidings across this province, waiting to be loaded, but 
they can't be loaded because the grain isn't going to be moving 
on the rail lines. And we again, Mr. Speaker, simply can't allow 
this to happen. 
 
Canadian Wheat Board spokesman Bob Roehle, I think it is, 
said mounting labour problems damage Canada's reputation, 
Mr. Speaker, and we can't afford to lose any buyers in such a 
competitive trading world. And that's the reality. 
 
As you all know, in agriculture what happens is you make 
commitments to people to sell them grain at a certain price plus 
the delivery of that product, Mr. Speaker. And you can't sit back 
and wait for these kinds of things to play out on their own. You 
have to have a reliable transportation system. 
 
And there will be increasing pressure on our transportation 
system now, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the Crow changes to 
western grain transportation. There will be considerable 
pressure for movement to the lowest cost shipping alternative. 
 
And if that means the United States of America is one of those 
alternatives, the Mississippi system or other systems, rail lines  



March 15, 1995 

 
878 

leading out to Portland and other ports in the United States, that 
will be the kind of pressure. If you're going to change the Crow 
benefit, Mr. Speaker, you're also going to put pressure on the 
Canadian system to be competitive against the American 
system, because all farmers and all commodity groups are going 
to be looking for the lowest cost alternative when it comes to 
shipping their product in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, I think the piece of 
legislation that was introduced in the House of Commons the 
other day by Mr. Ray Speaker, a Reform MP from Lethbridge 
Alberta . . . he introduced the Bill C-262 into the House of 
Commons and we are supportive of that because of the impact 
of it. 
 
This Bill would stop Saskatchewan producers from being the 
can that is kicked about between opposing sides of labour 
disputes. Bill C-262 is fair to everyone. It will provide for a 
formalized and permanent method of dealing with the all-but-
too-frequent labour disputes which cripple the grains industry. 
 
In light of the seriousness of this situation, the potentially 
devastating effect of this labour dispute, I believe all members 
in this Assembly should support urging the federal government 
to take immediate steps to support Bill C-262. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is of such critical importance to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, all commodity groups that ship product out of 
this province, that I would urge all members to support our 
motion this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and I will move the motion 
at this time. 
 
The motion is moved by myself, the member from Kindersley, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 
 That this Assembly urge the federal government to 

demonstrate national leadership in an effort to facilitate 
a negotiated settlement between employees and 
employers involved in the transportation industry; where 
the public interest is threatened, the federal government 
move to end the dispute by legislating a process which 
will result in a fair and equitable solution for both 
employers and employees and which will protect the 
viability of Saskatchewan's agriculture industry, the 
potash industry, and the Canadian transportation system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so moved. 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to be 
able to join in this debate today, Mr. Speaker, on this very, very 
important issue. We have a problem, and that problem is that 
the port authority has chosen to lock out the workers on the 
west coast which in turn will affect the shipments of grain and 
potash in particular out of that port. 

And we all understand the processes which the unions and 
management go through to try to come to a negotiated 
settlement and that type of process is preferred I think, by most 
people. Negotiated settlements are, for the most part, the norm. 
We hear through the media and through other sources all the 
settlements that aren't negotiated because those are the ones that 
we seem to be interested in although the proportion are very 
low. Most of the contracts go by signed, negotiated, and signed, 
and nobody really knows anything about it. 
 
In this particular case it's different. We know about it because 
it's directly affecting our lives, directly affecting the economic 
framework in which we in Saskatchewan work within. And 
when things like that happen, Mr. Speaker, and you can see 
where there apparently is no hope now — although we don't 
like giving up hope, there appears to be little hope, I should say, 
of a negotiated settlement — then something has to be done. 
Something has to be done to ensure that livelihoods of men and 
women on the Prairies who work in the potash and grain 
industries are maintained. 
 
Now I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, I don't want to forget 
about the lives and earning power and stability of those people 
who were working at the west coast because that's important as 
well. I don't want to diminish that because they have to raise 
their families and put food on the table and pay their mortgages 
just like the rest of us do. And I don't want it to get into a we or 
they issue. 
 
However at this point in time, if there appears to be no hope of 
a settlement and that will result in the tremendous economic 
pressure on the Saskatchewan economy and all its people, then 
we have to take more drastic moves. And this is nothing new. I 
mean we've had other strike/lockout situations in the province, 
in the country. And at some point in time, if nothing moves, the 
government then has to take the opportunity, through their 
power, to possibly legislate the continuance of the workforce. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is not an easy situation. I don't take it 
lightly, standing up in the House and asking to force anyone to 
be put in a position where they can't negotiate a contract in the 
normal process. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have a billion dollar industry between 
grain and potash — billions of dollars. In my area I think I have 
four or five potash mines in my constituency. And I understand 
— I understand — what it does for those areas. I also 
understand the industry who has come through a bit of a 
parallel with the grain industry. Come through tough, tough 
times, Mr. Speaker, where they had to have lay-offs, some 
lengthy lay-offs in the industry. Prices were low. 
 
But now things are starting to turn around a bit. They're starting 
to turn around. There's optimism in the industry. In fact one of 
the mines that I live by probably won't have a shut-down this 
year except for a scheduled maintenance shut-down, which is 
the first time in many, many years that that's happened. 
 
And some of the other mines are reducing their shut-downs  



March 15, 1995 

 
879 

depending on what sales position they're in. But the industry's 
on the move. We can't allow something that may be dragged out 
a long time to affect this industry that's just getting back on its 
feet. 
 
The same thing with agriculture. When we've come through 
many, many years of long, low prices, disasters, insects, 
droughts, now we see the firming up of the industry or the 
prices. We're seeing the sales move in . . . move up slightly. We 
see the net return to farmers increasing. We can't allow a 
prolonged lockout or strike to end or to put the brakes on this 
recovery that we're experiencing. 
 
And I want to just expand a little bit again today, Mr. Speaker, 
what I talked about yesterday. In the position that we're in as 
farmers — I'll set potash aside for a bit — the farm community 
out there has been told by the federal Liberal government that 
there will no longer, after the end of this crop year, be a subsidy 
known as the Crow benefit. That'll be gone. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale, was unable . . . and I 
hope was unable, only unable and not unwilling. Although if I 
wanted to get a little grouchy, I would say possibly unwilling, 
but I couldn't conjure up the reason why he'd be unwilling to 
fight for more return to the farm economy. 
 
Anyway, the Minister of Agriculture was not able to get proper 
compensation. Now I know as government we've had to do 
many cut-backs and so has the federal government. But proper 
compensation in terms of the value of the product, in terms of 
what the value of that product does for Canada — not just 
Saskatchewan — the value of the grain industry in 
Saskatchewan benefits every person in Canada because it's a 
product that we export out. Every dollar that we get . . . not 
every dollar, the large majority of dollars that come from the 
grain industry are all new dollars. They're coming in from other 
countries, and there's a tremendous value to that. 
 
Unfortunately the federal minister, Mr. Goodale, was not able 
to provide the province of Saskatchewan and western Canada 
with proper compensation. If they wanted to change the rate, 
they can do that — they're a majority government in Ottawa, if 
they want to change the Crow benefit and wipe it out. And 
they've done that. 
 
But for heaven's sakes, why wouldn't they do it fairly and think 
about the compensation factor in terms of what that industry 
does for the country? And when I look at the comparisons . . . 
and unfortunately what happens, Mr. Speaker, is you get into 
the debate about, well, you got less than somebody else got. But 
when something's unfair you have to get into that debate. And 
since 1991-92 to 1993-94 . . . or '94-95, federal cuts to 
agriculture in Quebec have been approximately 22 per cent; in 
Ontario about 30 per cent; and in Saskatchewan about 60 per 
cent. 
 
And you tell me, Mr. Speaker, the value of the products, the 
value of the products in those other regions that come into this 
country — the disproportionate return. As I said, our grain is all  

new dollars coming in. And I know Ontario and Quebec have 
some agricultural exports to the U.S. (United States), but 
relatively low; it's relatively small compared to our industry out 
here. 
 
So we have the federal minister unable to secure our share, our 
equal share of the return after they did away with the Crow 
benefit. And so then we have a scenario that goes like this. The 
benefit's going to end at the end of this crop year. I, as a farmer, 
I think well I'd better try . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think I'm going to have remind the 
member that we are on a different motion today. And I see 
nothing here that relates to the ending of the Crow rate. The gist 
of the debate is to end the strike or the lockout that is before us. 
And I think the member has to get back to the topic that is 
before us. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I should have told you 
where I was going, because I am coming to the point exactly of 
this lockout, and the process that we're going through. So if 
you'd please indulge with me . . . Okay, I'll briefly explain to 
you until you're comfortable with it. 
 
The farmers want to ship their grain now, because the federal 
Liberal government took the Crow rate away. And now there's a 
lockout/strike position on the west coast that the minister again 
is not going to do anything about, or appears not going to do 
anything about. Therefore we have the motion. We're 
encouraging him to do that. And I'm just trying to give the 
results of if he doesn't . . . if something isn't done, what 
happens? I mean I hope that satisfies you. 
 
The Speaker: — I want to remind the member that there is 
nothing in the rules that says that he can't relate to other factors, 
but he can't go on in detail on other, unrelated factors. He must 
get back to the gist of the debate or the motion that's before us. 
And relating to other factors and bringing it in to the motion 
that's before us, there's nothing wrong with that. But you can't 
go on in detail on another matter that is peripherally related to 
this. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Anyway, Mr. 
Speaker, the importance of keeping the grain moving is 
obvious, because this Assembly has agreed to a motion that we 
can debate to send down to the federal House. 
 
And I don't want to do anything that would maybe undermine 
the importance of the debate. I'm getting my words on the 
record because I think it's very important. 
 
The reason we're here today is the inability of the federal 
Liberal Agriculture minister to handle his portfolio on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. Because he obviously needs some 
encouragement — and I don't know what he's scared of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A reminder. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Maybe my colleague is right, that's the word  



March 15, 1995 

 
880 

— a reminder of what his job is. His job as federal Agriculture 
minister is to represent the needs of all agriculture producers in 
Canada. 
 
I think we should remind Mr. Goodale of where he comes from; 
and he comes from Saskatchewan. On two occasions now — 
this is the second occasion in a short time — he is dealing a 
blow to the farmers of Saskatchewan. Farmers want to move 
their grain because he took away the Crow benefit, wiped it out. 
They want to get it in before the end of the crop year because 
they'll receive that benefit up until the end of the crop year, July 
31. 
 
Now he's letting the lockout continue at a time when it looks 
like there can't be a negotiated settlement. Not responding again 
to the needs of Saskatchewan farmers who have to move that 
grain because he's put them in the position of having to move it 
because he's ending the Crow benefit. This minister, Mr. 
Speaker, must be reminded of his roots. And I would ask that 
the Liberal caucus in this province . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Be part of the solution. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Be part of the solution. Exactly. 
 
We'll see, Mr. Speaker, what side of this little fence they may 
come upon. They have an opportunity here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our side of the House has tried to do a number of 
things to prevent this in the past, starting a number of weeks 
ago. Writing letters not just to the port strike or lockout but to 
the potential work stoppage to the railroads. 
 
We've written the CN (Canadian National), the CP (Canadian 
Pacific). We've written the unions; we've written the port 
authority. And this has been going on for a number of weeks 
now to encourage them. 
 
In fact, I believe Minister Goodale had a letter written, sent to 
him, encouraging all these people — reminding them, I guess, 
first, of the importance of this industry, the importance of this 
to our grain industry, and encouraging them to settle as quickly 
as possible. 
 
Obviously, some things don't work in the way you want it. And 
here we are today. 
 
But we have consulted. I heard the member from Morse 
yesterday say that they had consulted. And I would encourage 
the Liberal members here today to — as we did yesterday — 
agree to table our consultations to show . . . (inaudible) . . . And 
if you had any consultations on paper, we'd sure be encouraged 
if you would table them for us today or tomorrow to show that 
you are actually onside with the farmers and the rural people of 
Saskatchewan and the potash industry. But I leave that up to 
you. And if you're on your feet during this debate, I would ask 
maybe that you respond to that offer. 
 
(1500) 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of factors that come into 
this. But I want to end by saying this. Saskatchewan has come 
through many, many years . . . a number of years of turbulent 
times. We are now on the verge of going up dramatically as far 
as economic development. We've had a number of 
announcements. We cannot allow anything to be stopped 
because of decisions by some people to not negotiate, decisions 
by some people to play their political games or whatever. 
 
We have to ensure the movement of our grain and of our 
potash. These two industries are very, very important to this 
province. 
 
I would simply ask the Prime Minister and the Minister of 
Agriculture, think about what you're doing. Think about the 
effect that this will have if it's a prolonged strike or lockout 
situation. Think of the effect, as I said, of the value of the 
products that come out of Saskatchewan that go overseas and 
bring new dollars in here. Give some consideration to that. 
Revisit your position on the unfairness of the cuts across 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage the Prime Minister and the Minister of 
Agriculture to do their duty. Mr. Goodale has a duty and a 
responsibility to this province. Keep our grain and potash 
moving. Encourage all those involved to get back to the table. 
Do whatever they have to do to end this. It's not a nice situation. 
It's not an easy situation, but when it comes to this point where 
we have today, we have to take fairly dramatic action. Mr. 
Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm proud to 
enter this debate today. And when I listened to the remarks 
from the member of Humboldt, I think if you were to strip away 
all the rhetoric that he had and get right to the nub of the issue, I 
think I would have to say I agree with some of the stuff he's 
saying. And in fact the motion itself, I would have to say I'm 
proud today to stand in this House, proud today to stand here on 
behalf of the Liberal Party and say that for once it shows how a 
united front can work well, how we can set politics aside. And 
for who? For the farmers and for the agriculture industry in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I just want to make it very clear that we stand in support of 
the motion as it is, or in fact any amendments that stay within 
the framework of the motion itself, or stay in the spirit of the 
motion. 
 
And I think with this united front, Mr. Speaker . . . well it 
shows not only the federal government but in fact it shows the 
people of Saskatchewan, the people of Canada in fact, how 
when we set politics aside and work for the betterment of the 
people of our province and Canada as a whole; it shows this is 
really where the minds of the people are at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the kind of responsible work that they want the 
legislators to do for them. And I won't get into too much of the  



March 15, 1995 

 
881 

debate on the issues because I'm sure it will be brought up 
several times yet today, but that's not to say we don't agree. 
 
There is no room at this present time in Saskatchewan, given 
the fact that farmers are going through a great deal of change 
. . . And don't be confused of what's happening here. It's not that 
they're opposed to change. In fact farmers, by and large, are 
leading most of the changes happening in this province. 
 
And I know the members opposite will likely get into some of 
the transportation subsidy talk here today, but in fact their own 
polls are showing that they themselves are lagging in where the 
farmers are going and they want to be very careful, I think, they 
want to be very careful on some of the positions they take. 
 
But in speaking to the motion itself, it's very clear — it gets 
right to the point — that in fact there is no room for any strikes, 
there is no room for anyone to hold up the grain industry of this 
province, and we agree entirely with that. 
 
This is probably a time in this province when we can't afford to 
have our farmers handcuffed with others' problems. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the Liberal opposition 
unequivocally supports this united stand and we support the 
motion, and amendments, Mr. Speaker, that stay in the spirit of 
the motion. 
 
We have other commitments yet today, Mr. Speaker, and of 
course can't be here later in the House when this vote will be 
taken, but rest assured we support it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
support this motion. I will be moving a minor amendment at the 
end of my speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rail strikes and port strikes affect all of 
Saskatchewan. We are, as many have pointed out, a land-locked 
province thousands of miles from the ocean. We export 
something like 80 per cent of what we produce in this province. 
 
We depend on a reliable national transportation system. And 
when that comes to a halt, it hurts all of the industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I will concentrate my remarks on the 
area of agriculture, which of course is probably the most 
affected by it. 
 
I think this is a very serious issue. It's very nice to see the House 
all setting aside politics. One wonders at the sincerity of the 
member from Shaunavon when he sets aside politics. 
 
We saw on the Crow issue where on budget night the Liberal 
Party was in favour of the budget and said it was fair; the next 
day they voted in favour of a motion condemning the federal 
government. This morning the member from Shaunavon in a 
scrum is saying, well we're not sure whether we're going to 
lobby the federal government; we want to see where the cards 
fall. 
 
So possibly we'll see that flip-flop happening again on this  

issue. It wouldn't surprise me at all. But at least for the time 
being we have all the members of the House on sides for this 
and I think that should send a strong message. 
 
This is very devastating to Saskatchewan farmers if it carries on 
to any length of time. No stoppage in grain flow is acceptable. 
It's going to begin to hurt immediately. It comes on the heels of 
the federal budget which eliminates the Crow benefit, has 
thrown Saskatchewan agriculture for a real loop. 
 
Farmers don't know whether they're getting any of the 1.6 
billion or who's getting it. They're not sure of what kind of a 
railroad structure will be here in a very short period of time. 
They're anticipating abandonment of rail lines. They're trying to 
make decisions as to what to seed. With the transportation 
strike tying up valuable time and money for producers, this will 
be very unacceptable; it is unacceptable to our producers. 
 
With the change of the Crow benefit, if grain is not being able 
to be delivered now, we're soon into the season where there's a 
ban on roads. If they don't get the grain delivered by July 31, 
they pay a much higher freight rate, so that makes it even more 
important to get the grain flowing and to keep it moving. 
 
Certainly there's an immediate need. We have said in the House 
and we continue to say that back-to-work legislation is not the 
preferred alternative to settle a dispute, but if there is no other 
alternative then certainly for something as important as national 
transportation and the public interest we will have . . . we would 
have no choice but to support it, if indeed there is no other more 
reasonable solution. 
 
I think what we're seeing is more of the Liberal government's 
inability to deal with problems, to procrastinate, not to have a 
plan. We're seeing hacking and slashing in the budget without a 
plan. We see at the end . . . no balanced budget at the end of it. 
We see cuts to the Crow rate — not cuts, elimination of the 
Crown benefit — changes to the transportation system without 
any real plan in place as to what is going to replace it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's very critical not only that we have grain 
moving again in the short term, but that we have a national 
transportation policy that works for Saskatchewan, and that 
policy includes labour relations, some kind of contracts that 
ensure that there's some continuity of grain flowing. 
 
To have back-to-work legislation will certainly solve the short-
term problem. But if the federal Liberal government doesn't 
deal with the long-run issues of how to get contracts that work, 
to get peace in the system, to get turnaround times and 
efficiencies and so on built into the system, then it will be a 
short-term solution. And, Mr. Speaker, no country — as we've 
said before and we said in the Crow debate — no country 
should be without a national transportation policy. 
 
I don't believe that you can treat the rail system in this country 
as just another industry that can go off and settle things by 
itself. It is very much part of the Canadian fabric. It's very much 
part of our economic well-being in this country. And certainly  



March 15, 1995 

 
882 

for provinces like Saskatchewan, a national rail system that runs 
well and runs efficiently and is not interrupted by labour 
disputes that ruin our reputation in international markets and 
create cash-flow problems for farmers, is not acceptable that we 
do not have that sort of system in place. 
 
We urge the Liberal government not only to get the grain 
flowing in the short term, but to come up with a plan for a 
national transportation policy that works for Saskatchewan. 
That, I think, is very crucial to the well-being of the farmers, 
and our farmers are not going to rest comfortably until they see 
a plan. 
 
Our farmers have always been innovative. We have, in 
Saskatchewan, been leading the charge in diversification and 
value added. We're prepared to change but we need to see a 
plan. We need to have a federal government that's at the 
controls, that understands western agriculture and understands 
that we need a national transportation policy, and that's 
prepared to work with us to create a plan that sees grain flowing 
smoothly in the future and flowing profitably from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. I would like to 
move an amendment, seconded by the member from Pelly: 
 
 That the words "and as a last resort" be added 

immediately after the words "the transportation 
industry" as it appears in line 3 of the motion. 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to enter into this debate. I'm just a little saddened that 
we have to have this debate. Without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, that 
the lack of substantial leadership from the federal Liberal 
government in regards to the movement of grain from the 
Prairies here in regards to the labour disputes within the rail 
system and particularly at the Port of Vancouver certainly 
continues to contribute to what I think many people in Canada 
and particularly farmers in Saskatchewan are knowing  that 
the Liberal government is once again using the prairie provinces 
as a whipping-boy in their lack of concern for the financial 
abilities of Saskatchewan farmers to maintain their operations. 
 
It goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, that the rail system is a 
very vital system to the prairie economy, particularly in 
agriculture, because I think it goes without saying that the 
prairie producers that produce the grain products here in 
Saskatchewan that are shipped both east and west through our 
major outlets to the salt water transportation system of our 
oceans . . . the bulk of that transportation and the products 
carried by our rail system is prairie grain. That grain destined 
for export throughout the world. 
 
And in light of recent changes to the Crow benefit as brought 
down in the federal budget recently, there is certainly going to 
be greater pressures by farmers to deliver their grain within this 
crop year so that the farmers can take advantage of the present 
subsidized freight rates as the Crow benefit exists in this crop  

year. And I think, Mr. Speaker, in regards to this, is absolutely 
essential that there be as little or no slow-down in the 
movement of our grain from the Prairies through our export 
system. 
 
(1515) 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I think the pressure and 
responsibility definitely is on the federal government to ensure 
that there is a steady and a systematically handled grain system 
here in Canada and that there is no slow-down in the process of 
moving our grain from the Prairies to export position. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I think the onus is certainly on the 
federal government, particularly the federal Agriculture minister 
and the federal transportation minister, to ensure that everything 
is done to arrive at a negotiated settlement of the labour 
disputes that are affecting the rail system and the port systems. 
 
And I would like to see, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 
government live up to their responsibility and not just pay lip-
service to this thing, but really get involved and ensure that the 
parties involved sit down to the negotiating table and burn the 
midnight oil and arrive at a negotiated settlement as soon as 
possible. 
 
The impact of not having this settlement would be simply 
tremendous on the entire Canadian economy, but in particular 
on the economies of the prairie provinces. And we cannot, we 
cannot allow this to happen, particularly since farmers are really 
in a squeeze here now in more ways than one, Mr. Speaker, as 
we know that we are entering into our spring season, and the 
final delivery date for grain in this crop year is July 31. 
 
But it's not quite that wide open, Mr. Speaker. As a result of the 
spring season, road bans, both on the municipal roads and on 
our highway systems, will come into effect as the spring thaw 
takes a bit of hold of our province. And when that happens, 
those road bans then restrict the farmers' ability to deliver grain 
to the elevator system. That then in turn, Mr. Speaker, tightens 
up the time frame in which the farmers have to deliver their 
product to the elevators and within the grain system. 
 
And in light of that, Mr. Speaker, what we do not need at this 
time is some bottleneck in the system that will infringe upon the 
farmers' ability to move their product, the product they 
produced last year in last year's crop season — move that 
product to market. 
 
As many of us who are farmers are aware that a lot of the rural 
elevator systems have been, throughout the winter, congested 
with grain for a various number of reasons, but in particular a 
shortage of cars and a shortage of rolling stock to move the 
grain out. But as that unfolds and starts to open up now in the 
spring season and some elevator space is starting to become 
available within the system, we certainly do not need a dispute, 
a labour dispute, that will slow down the movement of grain at 
the ports, through our ports. 



March 15, 1995 

 
883 

And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we must realize that if 
there is a slow-down of movement of grain because of labour 
disputes and couple that with a road ban going on our grid road 
systems and our highway systems, not allowing the farmers the 
ability to deliver their grain, then it will really make it a very 
tight time frame in which farmers will have to deliver that grain, 
and then will result in congested elevator systems, and once 
again forcing farmers to hold their grain and not be able to take 
advantage of the subsidy system that's in place right now. 
 
Normally, Mr. Speaker, with the continuance of the Crow rate 
benefit, farmers would have been able to deliver into the next 
crop year and still receive the same subsidy payments that 
they've received in the past. But as you and I both know, Mr. 
Speaker, come August 1 that whole picture changes, changes 
quite dramatically for farmers in my area in particular. 
 
I had the opportunity of stopping in at the Sask Wheat Pool 
elevator in Hyas last week and talking to Jim Southerville, the 
. . . Sommerville rather, the agent there. And he tells me that as 
a result of the Crow rate benefit, there's going to be a 
substantial increase in the freight rate cost to farmers in the 
Hyas-Norquay area. According to his figures, based on July 1, 
1994 freight rates, that there will be an increase of about 42 
cents a bushel to farmers in their cost . . . in the extra cost of 
freight for moving their grain. 
 
So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, you can realize why farmers 
would be extremely interested in getting their grain into the 
system now, in this crop year. Because 42 cents a bushel is a lot 
of dollars to a farmer out there. Forty-two cents a bushel is 
more than double what the farmer is paying for his share of the 
freight rate costs right now. 
 
As it stands in Hyas, Mr. Speaker, the farmer delivering grain, a 
bushel of wheat from that point, from that delivery point, pays 
33 cents, and the Crow benefit has been another equivalent of 
42 cents, bringing the entire freight cost up to about 72 cents a 
bushel from the Hyas point. 
 
But with the Crow rate benefit being done away with, in rather 
a savage fashion by the federal Liberal government, we're 
seeing that increase of 42 cents to the farmer come August 1, 
1995. 
 
Well with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we can't help but 
understand why farmers would be very excited and very 
determined and very desirable for them to move all their 
product that they have in storage in their bins right now into 
that system so that they can take advantage of the dwindling 
number of days in our freight subsidy program. 
 
It becomes more . . . more necessary, I guess, Mr. Speaker, for 
the federal government to own up to its responsibility and get 
involved in ensuring the fact that we do have a smooth system 
of moving grain through our elevator systems, through our 
transportations systems, and into our port system. More 
important now than ever, Mr. Speaker, so that farmers can take 
advantage of that subsidy while it's still there. 

And this only comes in light, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan agriculture has gone through 
some very tough financial times in the last several years. And in 
my area in particular, probably the most stressful times for 
farmers and for the agricultural industry there has been over the 
last four years, having the unfortunate circumstances of 
experiencing three consecutive extremely wet falls and wet 
summers, resulting in farmers harvesting in that area certainly 
reduced quality of grains, and in some places, reduced 
quantities. Last year the quality was much improved, but the 
quantities were certainly down. 
 
I had the opportunity here some month and a half ago to visit 
with the RM (rural municipality) of St. Philips and met with the 
council there. And what they were able to demonstrate to me 
was the fact that within the boundaries of the RM of St. Philips, 
the wheat yields averaged 15 bushels an acre. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, this is very dramatic, particularly in an area where the 
normal wheat yields would run 40-45 bushels. At the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, they were able to demonstrate to me that the 
canola yields in the RM of St. Philips were also down quite 
dramatically, more along the lines of 3 to 4 bushels an acre, and 
again, Mr. Speaker, in an agriculture area where the average 
canola crop would be some place between 22 and 27 bushels an 
acre. 
 
So though, Mr. Speaker, the prices certainly have looked better 
and the quality was better, but with the yields down, the farmers 
in that area are still very, very dramatically impacted. That is 
why, Mr. Speaker, those farmers there would really dearly love 
to be ensured the ability to deliver their product, what little they 
have, in through a very efficient system that would handle their 
product through the elevator system, through the transportation 
system, through the port system, and out to export. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is basically what farmers in my constituency 
are looking for and have been desiring for some time. What 
they do not want is a blockage in this system that will have a 
very negative impact upon their ability to deliver their product 
and result in further financial losses. 
 
As we all know, they are struggling. They are struggling to deal 
with their financial commitments in light of factors that are 
beyond their control: environmental factors, weather factors, 
things that they cannot do anything about. 
 
But what really frustrates them, Mr. Speaker, is that there are 
things such as the federal government's inability, or at least 
perhaps lack of desire, to ensure that there is that system 
available to farmers to deliver their product that we can do 
something about. That we can assure the fact that those farmers 
will have that ability to deliver their product in a very efficient 
system that will ensure them a speedy return on their products 
that they sell, and that they will be able to continue to maintain 
a very viable agricultural operation. 
 
It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, to think that we elected a federal 
government a year and a half, couple of years ago, that made a 
commitment to maintain a very worthy and efficient . . . and to  



March 15, 1995 

 
884 

ensure that we had the ability to deliver our product as farmers 
to the market-place. 
 
But soon after becoming government, they sort of forget about 
their commitments that they made during the election campaign 
and have a tendency to focus their attention on the rail system 
all right, but not with intentions of improving it and making it 
more efficient and more effective to serve the customers out 
there, to serve those farmers in rural Saskatchewan. But they 
have rather focused their attention on rail line abandonment. 
And that will come as a result of the budgetary changes that 
they have made to the Crow rate benefit and to the very 
suggestion of putting the CN on the auction block. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is certainly opposite from what we as 
farmers were led to believe, during the last federal election, was 
the goal of a federal Liberal government. It simply speaks to 
me, Mr. Speaker, as a tradition that the Liberal Party has held 
for a long time and is being enhanced by the provincial Liberals 
here in Saskatchewan, of flip-flopping on the issues. 
 
And they seem to be a party that has all the ability to criticize 
but has no plan for the future. And that's been very well 
demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, in their inability to handle the 
transportation crisis that's arising here in our country today. 
 
They have the inability to face up with reality and to act as a 
federal government should in ensuring the fact that farmers will 
be able to move their product down the rail system into port 
position in a manner that will be acceptable to all. And when I 
say that, Mr. Speaker, I mean all those very important rail 
workers, all very important dock workers who — quite frankly, 
Mr. Speaker — have families to feed, need to have job security, 
need to have the income, need to have their ability to maintain a 
quality life. And we don't object to that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the onus here is on the federal 
government to make sure that all the parties involved sit down 
to a negotiating table and hammer out an agreement. Now I'm 
not sure of my figures here, Mr. Speaker, but I believe a couple 
of days ago I seen a clip on the news which indicated that the 
dock workers and grain handlers on the west coast have been 
working now some 23 months without a contract. 
 
And if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, then I think the 
responsibility of the federal government is long overdue to 
ensure that both the management of the dock system and the 
workers sat down at a negotiating table and hammered out an 
agreement without creating any disruption in the transportation 
of our products through our rail system. That, Mr. Speaker, has 
to ultimately be the responsibility of the federal government. 
 
(1530) 
 
My memory serves me correct, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there 
has been some 14 different work stoppages over the last 20 
years in regards to our dock workers and in regards to our 
transportation system. And that, Mr. Speaker, does not speak 
well for our ability as a nation to make our trade commitments  

internationally. It doesn't offer security to those people who are 
purchasing products from Canada, the security of knowledge 
that they're going to be able to receive that product on time. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this just further shows the 
inability or the lack of desire for the federal government to own 
up to its responsibility to ensure that we do have a very efficient 
and effective system of moving our product to market and to 
export. 
 
And it saddens me, Mr. Speaker, to think that we have a federal 
government that should understand the vastness of this country 
and should understand the need to have a very efficient 
transportation system here — efficient and effective. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that many people in western Canada, 
many people in Saskatchewan in particular — and I'll get back 
to my farmer friends once again, Mr. Speaker — did hold out 
some hope that with the last federal election and the cleaning of 
the House, so to speak, of the Conservative government that 
was in power at that time and a Liberal government elected, that 
perhaps, perhaps we would see some of these issues identified 
and a positive resolve to them. 
 
But once again, Mr. Speaker, I think what we're seeing . . . that 
not happen. We're seeing a federal government that is shirking 
its responsibility to Saskatchewan farmers in particular, to 
western Canada as a whole. 
 
And it becomes quite evident when you look at some of the 
headlines in the Leader-Post and the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
of, I believe, just today where a poll was taken by the Leader-
Star Services and I believe the poll was carried out by Can West 
Opinions research. And the poll sampling was in Saskatchewan 
of about 1,500 Saskatchewan residents, and it was taken 
between March 6 and 13. And that poll indicated that 85 per 
cent of the people polled felt that western Canada was very hard 
hit with the federal budget, western Canada as a whole, but 
Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we all know that the main industry in 
Saskatchewan here is agriculture, and with 85 per cent of the 
people being polled felt that they were . . . western Canada was 
badly treated and Saskatchewan in particular was badly treated 
by the federal government. Saskatchewan farmers I would say, 
rank right in that same 85 per cent, suggesting that 
Saskatchewan farmers were singled out to carry the brunt of the 
federal government's desire to balance their deficit and get their 
deficit problems under control. 
 
But what really, really saddens us here, Mr. Speaker, is despite 
their window-dressing efforts in their budget and taking their 
deficit reduction strategy out on the backs of Saskatchewan 
people and Saskatchewan farmers in particular, they haven't 
really addressed the deficit. And that saddens us all, Mr. 
Speaker, because we see Saskatchewan farmers losing 100 per 
cent of their subsidy program while other jurisdictions in this 
fine country of ours do not share the same level of reduction in 
their subsidy programs. 



March 15, 1995 

 
885 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers have been 
singled out to really carry the brunt of the federal attack on the 
deficit at the expense of the Saskatchewan farmer. 
 
And further to that, Mr. Speaker, we see then the Saskatchewan 
farmer's inability to deliver his product to the market-place 
because of the fact that the federal government has failed to live 
up to its responsibility in ensuring that the rail system is 
efficient enough to ensure that our product gets moved to 
market without any disputes that will bottleneck the system and 
force us into a situation where we can't benefit from the subsidy 
program while it still exists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's sad to see those things happen. It's sad because 
what's at stake here is agriculture as we've know it. We've 
known agriculture in this province as basically a family farm 
operation. But as the time have evolved here, Mr. Speaker, and 
with the assistance of the lack of Liberal support, and Liberal 
schemes such as eliminating the Crow benefit, and the lack of 
Liberals' willingness to ensure that we have a grain handling 
system that will move the farmers' product to market in a most 
efficient manner, we see the future of the family farm at stake. 
 
And my fear is, Mr. Speaker, that if you and I and all our 
colleagues here in the legislature were able to go into a time 
capsule and appear again in this province in 10 years from now, 
I'm afraid we would not recognize agriculture because it will 
change very dramatically in the next 5 to 10 years. 
 
And that saddens me, Mr. Speaker, because what's at stake here 
is a long tradition of agriculture and a heritage in this province. 
But what's also at stake here is the future abilities for our young 
people who are growing up on the farm today, their ability to 
maintain their goal of being involved in agriculture and being a 
part of this great industry that we've all enjoyed. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, what we're seeing here today is a 
desire by the federal Liberal government to drive a stake 
through the heart of farmers all across Saskatchewan because 
they want to destroy agriculture as we've known it. They want 
to destroy the family farm structure as we've known it and to 
evolve something else — a system which, Mr. Speaker, I do not 
think will be very friendly to individuals, a system that I do not 
think will be very humanistic to individuals, and a system, Mr. 
Speaker, that I don't think will allow younger farmers to portray 
their opportunities in agriculture. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make it very clear 
that I intend to support the amendment, and I'll support the 
motion when it comes to the vote. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's amazing how 
many people in this Assembly get those creeks mixed up, isn't 
it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me today to rise because for the 
last three days in this House I've been trying to get people to  

arrive at this conclusion, both in question period and in debate. 
And I think our party has felt for some time that the system is 
badly out of whack when you can have 14 major work 
stoppages in the last 29 years that have really affected the grain 
industry in a major way. And it seems that if it isn't somebody 
in the Port of Vancouver, it's somebody in the St. Lawrence 
Seaway, or it's someone involved in the rail industry, or it's 
someone involved with longshoremen or grain handlers at the 
terminals. I mean it goes on and on and on. And we have to 
deal with it in a very imperfect way. 
 
And usually at the end of the day, because it's federal legislation 
that governs the railway system or governs ports or governs 
other federal entities, we have to have legislation brought into 
the Parliament of Canada to solve a problem that's been 
brewing for, in this case, 18 months. And it's kind of 
disappointing when I see members of the government finally, 
today, agreeing that there was something needing to be done, 
willing to agree to a debate . . . that have to put in that little 
amendment, that little amendment that panders once again to 
special interest groups. 
 
That isn't the solution, Mr. Speaker. That isn't the solution  
prolonging what we have done for the last 29 years, in other 
words, saying that every time we have a labour dispute 
involving the grains industry or bulk commodities in this 
country, we got to go to the Parliament of Canada and come up 
with a piece of legislation to sort it out because it doesn't sort it 
out. It doesn't sort it out for the grain company, the railway, the 
people working. It doesn't sort it out. It's obviously the 
collective bargaining process in dealing with these areas is 
flawed, and it is badly flawed. 
 
And I think if we'd all wake up to the situation and say we aren't 
going to put up with half measures, then that means that parties 
like the New Democrats, parties like the Liberals have to wake 
up and smell the coffee and quit pandering to special interest 
groups who perpetuate a bad system. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, you look around the world, and our 
competitors don't go through this. They don't do this 14 times in 
the last 29 years. They simply move in and take our markets 
away. Every time one of these things happen, every time there's 
a line up of ships out in Vancouver harbour sitting there empty 
with the farmer in the province paying demurrage on it, 
somebody else moves in takes away our market. Now I don't 
know how any member of this Legislative Assembly, especially 
rural ones — and I've just heard two of them speak on this 
amendment — would want to perpetuate a system that means 
that that will happen again and again and again. It's nonsense, 
absolute nonsense. What we need to do is look and see what 
our competitors do to make sure this doesn't happen, and they 
obviously have systems in place to make sure it doesn't happen. 
 
And that's why the Minister of Agriculture has been so 
reluctant. Why, even this morning at 11 o'clock he was asked: 
when is this going to happen? He said, well maybe in a couple 
of days we'll see. You know we've got to let the process work 
through; we don't want to offend anybody in the union  



March 15, 1995 

 
886 

movement. 
 
Well I don't want to offend anybody in the union movement 
either, Mr. Speaker, but reality says there has to be a better 
system. There has to be a better system . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . the member from Humboldt thinks that I've got 
my priorities mixed up, Mr. Speaker. Well I don't think I do. I'm 
a farmer. This is the 25th crop that I'll sow this spring — 25 
years that I've had a permit book — and I am sick and tired of 
not being able to grow a crop and market it as I should be able 
to because somebody else is always messing around in the mix. 
 
And it's high time that it's stopped. You cannot plan, in today's 
1995 environment with the kind of money that you have to 
handle and generate, knowing full well that at any given 
moment all these different players in the system can pull the 
plug on you. And I don't know how any member of this 
Legislative Assembly growing up in this province would want 
to put up with that kind of nonsense over and over again. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm certainly happy that members of this 
Assembly of all parties have agreed that we have to show a 
united front to Ralph Goodale and the federal Liberal 
government. What they have done to western Canadian 
agriculture in the last few months is simply unacceptable, 
inexcusable, and should be condemned because it simply makes 
it more difficult for people in western Canada to do what they 
do best. 
 
But you know what? I'm afraid Mr. Goodale is going to be let 
off the hook because we are not asking for fundamental change 
in the way that we conduct this business. See, Mr. Goodale can 
walk into the House of Commons, and he can stand up with the 
Liberal majority and he can vote for this legislation and say, 
lookit boys, I fixed the problem. We did what we had to do. 
 
Well he fixed it momentarily just like he's trying to do with his 
way of changing the method of payment. It's momentarily 
alleviating the pain. But this Assembly should not let him off 
that hook. You should say to him, we don't accept the status 
quo; we don't accept this way of settling labour disputes 
involving the transportation system. 
 
What we expect out of you, Mr. Goodale, and what we expect 
out of you, Mr. Young, and what we expect out of you, Mr. 
Robillard, is that you put a national transportation policy 
together that is not full of holes, that will make sense, that is 
sustainable, and will move western Canadian products to 
market on an ongoing basis, without being brought to a 
complete halt every time somebody in a special interest group 
gets their nose out of joint. 
 
And that goes for the people that operate the terminals. That 
goes for the people that run the railroads, and it goes for the 
unions of this country who think by putting farmers to the wall 
they are going to receive some type of monetary gain. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that's an unacceptable system. 
 
(1545) 

And that's why I'm disappointed . . . that members of the 
government would not recognize the opportunity to put it in 
front of Goodale and Young and Robillard and say this type of 
fix is not acceptable any more. What this province needs in the 
face of the Crow change and in the face of massive rail line 
abandonment is a national transportation policy that doesn't 
need a band-aid put on it every six months. That's what this 
Assembly should send to Ottawa, and then they would have to 
listen . . . not an amended motion that makes us look weak-
kneed. And that's exactly what the Minister of Agriculture did 
when he brought that amendment in here. It says that we accept 
the status quo, that we're weak-kneed, that we'll take the quick 
fix, and we'll let you off the hook, Mr. Goodale, when Mr. 
Goodale should not be off the hook for the next month or two 
months or two years for what he has done to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that's exactly what has happened. So, members of this 
Assembly, recognize what you do when you send this type of a 
motion to Ottawa. You let them off the hook because the real 
working job that needs to be done will not get done. And if you 
are simply going to succumb to some kind of short-term fix 
offered to you by special interest groups, it never will become a 
reality. 
 
If we are going to have a transportation system and a rail 
network in this country that is sustainable, that has competition 
involved in it, that allows western Canada to grow on the 
strength of its products, its produce, and its manufacturing 
capability, then there has to be a system put in place that doesn't 
allow this to happen 14 more times in the next 29 years. It is 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I felt this was a good motion the way that it was 
presented because it clearly said to Mr. Goodale and the federal 
Liberals, we don't accept your short-term band-aid solutions any 
more to the problems that face western Canada. Stand up and 
be accountable. I'm just sad to say that this simply weakens our 
hand, not strengthens it. And, Mr. Speaker, I would have 
preferred to put Mr. Goodale's feet to the fire and make him 
work with us in solving our problems rather than letting him get 
off with a band-aid solution. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 
a short intervention in this debate this afternoon. I consider this 
to be an important debate, not only in regard to Saskatchewan's 
commodities such as grain and potash but also, and more 
importantly I think in the long term, the integrity of our 
Canadian transportation system. 
 
And as the member who has just spoken has pointed out, there's 
been some 14 different disputes which have caused some 
hardship on the Saskatchewan economy. And I think that in 
itself speaks loudly that there's something wrong with our 
transportation system in that these disputes occur like this, and 
we end up looking at all the avenues that are available through 
the collective bargaining process and in many cases back-to-
work legislation to get the products from Saskatchewan 
moving. 



March 15, 1995 

 
887 

Although it's important to our economy, I want to put some 
blame squarely where it belongs, Mr. Speaker, and that's on the 
back of the Liberal Party who is represented here in the 
legislature by the three members opposite, and the federal 
government which really has the ultimate responsibility for 
dealing with these important issues that affect our 
Saskatchewan economy so dearly. The Liberals in their 
presentation this afternoon said that they wholeheartedly 
support this resolution going forward to the federal government 
from this House. But the words are hollow, Mr. Speaker. The 
words are shallow because there's no action taken by the federal 
government or by the Liberal opposition here in this legislature 
to put in place a longer-term transportation policy which will 
ensure the integrity of our transportation system. 
 
I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there's been a 
development this afternoon. And I'm sorry I didn't catch all the 
debate here. But the federal government has in fact given notice 
this afternoon that in 48 hours from now, which will be Friday 
afternoon on March 17, there will be an introduction of back-
to-work legislation aimed at the west coast ports. So in some 
respects our debate here is not as relevant as what it may have 
been if the federal government had not taken this action. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government has 
neglected to use other avenues available to them. And I think 
that they have overlooked some of the conciliation, some of the 
mediation, and as a final step in the collective bargaining 
process, to have some arbitration take place, and  at the same 
time while the arbitration takes place  to have the workers 
and the employers continue to move the products that are 
produced in provinces like Saskatchewan, whether it be potash 
or timber or the grains that are produced by our Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
And I criticize the federal government for not taking the steps 
that are necessary for, one, ensuring the integrity of our 
transportation system; and secondly, to not find mechanisms by 
which to resolve a dispute before they have to come to the 
drastic point of ordering back-to-work legislation on the floor 
of the House of Commons. 
 
Now we don't have all the details, as I mentioned. And the 
member from Morse asked whether or not it was just the west 
coast ports. I don't have a clear understanding of it at this time, 
whether it's going to affect the rails plus the ports or not. And I 
think it's symptomatic of the lack of understanding that the 
Liberal government in Ottawa has of the very seriousness of 
this situation. 
 
We do have a situation where the longshoremen, for example, 
have actually offered to move the grain and continue to work on 
grain during the dispute, but as a bargaining chip, the British 
Columbia marine employers association have chosen to lock 
those employees out. 
 
So this isn't something that can be laid squarely on the backs of 
the working people who make the grain move. The guilt should 
also — and maybe even more importantly so — fall on the  

backs of some of the employers who choose to lock out 
employees who actually offer to move the grain through the 
ports out in British Columbia. 
 
So we have to be very clear on that that this is a complicated 
issue; it's not easy to identify and tag blame on it. But what we 
do in Saskatchewan . . . is that we react to a situation that can 
have a devastating effect on our economy here in Saskatchewan 
because of being an exporting province. We rely so heavily on 
the transportation systems and the goodwill of those companies 
to move our products to the ports and therefore to their ultimate 
markets. I would also want to think a little bit about the 
employers' association, especially the British Columbia marine 
employers' association, of using us as a pawn in terms of the 
disputes that they run into with some of their employees from 
time to time. 
 
Now I know that has to do with the ports in particular, but 
there's also the issue of the movement of grain and the pending 
disputes that are there between the employees and the rail 
companies. As I've mentioned earlier in question period 
yesterday, there are basically five unions involved with the rail 
transportation system. Three of those unions have reached 
tentative agreements with the employer; one is in dispute; 
another one is sort of on notice. 
 
So I think that there's movement there, and we should have faith 
in the collective bargaining process to make sure that these 
disputes can be resolved by every means possible before the 
federal government exacerbates a situation which has long-term 
implications in putting into place a transportation system that 
will serve Canadians' needs. 
 
Now the point of the longer term solutions that we have to look 
at is in regard to grain companies, Canpotex and others who are 
looking at ways of moving their products, not through the 
Canadian transportation system, but through the transportation 
system out of the United States of America. I think if it comes 
to that point, Mr. Speaker, we'll see a devastation on the 
Canadian economy that makes any of these issues we're 
debating here today actually pale. 
 
We have to have a transportation system whereby the 
confrontational attitude is taken away, and part of some of the 
debates that I've heard in the House of Commons, sometimes in 
this legislature, enhance the confrontational approach. We need 
to get away from that. 
 
Just recently there was a meeting of WESTAC (Western 
Transportation Advisory Council), a group encompassing 
labour and farmers and employers, and they had called for a 
national transportation policy. Now I don't know why, but the 
employers in that group seem to be a little bit less enthusiastic 
than anyone else. But I think it's in all of the interests, whether 
it be a farmer or a potash producer or a labourer or an employer. 
We have to sit down at the table and figure out how the 
transportation system best serves the needs, not only of 
Saskatchewan and our products that we want to move to 
market, but for the Canadian economy as a whole. 



March 15, 1995 

 
888 

With specific regard to grain handling, labour has actually 
offered to set up an industry sectoral council to minimize the 
opportunity for the disputes like the one that we're talking about 
today or the ones we're talking about today, as well as the 14 
that the member from Thunder Creek had referred to that have 
happened in the past. And I think that this is a good idea. It's a 
good starting point whereby instead of the confrontational 
approach through a dispute, we sit down around the table and 
work out what our transportation policy is. 
 
Now I don't know where the Liberal opposition in this 
legislature stands on those issues, Mr. Speaker. They say they 
support the motion that's before the House today, that we're 
going to be passing on to the federal government to give them 
our guidance to try and come to a resolve. I don't know what 
kind of effect that will have on the federal government. 
 
I would like to know what correspondence and what calls have 
happened from the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan to their 
cousins in Ottawa to make sure that they protect the integrity of 
our transportation system which is the longer-term problem that 
we face . . . and we do not accommodate as a group in this 
Assembly the enhancement of the longer-term issue unless we 
have the federal government onside with us. And part of that 
important part is the political connection through the Liberal 
opposition and those that govern in the national capital. 
 
I think it's important to remember that still our transportation 
system, according to the Canadian Wheat Board, can still move 
our grain $20 a tonne cheaper than what it can be moved into 
United States. And I think that figure's correct; they were 
talking about $20 a tonne cheaper on the Canadian 
transportation system. Now it must be a terrible situation for 
some companies in Canada to be contemplating using U.S. 
transportation systems when it's still cheaper by $20 a tonne to 
move our grain through the Canadian transportation system. 
And surely to goodness, through the work of our Legislative 
Assembly, having all parties onside with it and having the 
federal government onside, surely we can come up with a 
national transportation policy that protects the integrity of our 
transportation system. 
 
And I assure you, Mr. Speaker, this cannot be done by a 
confrontational approach. We have to pigeon-hole those who 
are willing to sit down at the table and those that will come to 
the table to facilitate discussions on how we come to better 
resolving disputes that may arise, and through that, protecting 
the longer-term integrity to our transportation system. 
 
I as Minister of Labour in the province of Saskatchewan am 
committed to doing what I can for the players in Saskatchewan 
to come to a table to reach such an accommodation. I think it's 
part of my role, it's part of the role of each member of this 
Legislative Assembly, to find ways in which we can facilitate 
that type of a strategy, that type of a policy that will in fact 
serve us well, whether we're a grain producer or whether we're a 
unionized employee or whether we're a company who is doing 
business that relies on the transportation system within our 
country. 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the plight of producers, our grains 
and our potash production, as well as the manufactured goods 
that must move to our markets. It's not good enough to deal 
with these issues any longer on a piecemeal, ad hoc basis, as 
basically what we're doing. We react every time there's a 
dispute comes along. 
 
(1600) 
 
It seems to me that there is a need for a forum where the needs 
of the producers and the carriers and the organized employees 
can be discussed and understood and from which we can 
develop a unified and a mutually beneficial policy. 
 
In the present case, there seems to be an impasse. And if that is 
so, we will have no choice but to support whatever it is 
ultimately that has to be done. I don't think we should ever have 
to come to that again. I'm not sure we should have to come to 
that situation in the present dispute that so many are involved in 
now. 
 
And again, I think the member from Morse points out a good 
item as to what the legislation or what the motion is that's 
coming onto the floor of the House of Commons on Friday. I 
suspect it will show a lack of understanding and a lack of 
sensitivity to the major, major issues that affect us I think more 
so in western Canada than they would in central Canada. And I 
don't know that the Liberal opposition here in this legislature 
has passed on that clear understanding to their federal cousins 
in the other place. 
 
Our preferred option, as the Premier has said and the Minister 
of Agriculture has said and I've said, is a negotiated settlement 
where there is a continuing window of opportunity for the 
parties to settle the dispute before the action has to be taken. 
 
In fact I would hope that within the next 48 hours, from here 
until the time of the legislation coming back into the federal 
House, that every last effort will be made to resolve this 
dispute, or disputes, without having to have that action take 
place. 
 
I think it's a concern of a sense of community almost, the 
Canadian community, that's incumbent upon all the players to 
sit down around the table and to try and work out these disputes 
that are on the public eye now, and to have that as a starting 
point to develop longer-term policy which will in fact protect 
the integrity of our transportation system, that will serve all of 
us and is vital to our economy, no matter whether we live in 
Saskatchewan or Pictou county, or whether we live in any spot 
throughout this country of ours. 
 
So I'd encourage that to happen, that the disputes that are before 
us now get resolved within the next 48 hours. And if not 
resolved, to come to every last effort to get the parties back 
around the table, even if it's by an arbitrator or a mediator to 
come into place and have the parties sit down and work this 
out; not only with the view, as I've said earlier, of resolving 
these disputes, but starting the process for a longer-term  



March 15, 1995 

 
889 

discussion and dialogue that is going to serve people in 
Saskatchewan in this particular case, because that's who we're 
concerned about, that's who we represent, within the 
Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that I've likely added what I want to, 
to the debate. I encourage support of the motion that we have 
here. But I do call on all people to be calm about this situation, 
to not exacerbate the tense feelings that are currently there 
between the unions and between the employers. 
 
And that the federal government will make every effort possible 
— and I'll be communicating this to the federal minister of 
labour — to have the parties come back to the table, to have the 
discussion there, to resolve the dispute, go to arbitration if 
necessary, have the grain and the products move while that's 
going on. I think that the unions should agree to that. I'd be 
hopeful that the employers would agree to that. 
 
And I'm hopeful that the federal government will listen to what 
it is we're trying to say to them. They cannot lack the sensitivity 
that they've shown so far to people who live in western Canada. 
The rail tied us together in the beginning, and the transportation 
system will tie us together in the future. I fear for my country 
and my province if we start shipping all of our products to 
United States of America. 
 
I think that the federal minister of labour must call very clearly 
on the parties to get together at that table within the next 48 
hours, let the products move over the system. But I think in 
order for the federal minister to be able to get the parties to the 
table, it has to be focused on the larger issue, and that's one of 
integrity of the transportation system which serves us all, 
whether we're employers or whether we're unionized employees 
or whether we're members of the legislature or the public at 
large. 
 
And so in closing, Mr. Speaker, I ask the federal government to 
have understanding and tolerance, and to take action on this, to 
use the process that's there within the next 48 hours to make 
sure that we can be well served into the future. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I've been listening 
patiently and with some degree of support for the words that 
have been spoken by our Minister of Labour and the members 
of the government. 
 
It was our concern, Mr. Speaker, that we should raise this issue 
as an important part of dealing with how we respond to the 
serious lockouts that have been initiated by companies. The 
lockout by the railroads, the lockout by the terminals, and then 
the strike action by the employees. 
 
It's caused us concern across the province for a number of 
reasons. And the member from Thunder Creek pointed out that 
it's time we put together a method that we fix this. This is the  

14th time in 29 years that we've had a labour dispute. And it's 
very significant to the economic base of this province — very 
significant. Eighty per cent of all the products that we produce 
are exported in one way or another. Transportation and the 
movement of goods and services across this province are as 
important as any other function of transportation in any other 
country or province or state. 
 
People have often told me about the Mississippi River system 
and its importance to the U.S. economy. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
don't have a river system that flows the direction that we need 
to have, and we need to have a transportation system that will 
enhance the opportunity to deliver products and services to the 
people of Canada and also to provide for an economic base 
such as we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's a concern of ours and it's led to us identifying 
a number of areas that we need to take a look at. The first area 
is in the movement of grain. The CP Rail has locked out about 
3,200 workers. The workers went on strike and CP moved then 
to put a lockout notice on. The Canadian Auto Workers, 
because they didn't want to have any involvement in crossing 
picket lines, have initiated 4,000, have threatened to go on 
strike as of Thursday. 
 
Those are all issues, Mr. Speaker, that really cause a concern to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And what they do, Mr. Speaker, is 
a number of things. And I want to outline some of them. 
 
The problem has existed for a long, long time already, Mr. 
Speaker; 29 years, 14 disruptions in transportation to the people 
of Saskatchewan, have caused significant cost to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We have costs in holding shipping in ports in 
Vancouver, at Prince Rupert, and in Thunder Bay. 
 
We have costs that relate directly to grain storage and handling 
and costs as it relates to farmers having to take out of their own 
pockets, Mr. Speaker, out of their own pockets and pay for 
those ships that are waiting off the port in Vancouver. We have 
to pay for that wait. 
 
Every one of the people of the province of Saskatchewan — the 
60,000 farmers — have to pay for those ships to wait while 
somebody has a strike. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a cost to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 
a delegation from Heilongjiang province in China. They're 
currently on a mission to Saskatchewan. 
 



March 15, 1995 

 
890 

They have been here before and had a very successful trip and 
we're hoping that they will find things that are useful in 
Saskatchewan and that we will likewise be able to find 
economic opportunities to trade with Heilongjiang from China. 
 
Please welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I would just have 
an opportunity to make some remarks to the guests. 
 
It's a pleasure for me to welcome you here today. My family 
have been somewhat interested in a university in Hohhut, 
China, and my nephew teaches English at the agriculture 
college there and so . . . He's there right now and he's going to 
be coming back in June. So it's a pleasure for me to welcome 
you here as well. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 
 

Grain Handlers' Strike 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Martens: — The issue that we're debating here today, Mr. 
Speaker, and to members of the Legislative Assembly, is the 
transportation system and the requirement to do something that 
is going to significantly enhance the opportunity to deliver 
supplies of the products that we produce in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was mentioning early, there's 60,000 farmers 
have had to pay for the ships to wait in Vancouver port over the 
years and we have had . . . the last 29 years we've had 14 of 
these kinds of costs to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
western Canada. It is very, very significant, Mr. Speaker, and it 
doesn't run in the millions of dollars, it runs in the hundreds of 
millions of dollars that we have paid to the shippers in order to 
maintain them. And it's called demurrage, Mr. Speaker, but it's 
cost every producer in the province of Saskatchewan a lot of 
money. And that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the costs that we have 
to consider. 
 
The second of these costs is an example we have in the 
Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. We have supplies that we 
provide  potash  to the people all across the world, all 
across the world, and that is an important part of what we have 
to think about when we consider what strike action does off the 
coast of Vancouver and on the rails across Saskatchewan and 
the Prairies. We have to consider that as an important part. 
 
That's why we raised this concern in relation to the 
development of what has happened in the last few weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. Our concern is that we will not be able to meet the 
requirements of shipping the commodities that we have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things that has bothered me over the years, Mr. 
Speaker, is the involvement that the longshoremen have had in 
dealing with how we deliver our products. Mr. Speaker, it has  

always been a concern and many people in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are in agriculture have been concerned 
about the fact that most of the longshoremen earn more per 
hour than people in Saskatchewan do. And not only that, Mr. 
Speaker, those people have put at risk many of the farms in 
Saskatchewan by their actions in order to have more money for 
their jobs. And that has caused the people of Saskatchewan a lot 
of problems. 
 
Another thing that we want to talk about today is the risks that 
are involved in what we do when we have a strike action and 
how it impacts into Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, a few days ago 
we talked a little bit about IPSCO laying off employees or 
sending out lay-off notices to employees. The steel plants in 
Saskatchewan need to have the opportunity to deliver their 
products along the rail just like the grain producers. 
 
Mr. Minister, the potash mines in Saskatchewan also need to 
have an opportunity to deliver their products across this 
province and into port in Vancouver and in Prince Rupert and 
in Thunder Bay. Mr. Speaker, the importance of this is that our 
customers are satisfied with the requirements that they have to 
meet. Mr. Speaker, we are providing these products to people 
who rely on them to have a certain destination and a designated 
time to deliver them. We put them at risk every time we have a 
labour dispute across this province or in a port in Vancouver or 
Prince Rupert. We put at risk that opportunity to be 
competitive. We put at risk the opportunity to be providing a 
good product to our consumers. And, Mr. Speaker, that impacts 
negatively across Saskatchewan. It is negative to the people that 
buy our products. 
 
What kind of a reliability do we have as producers when the 
transportation system will clog and block all of the export 
opportunities that we have. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan need to have an opportunity to market their 
products. 
 
(1615) 
 
They deliver to China, they deliver to Korea, they deliver to the 
Pacific Rim, they deliver all over the world through the ports in 
Vancouver. And then if we have a slow-down in work or a 
stoppage in transportation or a stoppage in the ports, what do 
we get? The producers and the suppliers have to look for 
alternative ways to get there. 
 
And what are we? We are captives of the system and we cannot 
avoid using it. So then what do we have to do? We have to sit 
and wait here. And we wait and we wait, and it costs us money. 
We wait some more and it costs us more money. And the 
people in Ottawa need to understand that we don't need a short-
term fix for this; we need a long-term solution for the kinds of 
things that we are encountering on an annual basis almost, in 
terms of the conditions that are out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is serious implications in Saskatchewan for 
the kinds of things that are happening in this action and 
regarding this motion that we've put forward. It's our  



March 15, 1995 

 
891 

contention, Mr. Speaker, that we urge the federal government to 
act as quickly as they can, not only to resolve the strike, but to 
resolve the problems as they relate to all of transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is serious in Saskatchewan. It's this serious: if 
we for example do not get the grain to market this year, the 
volumes of grain, it will cost the farmers in Saskatchewan an 
additional $20 a tonne to deliver that to port. It will cost the 
farmers an additional $20, and if there is 100 million tonnes of 
grain that has to be moved to port; that will be very significant 
in dealing with what we have to do to get compensated for the 
losses that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very serious. We will set at risk some of our 
customers. We will set at risk our consumers. We will set at risk 
our producers. We will set at risk employers. And we will set at 
risk supplier of products, both as a service industry and as a 
supplier for raw products. Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of things 
that are at risk if we do not have a long-term, viable solution to 
the things that are happening in Saskatchewan and in the ports. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to just urge the federal government 
to take some clear-cut stands as to the way they're going to 
handle it. That it's important that we deal with it, and that is 
why we're asking this Assembly to vote in favour of dealing 
with this in a rational way. The federal Liberal government 
needs to be held accountable and responsible for actions taken 
because this is almost a national emergency, Mr. Speaker, and 
we need to have it addressed as quickly as we possibly can. And 
that's why we need to have this message taken to the Minister of 
Transport, Mr. Young, to the minister of labour, Mr. Robillard, 
and to the Minister of Agriculture who is from Saskatchewan 
who should recognize the urgency and to do something about it. 
 
And so we want to have those people understand that we are 
sincere about how we tell them what is necessary to be done. 
And so I want to thank the Assembly for the opportunity to 
speak here today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I as well 
would like to make a few comments on the motion before we 
have an opportunity to bring it to the floor for a vote. I'd just 
like to reiterate a number of the comments that have been made 
by members across this House and the number of party 
members . . . or I mean the number of the legislators in this 
province who have stood up in their place, taken their position 
in their place today in this Assembly to voice the concerns that 
are coming to their . . . being brought to their attention by 
people across the province and certainly by their constituents. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege to join with the Leader 
of the Opposition, as some . . . meeting folks in some of the 
coffee shops across the province yesterday afternoon and this 
morning, as well as attend a meeting last night. And needless to 
say, one of the major concerns that was brought to our attention 
was the tie-up of shipping across this province and in this 
country and certainly the lockout that was taking place at 
Vancouver. 

But, Mr. Speaker, while we're discussing the impact it has on 
agricultural producers, by the strike and by this slow-down of 
moving of our product by the rail systems across Canada and 
across this province, it's important to note that agricultural . . . 
the working and the economic spin-off and the benefits of 
agriculture in this province don't just apply to the farming 
community. And as we saw yesterday right across . . . it's not 
just in small town Saskatchewan, I think. Sometimes we always 
relate it to some of our rural communities, but it in fact reflects 
right across the province and certainly in our larger centres. 
 
And yesterday it was brought to our attention by a number of 
even business people who have felt a real slow-down on this, a 
slow-down in their businesses, in the buying power of the 
people coming through the doors. And I think what it reflects, 
Mr. Speaker, is the fear right across this province that a major 
slow-down in movement of grain through this . . . from our 
land-locked province to the ports is a major concern too. And 
people right across the province realize that. 
 
In fact delegates from across this province who are representing 
rural municipalities are presently meeting in Saskatoon, and I 
believe have a couple resolutions that they will be debating, 
regarding this very issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's certainly pleasing to hear that the federal 
government is bringing forward legislation to deal with the 
longshoremen. But at the same time I trust . . . and I haven't had 
a chance to confer with anybody to have it confirmed that 
indeed this legislation is coming forward and that it is going to 
deal with the whole transportation system and with the slow-
down of movement of product. 
 
We're talking specifically of grain, but we also need to realize 
that the potash . . . Canpotex is facing a very serious problem in 
moving their product to market. IPSCO in fact, because of our 
labour legislation, gave notice because they were uncertain 
when a strike may come, and it certainly affects their ability to 
deliver their product — not only to bring steel in to process but 
also to deliver the finished product. 
 
But even last night, I caught on the news where some of the 
major car manufacturers were beginning to look at alternatives. 
Because if this dispute drags on — and it's not just the terminal 
in Vancouver, but it's the rail system in general across Canada 
— then it affects them as well. 
 
And I think what that says to us at the end of the day, and 
maybe that's where it comes home, the importance of legislating 
workers back to work and getting our rail system running at full 
speed, is the fact that when it starts hitting home in Ontario and 
the heartland, the manufacturing heartland of Ontario, 
unfortunately that's sometimes what it takes to get federal 
governments to begin to look seriously at the importance of the 
rail industry in this country. 
 
And while it's very important to us in Saskatchewan and 
western Canada, eastern Canada a lot of times doesn't seem to 
really care. And what I just mentioned about the car  



March 15, 1995 

 
892 

manufacturers, where it hits them directly in their industrial 
heartland, brings the importance of some of these issues that are 
very important to us . . .  
 
And so I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is important that we as 
individuals do take the time to debate such issues and bring 
forward motions that we could send from this Legislative 
Assembly to the federal government, to the Prime Minister, to 
the Agriculture minister and the Transport minister just 
reiterating again the fact that this province needs their 
assistance. And that they can't just sit in Ottawa and sit back on 
their hands and say, well eventually this problem will resolve 
itself. It's really not bothering us here as we look at, say, 
Thunder Bay and east. It really doesn't have major impact on us. 
Out there in western Canada, I think they will find out a way to 
work around it. 
 
But indeed, Mr. Speaker, this issue is a national issue. It's not 
just a provincial issue, it's not a Saskatchewan issue, or a 
Manitoba or an Alberta issue, this is a national issue. And it's 
important that the federal government recognize the 
responsibility that was placed on their shoulders by the 
electorate some months ago when they were elected to lead. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we stand in this Assembly and bring 
forward this motion encouraging the federal government to, 
indeed, to accept their responsibility — the responsibility 
placed on their shoulders — it's also important for us to bring 
out the fact that as individual legislators we have a 
responsibility to our constituents, as well, to stand and bring 
forward these points and let people know that we are indeed 
representing them and speaking out on their behalf. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to stand 
and just add a few words of support to many of the words that 
have already been brought forward in this Assembly. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, I am fully in support of the motion that 
has been presented to us this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Carlson: — I think what we're witnessing here in the last 
few days is one of the major flip-flops in our country by our 
federal government. The Liberal government talked about doing 
some great things in Canada, and of course that was in the days 
of opposition. Now they're in government they flip-flop and 
they're not acting at all or talking about the things they're going 
to do, especially in transportation and in labour negotiations 
and in labour disputes. 
 
When we heard of today about the amount of strikes and 
disruptions over the last 20-some years, obviously there is a 
problem. And, Mr. Speaker, I think there needs to be a real 
strong initiative taken to alleviate some of the tensions, because 
if you've got 14 disruptions in 20-some years, you got to know 
you got a problem. And I think it's encompassing across the 
federal government that they look at the situation as it is and try 
and come up with some ideas, some solutions, that will lessen 
the tensions. 
 
And I think the fact that the Crow rate is gone is adding to the  

uncertainty and to the farmers and to the railroad workers, and 
of course the people at the ports, because nobody seems to 
know where our grain's going to go or how it's going to get 
there. Everybody seems to be in a state of confusion. There's no 
plan. 
 
The federal government has got no transportation policy, no 
plan to come out and say to people in western Canada, this has 
been taken away and this is what we're going to do now and this 
is what it's going to look like. We've got no idea. 
 
So when you've got uncertainty, you've got people being 
worried about their security. And when you've got people 
worried about their security and where they're going to be in the 
next few years and where they're going to get their income 
from, naturally they're going to fight back. You would do it and 
I would do it. Anybody would do that — would take whatever it 
is that we have in our capacity to fight back when the future is 
so uncertain because there has been no plan articulated or laid 
out. 
 
And I think that's the key, that's the key. No plan. No 
transportation plan, no policy. So we as farmers, railroaders . . . 
and I was a railroader myself for seven years. My brother's got 
30-some years on the railroad working in Melville. And I know 
what it's like working on a railroad. And I've talked to my 
brother in the last little while about the possibility of CN being 
out on strike or a lockout, and he doesn't like that possibility 
any more than I do. But when you fear for your security you 
take what actions that you have at your disposal. 
 
We all know in western Canada, in Saskatchewan, that our 
transportation system needs to work 365 days a year. It needs to 
work efficiently for 365 days a year in order to get our product 
out of the West, into the ports and into market, into place to go 
into the market-place. And anything that impedes that or cuts 
that period down from 365 days to 300 days or 325 days or less 
than 300 days, puts a stress on the system, puts a stress on 
farmers to be able to get their product to market. 
 
And that's what this debate's all about today, is to put across to 
the federal government that this is a real crisis. We can't afford 
to lose any time at all in the system, and that's what it's all 
about. And until they get the grasp of that and fully realize that, 
that every minute counts as far as our transportation system, and 
they take a hands-on approach that will make things work 
smoothly . . . and I'm not talking necessarily about bang, back-
to-work legislation, although I guess that's coming down. But 
we've had that for 20-some years and we just keep getting more 
problems and more problems and more disruptions. 
 
We need a long-term solution. We need the workers and the 
management that's working together a little bit more. If you've 
got a hired person, somebody working for you, and there's 
friction between you and that person, they’re probably not 
going to work as hard for you or do as good a job. So that's the 
key — is to get people working together, people feel like that 
they got a commonality. And I think that's when we're going to 
get some progress. 



March 15, 1995 

 
893 

I want to end my comments, Mr. Speaker, by reiterating what I 
talked about in the first opening statement, was that the federal 
government is the one that this . . . it's in their ballpark now and 
they're the ones that have to take the initiative. And I call upon 
them to do whatever they have in their powers to do in the next 
48 hours to come to a settlement whereby everybody will feel 
much better about as opposed to a confrontational settlement. 
 
But I'm very supportive of the debate today and the resolution 
going on to the federal parliament. I think they need to know 
what we are thinking and what we are talking about in this 
province, and I'm very supportive of that. And I thank you for 
the opportunity to enter in the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to have 
the opportunity to speak today about such a critical issue, 
although I certainly can't be happy that we have found ourselves 
with this issue to talk about. 
 
It shouldn't happen again in Saskatchewan and in western 
Canada. It's happened far too many times already that we have 
had strikes and lockouts that have hurt third-party innocent 
people in our country, and especially in the grain handling 
business. Certainly there are other aspects to the strikes and 
lockout that are being hurt and need to have consideration and 
need to have us recognize. But obviously with a farm 
background I'd have to target the hurt to the grain, cattle, and 
other livestock industries, the pork industry and all of the 
agricultural commodities. 
 
Certainly our colleagues have made the point that the potash 
industry could very quickly be hurt, especially going into the 
spring season. Certainly our colleagues have made the point 
that those people waiting for a new car coming in from the 
ports or some other commodity being imported, those people 
are being inconvenienced, and perhaps in some ways even hurt. 
Those people obviously will let their feelings be known, and we 
as parliamentarians and legislators in the country will reflect on 
that as we hear their problems. 
 
It hasn't taken very long though, for the agricultural community 
to let me know what they think of the process that is going on 
today. Many of the farmers that I represent, Mr. Speaker, have 
said very clearly and very quickly that they're fed up with strikes 
and lockouts hindering their potential to make an honest living 
in this country. They're tired of it, and they don't want any more 
of it; 14 times out of 29 years is just too many times to have it 
happen. Last year we found ourselves in a similar situation. 
Here we are, a year later, back-to-back problem, same kind of 
issue. 
 
When is it ever going to end, people say to me. When are we 
going to bring a stop to this stuff? Well this is the time, Mr. 
Speaker. Right now would be the right time. We are a little 
upset with our government here in Saskatchewan, not having  

taken a more solid, more definitive stand on this issue yesterday 
and the day before, but we do want to compliment them for 
catching up today and getting on board. It's high time. And even 
though their amendment is a weak-kneed approach to a serious 
problem, we think we will have to support any kind of effort 
that will go along with trying to get this problem resolved. 
 
We don't agree that a soft-hearted, weak-kneed approach is the 
way to go. We think it's time to get tough — get tough on 
everybody that causes these problems, get tough on the 
railroads, get tough on the unions, get tough on anybody that is 
a contributor to these kinds of actions happening. There are 
such things as essential services in this world, and we had better 
start to think about that. 
 
In our province, Mr. Speaker, we are land-locked. One of the 
members opposite I noted, made special mention of that, and 
it's a fact. And we are people who are land-locked, and 
therefore we find ourselves in a precarious situation when we 
have to export goods in order to make our living. 
 
We don't have the population to eat all the food that we grow, 
so we depend on outside markets to use that product up. If we 
can't ship it out, then we can't make a living. It's as simple as 
that. 
 
There are people who have got bills to pay in the country. There 
are farms that are close to going bankrupt, even though we are 
in a somewhat better time than we were a few years ago. There 
are still vast numbers, Mr. Speaker, of people in Saskatchewan 
whose livelihoods go basically day to day — not on a month-to-
month or year-to-year basis — day to day, keeping the wolf 
away from the door. And we just cannot tolerate another strike 
or lockout, whichever it is. It's just not acceptable. 
 
The impact of prices dropping in the commodity markets has 
already been demonstrated and reflected in yesterday's market, 
and the day before. Clearly farmers are taking a financial hit 
when that happens. There is no other way of explaining it. 
There is no other way to look at it. 
 
The farmers are being charged a penalty, not to mention the fact 
that we would have ships not being loaded and demurrage 
charges that will generate back to the Canadian Wheat Board 
which takes money straight out of the pockets of the farmers, 
because the Wheat Board doesn't have any of its own money. It 
only has the money it takes out of selling the product. 
 
So that's money out of the farmer's pocket, and that cannot be 
tolerated and it is unacceptable, and we have to put a stop to 
this kind of thing and we may as well do it right now. And so 
we're saying, get tough, get tough now, and get tough on 
anybody that is causing the problem. 
 
So clearly then what we have to do is to identify who's causing 
the problem. And if we want to bunch them all up, then 
legislate them to back to work, that's fine with me. But right  



March 15, 1995 

 
894 

after that we have to start working on how to prevent this thing 
from happening again in six months; how to prevent it from 
happening again in a year. It's just happening far too often. 
 
Now collective bargaining, we have told you in many times in 
this House that we believe in it. It has a lot of merit in our free 
democratic society, and it's something we should defend. But 
how far should it go? How far should we allow it to go? How 
many people get hurt before you put a stop to it? That's the 
question we have to answer. Because every good rule has a 
limitation, and it's high time that we looked at where that 
limitation should be applied. It's got to be some time, some 
place, that we draw a line in the sand and say, enough is 
enough; we're not going to put up with any more of this. 
 
I say to the railroad companies, the same thing applies. As soon 
as you have a little disruption, right away you start to lock 
everybody out in order to create a confrontation. That's what it 
appears to be in the news today. And if that is a fact, then 
enough is enough and let's draw the line in the sand there too. 
It's got to be put to a stop. 
 
We cannot have the farmers and the consumers of food being 
the pawns in some kind of a chess game that people play. It's 
time we put a stop to that kind of nonsense, and it's time we call 
this an essential service and legislate it so that it has to go to 
binding arbitration on an annual or semi-annual basis. And 
enough of this ability to lock out or to strike whenever you feel 
like it. And I say we hit the railroads and we hit the unions; we 
hit them equally and we hit them hard and we hit them now. 
And we tell them, that's the end of it. No more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that many farmers 
will already have taken a financial loss. And it's a fact that we 
will, if we allow this thing to go on very much further, pay 
demurrage. 
 
Who should pay that demurrage? Right now the farmers will 
pay for it through lost income from their grain sales. The 
Canadian Wheat Board will deduct that from the pooled price 
of the grains they sell. Well I say the railroads and the unions 
should pay those demurrage charges, and then they would get 
back to the table and bargain. 
 
I'll bet you, you send them a bill for the demurrage charges, 
they'd be sitting down and talking pretty quick. But as long as 
the farmers are paying the bills, why should they bother. They 
have nothing at stake here except to hurt third parties who have 
everything at stake — their livelihoods and their very existence 
in the prairies of Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Alberta. 
 
And it's time we put an end to this kind of nonsense once and 
for all. Let's send a clear message to Ottawa. We want this 
declared an essential service. No more of this going on strike, 
locking them out. 
 
Whatever it takes, let's do it. If we have to expropriate the rail  

line, then let's do that too. It's time we get tough. It's time we 
order these people back to work. And if they don't want to go 
from the union side, put them in jail; that's where they belong. 
They're criminals if they don't get the job done of saving the 
third parties who are being injured. 
 
If the doctors tried to walk out on strike when somebody came 
in with their leg cut off, they'd be in serious trouble. Well I say 
this is just as important to the people whose livelihoods are at 
stake. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm saying to the people in Ottawa who are 
supposed to get a copy of these transcripts: get tough; get now; 
get tough now. Draw your line in the sand and say enough is 
enough and we're not going to allow this to happen any more. 
Declare it an essential service and tell everybody to get back to 
work. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'll be 
very brief but I do want to take the opportunity to get on the 
record. 
 
First of all this situation obviously is very complicated. We're in 
a time of the year probably when the farmers are at one of the 
busiest times for shipping. With the road bans coming on very 
soon now, they're anxious to get the grain moved. 
 
It is obviously a dispute between the CP rail system and also 
two of its unions. On one hand I certainly respect the rights of 
the ordinary worker that they be treated fairly and that they are 
paid fairly, while on the other hand of course, they respect the 
rights of farmers as well, that they should be able to move their 
grain freely across Canada. 
 
Our Agriculture minister just a few minutes ago moved an 
amendment that back-to-work legislation should only be 
considered as a last resort, and I certainly want to say that I 
concur with that 100 per cent. 
 
Agriculture in the last few years has been hit very hard. There's 
been hundreds of millions of dollars, in fact billions of dollars, 
cut by way of the elimination of the Crow benefit in the last 
couple of days. We've had not enough rain. We've had too 
much rain and grasshoppers. So farmers have been hurt pretty 
bad in the last 8 to 10 years. As the member from Maple Creek 
said, we live in a land-locked province and our farmers depend 
on the rail line system for their income and to move grain. 
 
I want to say then that I think it's incumbent on the federal 
Liberal government to develop a national transportation policy 
that is workable for our workers and also for the farmers and 
indeed all Canadians. I would certainly concur that the federal 
Liberals, along with the support of the provincial Liberals, need 
to develop a solution to transport grain and potash, not just in 
the short term but indeed in the long term. 



March 15, 1995 

 
895 

I want to close then by encouraging the federal government, the 
federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale, from here in 
Saskatchewan, to sit down with workers and the railways, their 
employers, to negotiate a fair settlement. While they're doing 
this, I guess I beg them and indeed urge them to consider the 
impact that this has on farmers and producers here in 
Saskatchewan and the urgency with which this resolution to this 
problem needs to be developed. 
 
So I just want to be on record as supporting this motion with all 
of my colleagues here in the legislature and do indeed urge the 
members from the third party as well to be supporting this. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:46 p.m. until 4:48 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Thompson Wiens 
MacKinnon Lingenfelter Johnson 
Goulet Lautermilch Kowalsky 
Cunningham Penner Upshall 
Hagel Bradley Koenker 
Lorje Teichrob Pringle 
Cline Crofford Draper 
Serby Sonntag Flavel 
Roy Kujawa Stanger 
Kluz Harper Carlson 
Boyd Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen Toth 
Britton   

— 37 
Nays 

— Nil 
MOTIONS 

 
Transmittal Motion 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 
leave, I would like to move a motion: 
 
 That a copy of this emergency resolution and the 

verbatim of the debate be forwarded to the Prime 
Minister and the federal labour minister, Lucienne 
Robillard, for immediate attention and consideration. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview-Haultain. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting Trading in Real Estate, the 
Real Estate Commission and Brokerages, Brokers and 

Salespersons Trading in Real Estate 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Real Estate Act. This Act 
will serve to improve consumer protection and enhance the 
Real Estate Commission's ability to administer the Act 
effectively and efficiently. It also responds to the changing real 
estate market-place and clarifies the roles and responsibility of 
people registered to trade in real estate in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act replaces The Real Estate Brokers Act, 
1987. That legislation established a new direction for regulation 
of the real estate industry by delegating responsibility for 
regulation from the government through the Superintendent of 
Insurance to a newly created Real Estate Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the system of delegated self-regulation has proven 
to be beneficial for the public, the industry, and the 
government. However, Mr. Speaker, areas in which the Act 
could be improved have been identified during the past several 
years by the commission, by the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association, and by my department. And, Mr. Speaker, 
therefore a new Act is proposed, and I will highlight the major 
changes. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, consumer protection is enhanced in 
several ways. The existing Act requires that an offer to purchase 
be in writing, and it prescribes the content of such an offer. 
These requirements will also apply to other types of offers such 
as an offer to lease or exchange real estate. 
 
The Act will permit the Real Estate Commission to order a real 
estate broker or sales person to pay restitution to a consumer 
where the consumer has suffered a loss as a result of the 
professional misconduct or professional incompetence of the 
broker or salesperson. This removes the need for the consumer 
to take additional civil action to recover such losses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Superintendent of Real Estate will also be 
authorized to issue a cease and desist order against a brokerage 
where there are serious concerns such as a deficiency in a 
brokerage trust account or where the brokerage registration is 
suspended and criminal proceedings are under way. The 
existing Act has no such provision. 
 
Recently there has been an increase in the sale in Saskatchewan 
of time-share plans in relation to properties located outside of 
the province of Saskatchewan. The Act will permit regulations 
to be made to govern such sales. Consumer protection 
provisions respecting time-share plans may include, for 
example, a cooling-off period and bonds or other forms of 
protection for consumer deposits. Similar protection exists in  



March 15, 1995 

 
896 

some other province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Act prohibits arrangements for 
payment of commissions on the basis of difference between 
price at which real estate is listed and its actual sale price. 
However it does not prohibit other methods of computing 
commissions that can be to the consumer's disadvantage. The 
new Act will require commissions and remuneration to be 
computed only on the basis of a lump sum or a percentage of 
the sale price and to be agreed upon in writing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Real Estate Commission identified a number 
of ways in which the Act could be amended to streamline its 
administrative duties, such as giving the commission the ability 
to appoint committees and to delegate functions. Changes are 
being made to address these issues. 
 
The disciplinary sections of the new Act are also greatly 
improved and are consistent with other professions' legislation. 
The Act establishes an investigative committee, provides for 
interim suspension of a registrant in serious cases, and clearly 
sets out hearing procedures. Decisions of the Real Estate 
Commission will continue to be appealable to the 
superintendent, whose decisions may be appealed to the court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, property management is included as a forum of 
trading in the real estate under the existing Act. However the 
definition is too broad and could, for example, include the 
caretaker of an apartment block. It was never intended that a 
caretaker be required to be a registered . . . and to be registered 
under the Act. Therefore property management is being defined 
as negotiating or approving of a lease on behalf of a landlord or 
holding money received in connection with lease or both. 
 
The existing Act does not provide for agencies’ agreements 
other than listing agreements. Increasingly real estate is being 
marketed in other ways, such as buyer agencies’ agreements. 
And under the new Act, all agency agreements will be governed 
by the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within the real estate industry there has been some 
confusion with respect to the term broker and manager and their 
respective responsibilities. Terminology is now being clarified. 
The proposed Act spells out application procedures, 
requirements, and responsibilities for brokerages, brokers, 
branch managers, and sales persons. 
 
The new Act has been developed jointly by the Real Estate 
Commission and by the Department of Justice in consultation 
with the real estate industry, consumers, and other interest 
groups. The Act provides for many improvements that I believe 
will be beneficial to everyone concerned. And it is with these 
ideas in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I am proud to move second 
reading of The Real Estate Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd just 
like to make a few comments before I move to adjourn debate, 
just to indicate that as I was listening to the minister. The length 
of submission and presentation of this Bill this afternoon is  

almost indicative of the size of the Bill itself. And I think it 
means that we're going to need a little extra time to review that 
legislation before we get into further debate and move into 
committee. 
 
Therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 
reading of The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to this Act are strictly budgetary 
in nature. As in the past three years, we are setting the statutory 
funding level for the Wascana Centre Authority. This level and 
the actual funding will be the same as in 1994-95, and there 
will be no reduction in payments to the Authority, unlike was 
the case during the 1980s when the members opposite were 
involved in the planning of the Wascana Authority. 
 
However, to maintain this level, we are required to suspend the 
statutory funding level specified in The Wascana Centre Act. 
This requires the three funding parties — the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the city of Regina, and the University of Regina 
— to pay a sum equivalent to the amount receivable by the city 
through a levy of 1.7 mills. This formula has in fact been 
suspended since 1986-87. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as all members know, the 1995-96 budget marks a 
great turnaround for the province of Saskatchewan. Deficit 
financing is over. We balanced the budget in 1994-95 and in 
fact had a modest surplus. So although we are not in a position 
to increase the funding for the Wascana Authority, we are 
pleased to be able to maintain the same level of funding as was 
the case last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all members appreciate the importance 
of the Wascana Centre, and not only to the residents of Regina 
but to all people of the province and to visitors from across 
Canada and around the world. 
 
(1700) 
 
Thanks to the foresight of earlier generations, we enjoy one of 
the largest urban parks in the world. It is a beautiful setting for 
the finest legislature in Canada, and within the Wascana 
boundaries we find the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, the 
Science Centre, the Saskatchewan Centre, the Diefenbaker 
Homestead and of course, the University of Regina — a rich 
variety of uses indeed. 
 
Furthermore the Wascana Centre is a great attraction to 
naturalists and environmentalists, and it is a focal point of 
thousands of citizens, young and old, coming in winter and 
summer alike to enjoy the park and its many recreational 
facilities. 
 



March 15, 1995 

 
897 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that at the end of May and the 
beginning of June, Regina will host the second national capital 
cities workshop here in the capital of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this brings together representatives from the capitals of 
all provinces and territories and of the national capital. One of 
the main reason the delegates chose to meet here is to see the 
Wascana Centre and learn how it functions. Wascana is unique 
among the Canadian capitals. So we should all be very proud of 
it, and we should resolve to maintain its integrity and plan for 
its enjoyment by future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with those comments in mind that I am now 
proud to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
listening to the minister it sounds to me like that's almost a 
campaign speech that we just heard, and maybe we need to get 
into a bit of debate. But in consideration of the fact that the 
clock is winding down on us, I think in order to give time to 
digest some of the words and come back with some appropriate 
debate on this issue, it would be appropriate to move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading to amend The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Act. 
 
This Bill implements the budget decision to maintain the 1995-
96 statutory funding for Meewasin at the same level as last year. 
This is the second year in a row that Meewasin funding has 
been maintained at this level, permitting the Authority to 
continue an excellent level of service in conserving and 
enhancing the river valley. 
 
This Bill establishes the statutory funding contributions from 
the city of Saskatoon, the University of Saskatchewan, and the 
province. For 1995-96 this funding will be $1,870,760 in total. 
This amendment suspends the statutory formula for another 
year. This should not have an adverse impact on the operations 
of the Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also broadens the scope of the Authority, 
permitting it to enter into agreements with municipalities and 
organizations outside the Meewasin Valley. This will provide 
an opportunity for greater sharing of the conservation, planning, 
and river valley development expertise that the Authority has 
developed during the past 15 years. 
 
I move second reading of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:05 p.m. 
 
 


