






















































February 16, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 16, 1995 

 

 
225 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition I'll 
read the prayer of: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'd be happy to table these now. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
have petitions today. Once again these are from citizens of 
Saskatchewan along Highway 42. And I'll just read the prayer, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate the total amount of 
funds garnered from the taxpayer for fuel tax, vehicle 
licence fees, and provincial sales tax on new vehicles 
toward the maintenance and capital costs of 
Saskatchewan roads; and further, that the Government 
of Saskatchewan dedicate any monies available from the 
federal infrastructure program towards Saskatchewan's 
road system, rather than provide these sums toward 
capital construction of casinos in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I would lay these on the Table today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
three notices of motions that I'd like to introduce respecting first 
readings for Bills. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Monday next move first reading of a 
Bill, An Act to provide for the Enforcement of the Code of 
Ethical Conduct for Members of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly (anti-corruption Act). 
 
I give notice that I shall on Monday next move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act. 
 
And I give notice that I shall on Monday next move first 
reading of a Bill, An Act respecting an Economic Strategy for 
Saskatchewan. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Special Olympics Society Winter Games 
 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to report to the 
House that on Saturday morning I'll have the privilege of 
representing the government at the opening of the 
Saskatchewan Special Olympics Society Winter Games in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And 150 athletes will compete in events like figure skating, 
speed skating, snowshoeing, downhill and cross-country skiing. 
Medalists will advance to the national Special Olympics in 
Calgary. 
 
These games are sponsored by the Saskatchewan Special 
Olympics Society which is a non-profit organization providing 
sport, fitness, and recreational opportunities to over 2,000 
mentally challenged individuals across our province. And they 
also offer daily programs in over 80 communities in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we often talk in this legislature about inclusion, 
the right of every individual to participate in our economic, 
social, and recreational life. We have here, I think, a perfect 
example, and all should be congratulated who are involved in it, 
including Saskatchewan Lotteries, SaskTel, the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) law students, the Knights of 
Columbus, the Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon, and the Sons of 
Norway, as well as all who contribute financial and volunteer 
assistance. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure all of us will want to — in 
advance — congratulate all of the athletes who are participating 
and wish them a hope that swiftness, grace, and agility, will be 
with them all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 16, 1995 

 
226 

Scott Tournament of Hearts 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Besides it being a 
red-letter day in Saskatchewan — you may wonder why I'm 
dressed in red — well, it's to honour the Scott Tournament of 
Hearts national women’s' curling championship that will get 
under way this weekend in Calgary. 
 
Usually each province and territory sends one representative 
team to this tournament, but Saskatchewan has the distinction 
for the second year in a row of having two teams at the 
championship. The Sandra Peterson rink, comprised of Sandra 
Peterson, Joan McCusker, Jan Betker, Marcie Gudereit, and 
Anita Ford, ensured a spot at this upcoming championship by 
winning the national event and the world championship in 
1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of being present at the official 
send-off for the Peterson team, which has been dubbed "Team 
Canada" on this past Tuesday at the Caledonian Curling Club. I 
know that all curling fans and enthusiasts are very proud of 
Sandra Peterson's foursome, and look forward to following the 
Scott Tournament of Hearts February 18 to 26. 
 
The Sherry Anderson rink from Prince Albert won the 
provincial title and will be representing Saskatchewan at the 
tournament. The Anderson rink made its first appearance at the 
national championships last year and finished third. This team, 
comprised of Sherry Anderson, Kay Montgomery, Donna 
Gignac, Elaine McCloy, and Twila Fisher, has the right 
chemistry and is a task-orientated team. They have high 
expectations and attribute much of their success to their coach, 
Ron Myers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all hon. members offer their best wishes 
and good luck to both of these fine teams from Saskatchewan as 
they pursue the same goal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in Shaunavon Constituency 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
acknowledge the fact that it was one year ago today that an 
agreement was signed involving this government and the Rural 
Health Coalition. 
 
The coalition represented many communities in my 
constituency including Ponteix, Kincaid, Climax, Mankota, and 
most communities just beyond the boundaries of the Shaunavon 
constituency including Gull Lake and Vanguard, Coronach, 
Rockglen, Lafleche, to name but a few from south-west 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These towns signed a deal in good faith guaranteeing their 
residents, among other things, emergency services, acute-care 
services, 24-hour on-duty nursing, observation and assessment 
to meet required needs, and support services to fill any 
shortcomings that may exist. In the 12 months which have  

passed since this agreement was signed, Mr. Speaker, it has 
become clear that many aspects of the agreement which the 
government committed to have not been delivered upon. 
 
Given the fact that we now have a new Minister of Health the 
ball is now in his court. He must determine if the level of health 
care in these communities will continue to erode, or if the 
people of these towns and villages will have returned to them a 
safe, reliable health care system they rightfully deserve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Taxes 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question is 
directed to the Premier. As you know, Mr. Premier, we have 
continued our Mr. Premier, I want to know . . . initiative this 
year. And in just a few short weeks, we have received over a 
thousand pieces of correspondence, the vast majority of which 
deal with taxes and big government. 
 
Before we head into the budget, we would like you to face 
some of the questions being asked of your government by the 
taxpayers who have borne the brunt of your policies. 
 
This question comes from Jayson Thompson from Prince 
Albert. Mr. Premier, I want to know when our provincial tax 
will be lowered or discontinued. Sooner or later the 
Saskatchewan government will have to face up to the fact that 
the large numbers of people moving away from our province is 
mainly due to over taxation. The majority of these people are 
young. When you're out of school and trying to make it, it only 
makes it harder. 
 
Will you give them an answer, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to answer 
the question. I'm sure the hon. member will tell Mr. Thompson 
that the jobs creation record in Saskatchewan has been very, 
very impressive. January of 1995 to January of 1994 has seen 
an increase of 11,000. December of 1994 to December of 1993 
has seen an increase of 15,000. And November of '94 to 
November of '93 has seen an increase of 11,000. In fact since 
1992, there have been 7,000 new jobs created, and there are 
more opportunities for more young people. 
 
Now the hon. member asks about taxes, and of course we want 
to see that taxes are reduced. But I repeat again, as I did 
yesterday in question period, that it does, I think, sound a little 
strange coming from the mouths of the opposition parties that 
call for reduction in taxes, based on the fact that Mr. Thompson 
will no doubt be told by you that it was your administration and 
your government of which you're a part and a supporter thereof 
that nearly bankrupted this province, necessitating the kinds of 
actions which we have taken which the Minister of Finance  



February 16, 1995 

 
227 

later on today will speak to. We are doing all that we can to 
reduce taxes, maintain the quality of life, and pull this province 
out of the mess created by the official opposition parties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Finances 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is also to the Premier, and two things, Mr. Premier, I 
want you to be cognizant of. 
 
These are not our questions. These are the people, of the people 
of Saskatchewan, so please keep that in mind during that period 
of time. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Premier, while you so brazenly gloat about your 
job creation, remember that we are sitting here with 1,000 jobs 
fewer in 1995 than there were in 1991. And those are the facts, 
Mr. Premier. 
 
I have a question from you from Mr. Sam Enns, a constituent of 
mine from the town of Dalmeny. And he asks — and these are 
his words — it is no secret that you have theoretically balanced 
this year's budget with substantially higher taxes and utility rate 
increases, coupled with a bonanza in farm profits and the 
unexpected sales in oil and gas leases. What do you do for an 
encore when oil and gas rights and farmers' profit margins, both 
being extremely cyclical in nature, inevitably drop? Given the 
NDP's (New Democratic Party) love of nationalization, constant 
labour bias, and your undying respect for contractual law, can 
you really expect business to move in droves to Saskatchewan 
to take up the slack and help pay down the interest on our debt, 
let alone tackle the principal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at least the hon. 
member had the humility — and thank goodness for him that he 
did — to acknowledge that these were not his questions or the 
PC (Progressive Conservative) Party caucus questions, because 
it would be absolutely shameless of them to stand up and say 
that they were their questions, talking about honesty and 
budgeting and financing. So to that extent I have to compliment 
the hon. member opposite, and at least compliment Mr. Enns 
that he puts his question. 
 
Again my answer to Mr. Enns is much like the first question put 
by the member from Morse. The dilemma that we were faced 
on November 1, 1991, was occasioned by profligate spending 
where you spent $1 billion a year more every year, on average, 
over the nine years that you were in administration than you 
brought in by way of revenues. That's why we're in this mess. 
That's why we had to take a balanced approach to the budget. 
And I tell you that we have made a tremendous turnaround. All 
the people of Saskatchewan have helped very, very much in 
doing so. I also get . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it was a 
great Saskatchewan comeback, and it is, and I give it credit to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 

But I also get these letters that the Leader of the Opposition and 
members of the opposition refer to. I got one today from a 
person from Regina. It says this: 
 
 Mr. Premier, (and I want to give this because it gives the 

answer) I want you to know that your government is 
doing a great job. Keep up the good work. The best part 
is to see the deficit come down so that my grandchildren 
don't have to pay for the money spent  that was 
created in the '80s  that wasn't there to spend. 

 
Signs this particular person, Ms. Ast-Collins. I have many of 
these. 
 
That's what the ordinary people of Saskatchewan say because 
they see, and what they see is this: that we are managing the 
province's finances responsibly and properly and business is 
reacting, and Saskatchewan is on the verge of a brand-new day 
dawning. Don't try to spoil it with your doom and gloom all the 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Income Tax Rates 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question will be 
from a Saskatchewan resident and it has to do with taxes. Mr. 
Premier, as you know there are two basic approaches being 
talked about in Canada to balance budgets. One is one of 
cutting taxes, as we see in Conservative governments in Alberta 
and in Manitoba, and the other is in raising taxes as we see here 
in Saskatchewan with the NDP. Both may result in balanced 
budgets but one obviously is quite a bit more popular than the 
other. And this question comes from Tracy Brailsford from 
Lumsden and it is, and I quote: 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why you consider $42,000 per year 
income as being high income. According to the Saskatchewan 
tax form in the income tax return, we see that's the case. My 
husband finally earns a reasonable but not high income and yet 
we have to pay an extra 15 per cent tax. How do you expect a 
young couple with kids to get by on paying these extra taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the humility which 
was exhibited by the member from Rosthern unfortunately still 
isn't being exhibited by the former premier and my friend from 
Estevan. He asks this question of me after having sat in the 
treasury benches for nine years and presided over the fiscal 
destruction of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The former premier is dead right. There are at least two 
different ways in which to approach deficit cutting in the 
budget: the Alberta, the one that you seem to subscribe to and 
the one that the Liberals seems to subscribe to, less 
government; without telling us, by the way, what else from 
government you want to cut, what else you want to cut — 
neither the Leader of the Liberal Party nor you, sir, have said 
that — or the way that we try to do it. 



February 16, 1995 

 
228 

And I want to tell you that in Saskatchewan and Alberta — I 
had my Finance people do a little analysis of this — if they did 
their books in Alberta as we do ours, the per capita expenses in 
Alberta would amount, for the basket of services that the people 
get there, roughly $4,700 per capita compared to our 4,100 after 
Premier Klein's announced reductions. Forty-seven hundred to 
41 after his reductions. 
 
I want to tell you that under Statistics Canada, if you look at the 
global figures with respect to Statistics Canada, we average 9.9 
civil servants per thousand; they average 12.3 per thousand 
after the reductions. They have $900 per capita in revenue 
flowing from oil and natural gas by accident of geography; 
that's what the oil and natural gas is. If I had that, if you had 
that, perhaps we wouldn't have to raise the taxes. But we don't 
have that. 
 
And most importantly, their government didn't leave, like you 
left to us, a 14 to $15 billion debt, interest payments in the 
amount of $800 million a year of taxpayers' dollars going to 
Hong Kong and Zürich and London so that they can get rich, 
rather than having that money stay here for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. I say to you, sir, we're setting this 
province on the right course and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Government Expenses 

 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a question from a constituent to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
this question comes from Phyllis Ludlow of Balcarres: I am a 
senior and I am now fed up to my teeth with increased costs. 
The threat of increased taxes and the degradation of the health 
care has me greatly concerned. When are you going to reduce 
government spending? And please, no increase in taxes of any 
kind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'm also pleased to 
answer this question on behalf of Ms. Ludlow from the hon. 
member from Wilkie. I said yesterday the following, and I want 
to repeat this to the House: 1990-91 operating expenses — we 
were not yet in office — 1990-91 operating expenses were 
$4.54 billion. That's the operation of government — schools, 
roads, hospitals, and so forth. In 1994-95 mid-year — we're 
getting a budget in a few moments — that figure was down 
from 4.54 to 4.24, or a reduction of $300 million less money for 
programs. 
 
I already gave you the Alberta comparisons on a per capita basis 
compared to Saskatchewan on a per capita basis. And we did 
that, as the Prairie Messenger has pointed out, in extremely 
difficult circumstances compared to Alberta. 
 
So I say to the hon. member opposite, this propagation of a 
myth — and that's what it is — by you and the Liberals, the 
Liberals and the Conservatives each trying to out right-wing  

each other about us not being efficient in government, is 
absolutely false by every statistical and absolutely every 
objective analysis. 
 
Look, you can argue this ideologically, you can be rhetorical, 
you can be political, but for goodness sake, do not try to change 
the plain, bald facts and truths. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Reductions 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to bring to the Assembly from G.W. Gilchrist from 
Saskatoon . . . perhaps the Premier knows him. 
 
And he says: Mr. Premier, I want to know why you are reluctant 
to let the people of this province help build the future by putting 
more money into our pockets through massive tax reductions. 
Also, why are you dishonestly taxing us through monopoly 
Crown corporations? That's from Mr. G.W. Gilchrist from 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I welcome 
these questions, because I say to the official opposition and to 
the opposition parties, with the greatest of respect, this is the 
least credible line of questioning that you could ever adopt, 
especially on budget day, as budget day today is. But 
nonetheless, that's your choice . . . oh, sorry, I forget, Mr. 
Speaker, these are not their questions; they're the questions of 
the public, so I take it back. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Former Opposition Leader, that I can do no 
better than to quote the Prairie Messenger. These are not the 
words of myself as Premier, but the words of the Prairie 
Messenger on the situation which we inherited from your 
administration in 1991: 
 
 The current Saskatchewan government inherited a mess 

proportionately far greater than that bequeathed to 
Klein, and Saskatchewan has not known the oil and gas 
revenues which have graced its western neighbour. Yet 
the success Saskatchewan has achieved in balancing its 
. . . (budget) makes. . . (the accomplishments in Alberta) 
seem quite trivial in comparison. 

 
Quite trivial by comparison. I say to the questioner that wrote to 
you, that what you should tell that person is what the people of 
Saskatchewan are telling me in the same requests of 
information you ask that they give to me. 
 
Here's one: 
 
 Where were you, Bill Boyd (the one that I got), when 

Grant Devine was so busy putting our province in debt? 
You're expounding on all the faults of Romanow's 
government who is putting this province back together  



February 16, 1995 

 
229 

and trying desperately to get us out of debt. So tell Roy 
where you were and why you didn't speak out then. I 
and many others would like to know. 

 
That's my question to you, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Size of Government 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 
obvious the Premier has a captivated audience here today and 
he's certainly taking full advantage of it. But I think, Mr. 
Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I think, Mr. Premier, you are doing the public of 
Saskatchewan a great disservice when you continue to reiterate 
the fact that the questions are kind of trivial when they're 
coming from people who have specific interests. 
 
And I would like to direct this question from Mr. J.M. Seitz 
from Zehner. Mr. Premier, I want to know why Saskatchewan 
needs such a big government. I want to know why we have to 
pay so much tax to keep funding big government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it 
absolutely clear that I don't belittle any of the questioners, nor 
do I belittle anybody who happens to be in the Chamber here 
watching this very important day, probably the most important 
day in our legislative session — the budget. 
 
Unlike you, sir, I think these questions are very valid questions. 
I'm saying the questions should be directed to you because 
you're the one who got the province in this particular mess. 
You're the person who has gotten the province at the point 
where we had the largest per capita deficit of all the provinces 
in Canada, and still probably have one of the largest if not the 
largest per capita debt, although that is also being tackled under 
the administration that we've inherited since November '91. 
 
But you keep on repeating this notion about big government. 
How many times do I have to tell you, sir, that in 1990-91 it 
was $4.54 billion. In 1993-94, the mid-year term . . . '94 mid-
year report, it was 4.2 operating. That's not big government — 
that's a reduction of 300 million. 
 
Now look, I know you're not going to accept it. I know the 
Liberal leader can't accept it. You people are in opposition. You 
have to oppose. You've got a very tough time opposing the 
budget. You've got a very tough time opposing what we've done 
for three years so you're grasping at straws to oppose anything. 
 
I know your job. I was there as opposition leader. The only 
difference, the only . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And you will again, Roy, you will again. 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I was there. The only difference 
was that when I got up to oppose, I had so many things to 
oppose that obviously the people of Saskatchewan agreed and 
elected us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Government 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday the Premier denied that there was any excess in his 
office, Mr. Speaker; that 88 people earning average salaries of 
$48,000 a year were absolutely essential to his performing his 
duties; that he couldn't get by with one less person. These 88 
people make up the largest political staff for any premier's 
office in western Canada, and Saskatchewan has the smallest 
population. 
 
By April 1994, Mr. Speaker, 101 nurses had lost their jobs in 
the city of Saskatoon. The emergency ward at City Hospital had 
to close at night to save $200,000 a year — the equivalent of 
4.5 of the Premier's 88 personal assistants that he cannot 
possibly function without. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier this afternoon. If, 
Mr. Premier, you had chosen to reduce the size of your own 
office, to bring it into line with New Brunswick, with Manitoba, 
or even Alberta, the $2 million saved could have kept the 
emergency ward open and saved 45 full-time nursing positions. 
 
What were the principles upon which you have made your 
choices about your own office, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The key principle, Mr. Speaker, I say 
to the Leader of the Liberal Party, was to have full and 
complete accounting of every person located in my office. 
Because when I inherited the premiership, we found out that 
superficially the numbers on the Premier's office indicated 
perhaps fewer numbers, but when we assumed office we found 
that there were all kinds of executive assistants buried away in 
every kind of a Crown corporation or ministerial office or every 
other agency. In fact this has been identified by the Gass report. 
 
And what we did was what you wanted us to do: put it up front 
and make it accountable. And therefore everybody who works 
for the Premier's office is identified in the Premier's office. 
 
It is unfair, it is political, it's desperate politics to be sure, to 
compare on this basis: 9.9 per 1,000 civil service is the ratio in 
Saskatchewan; your favourite beacon, Alberta, is 12.3 per 
1,000. And take a look at what it is in your other favourite 
beacon, the Liberal provinces. 
 
Now look, I have 88 people; they're all accounted for. At least 
they're there. I wish the Leader of the Third Party would get up 
and tell us about how many people were there, at least for a 
short time, in her office, and exited. Probably more than 88. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 16, 1995 

 
230 

The Speaker: — Order. Before we continue, I would ask the 
members in the galleries not to participate in the debate by 
either applauding or whatever method you may use. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
are talking about political staff, Mr. Speaker. We are not talking 
about a professional civil service in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not just about money, and it is certainly not 
the trivial issue that the Premier would like to make it today. 
This is about principle, it is about integrity, and it is about 
choices. 
 
The choices this government has made about spending precious 
tax dollars is indeed going to be its legacy, and the choices 
show precisely where this Premier and where his caucus, his 
government, place their priorities. This government has 
departments with budgets that would be unheard of in other 
provinces, including the Provincial Secretary and Executive 
Council. 
 
My question again is to the Premier. How can you defend your 
choice between keeping the Provincial Secretary, which has 
increased some 200 per cent under your administration and a 
surplus of 41 political assistants, rather than keeping the 
children's dental plan alive? Or sustaining chiropractic service 
levels? Or avoiding cuts to mental health services and alcohol 
and drug abuse programs in the province of Saskatchewan for 
our citizens? 
 
Will you please stand and defend your choices. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have no problems in 
standing and defending our choices, nor do I have any problems 
in standing and defending our professional civil service. 
 
I think again it is — if I may say so very gently — uncharitable, 
to put it mildly, for any responsible political leader to refer to 
people as the deputy minister to myself as being an 
unprofessional civil servant. He's worked for the federal Liberal 
Party governments; he's worked for Conservative federal 
governments. And if one wants to get into that game, without 
putting too fine a point about your particular situation in this 
regard — which I will refuse to do — I think is unbecoming. 
That's my first point. 
 
My second point is it gets a little bit tiresome to hear the Leader 
of the Liberal Party talk about principle and integrity as if she's 
the only person in the whole world who's got principle and 
integrity. If you've got so much, tell us about all these people 
that are coming in from Alberta to help your campaign out, and 
tell us if they're in your office being paid by the public under 
the communications allowance, or in your office and being paid 
for by the political party. You know the people I'm talking 
about. Everybody knows about them. You give us 
accountability there before you get up on principle and 
integrity. 
 

And I say to the Leader of the Third Party one more time, as I 
sit down in answering this question, it is unfair to say in any 
one department this is what happens. It is your job to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan, if the government is too big, what will 
you do away with? Where will you cut in Health? Where will 
you cut in Education? You can eliminate all 88 people in my 
office and you'll pay for three days of interest payments on the 
interest of the public debt — maybe four. Then tell us what 
you're going to do for the next 363 days. Will you have the 
courage to tell us that? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, we have a government that 
has made choices, and it has made choices not to reduce the 
size of its own government before going to the taxpayers of this 
province over and over again. Yesterday the Premier launched 
into a speech about how frugal a government he runs. He said 
the government was saving money and we just shouldn't be 
adding the interest on the debt. Okay, let's take it out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is again to this Premier. Your 
government spent, without interest payments, $64.981 million 
more in 1994-95 than the previous year. How, sir, does this 
equate to reducing the cost of government for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well you know, perhaps the Leader of 
the Liberal Party should talk to her very dear friends and 
cohorts in the federal Liberal Party. And perhaps she's not 
talking to them these days, because she was very much in 
favour of gun control at the May Liberal convention. That is an 
undisputed fact. And at that point . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I'll answer the question I want to 
answer. I listened to your question; I'm going to answer the way 
I want to answer. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Liberal Party, you were for gun 
control in May, and so therefore your Liberal kissing cousins in 
Ottawa loved you. Then you came out in Saskatchewan, 
realized the people thought this was unnecessary bureaucracy 
and red tape and cost, and you flip-flop. Now you're against gun 
control. So maybe you're not talking to them. 
 
But you should be talking to them, because I tell you as much 
of the increase in those numbers which you have indicated are 
due exactly because of the offload of your Liberal counterparts 
in Ottawa on unemployment insurance changes, on the reserve 
status with respect to the social service programs, and a whole 
host of variety of other areas where they have dumped on the 
provinces right across the country. If you've got a complaint, 
because we've had that increase, take it up with Mr. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 



February 16, 1995 

 
231 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Budget Measures 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Premier, earlier this afternoon, earlier in question period, 
you heard from the opposition what Saskatchewan people think 
of big government, big spending, the attitude of your 
government. And people all across this province have been 
writing us with regard to that, Mr. Speaker. And you, Mr. 
Premier, stand and call their questions not credible. I can't 
believe that, Mr. Premier. These questions didn't come from the 
opposition, they came from people all across this province. And 
there is no relief in sight. In today's paper the Finance minister 
says there's no cause for immediate tax relief. Instead you hold 
future tax cuts as an election gimmick. 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan taxpayers have heard that tune from 
you before, during the last election campaign. You promised no 
new taxes, and then you raised every single one of them. 
 
Mr. Premier, will today's budget make meaningful cuts on both 
sides of the ledger? Will we see cuts in government spending, 
and will we see those cuts passed along to the Saskatchewan 
people in the form of tax relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say to the 
Leader of the Opposition is of course stay tuned, because I 
think the next agenda item is the budget speech and you can 
make your own judgement. But I'll bet my bottom dollar that 
when most of the people of Saskatchewan are going to be 
rejoicing in the accomplishment and the turnaround, you'll find 
some reason to be negative. 
 
I want to tell you that I do not criticize any of the people who 
have written to you and the many who have written to me on 
your ask-the-Premier questions — not at all. I criticize you for 
having the audacity to get up under the guise of these innocent 
people and portray somehow this problem as a problem of our 
making when it is a problem of your making, your making, your 
making, and your making. 
 
And I say to you, sir, everybody in Saskatchewan who's been 
watching what we've been doing in this province will reject the 
notion of slashing and hacking and destroying government. 
When you talk about less government, what you're really talking 
about is no government. That's what the Liberals and the 
Conservatives stand for; we don't. We believe government is no 
more, no less, than the people. And the people want a quality of 
life; they want good health care; they want good education; 
they're prepared to pay fair taxes, fairly applied; they want 
reduction in government. And we're going to provide them. 
Stay tuned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could, as it relates 
to questions 1 and 2, I hereby table the answers. 
 
The Speaker:  Answers to questions 1 and 2 tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: —  
 
 The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1996, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for 12 months ending March 31, 1995, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Riversdale: 
 
 That His Honour's message, the estimates, and 

supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee 
of Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, there are many special 
guests in this legislature today. With your indulgence I would 
like to begin, as in other years, by introducing four of these 
guests to the Assembly. First — and I'd ask them to stand please 
— my husband, Peter MacKinnon, who is also the dean of the 
law school at the University of Saskatchewan; my son, Alan 
MacKinnon, who is a grade 10 student and a wrestler; my son, 
William MacKinnon, who is a grade 7 student and soccer and 
basketball player; and my neighbour, Bill Kinloch, who is also a 
veteran of the Second World War. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure to rise today to present Saskatchewan people with their 
first balanced budget in over a decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



February 16, 1995 

 
232 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — But, Mr. Speaker, what I am 
presenting here today is not just one balanced budget. I'm 
pleased to announce that the budget for the current year, 1994-
1995, will be balanced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Further, the budget I am presenting 
today for 1995-1996 will also be balanced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, this is not just two 
balanced budgets. I'm proud to present our new financial plan 
which projects three more balanced budgets through 1998-99. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, that is five consecutive 
balanced budgets, a half decade of sustainable, balanced 
budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This is an achievement in which all 
Saskatchewan people can take pride. Each and every one of us 
has made our contributions to this success. Each and every one 
of us has done our part. Saskatchewan has gone from the brink 
of a financial crisis to being the first province in Canada to 
balance its budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Once again, Saskatchewan people 
have led the way. We are a model for the rest of the country. 
We have shown the nation how to meet the challenges of a 
changing world with courage, vision, and compassion. We did 
it with a common sense plan, the balanced budget plan. 
 
The plan set specific goals and targets. It built for the future by 
stimulating economic growth and creating jobs. It remained true 
to our community's fundamental values of caring, compassion, 
and cooperation. The plan succeeded because of the hard work 
and commitment of Saskatchewan people. We did it together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1415) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Since 1991 we've gone from a 
deficit of $842 million, one of the highest per capita deficits in 
Canada, to being the first province to achieve sustainable 
balanced budgets. We've gone from negative economic growth 
in 1992 to one of the strongest growth rates in Canada for the 
last two years. We've travelled from a time of uncertainty and 
insecurity to a time of confidence and security. 
 
A half decade of balanced budgets establishes a solid and 
secure foundation for Saskatchewan's future. Now is the time to  

build on that foundation together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to present today our new financial 
plan for Saskatchewan's future, a plan which will prepare us for 
the 21st century. The debt management plan I am tabling today 
includes a strategy to pay down the debt so that our children 
and our grandchildren will not be burdened with our bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — A strategy to move toward the ideals 
of full employment and full employability; a strategy to 
improve our quality of life by improving on health and 
education programs; a strategy to allow Saskatchewan people to 
reap the rewards of their past sacrifices. 
 
Because we have come so far in just three years, we've earned 
the freedom to dream new dreams for ourselves and for our 
children. Saskatchewan people have a right to ask: will this new 
plan work? I can tell them with confidence it will, because it 
builds on what we've already accomplished together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Sound financial management is a 
precondition to economic growth. Business is reluctant to invest 
in a province that cannot manage its money. Saskatchewan's 
recent fiscal record has restored confidence in our economy. 
 
Moreover, stimulating economic growth was one of our key 
strategies in balancing the budget. We reached our deficit 
targets not only by cutting spending, but also by promoting 
economic development to increase our revenues. 
 
There are many examples. We redesigned our oil and gas 
royalty structure to encourage more exploration and production. 
We changed our approach to agriculture to encourage 
diversification and more value added production. We provided 
targeted tax reductions to business to encourage investment. 
 
Our approach is paying dividends. Over $1 billion was invested 
by our oil and gas industry in 1994. Annual oil production is up 
more than 15 per cent and hundreds of jobs have been created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Realized net farm income in 1994 is 
estimated to be $925 million, 69 per cent higher than the 
previous 10-year average. Farm cash receipts are the highest in 
the history of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Retail sales increased by more than 
9 per cent last year — the best performance since 1982. This 
revival in consumer confidence helped create more than 850 
jobs . . . 8,500 jobs in our service industries in 1994. 
 



February 16, 1995 

 
233 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This is a solid foundation upon 
which we can build; and we will, by making jobs our number 
one priority, by making our long-term ideal full employment — 
everyone needing a job should have one — by continuing to 
implement our economic development plan, Partnership for 
Renewal. 
 
The 1995-96 budget provides increased financial support for 
regional economic development authorities. This budget 
provides support for the Saskatchewan Research Council to 
help companies develop and market their new ideas and 
technologies — help to turn good ideas into good jobs. 
 
This year government departments and Crown corporations will 
spend more than $825 million on capital projects across the 
province — creating jobs today while investing for the future. 
 
Another $20 million has been committed to the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation. This unique corporation will enter 
into new partnerships with private businesses, communities, 
and other levels of government, to improve the quality of our 
roads and highways — creating jobs today while investing for 
the future. 
 
The Saskatchewan infrastructure program will continue, with a 
total investment of $91 million for over 320 projects ranging 
from roads to a biofermentation plant — creating jobs today 
while investing for the future. 
 
To enable our municipalities to maintain and improve their 
services, this budget commits 10 per cent of VLT (video lottery 
terminal) revenues to local communities. Revenue-sharing 
grants will continue at this year's level in both in 1995-96 and 
1996-97. 
 
Building stronger communities is an important part of this 
budget; so is helping business create jobs. Since 1991, a 
component of our job strategy has been targeted tax reductions 
to business. Over the last four years our government has 
reduced the corporation income tax rate for Saskatchewan small 
businesses by 20 per cent. The small business tax rate in 
Saskatchewan is now 8 per cent, the second lowest provincial 
rate west of Quebec. 
 
The budget I am presenting today builds on our strategy of 
targeted tax reduction tied to job creation. Effective March 1, 
1995, the fuel tax on aviation turbo fuel will be reduced from 7 
cents per litre to three and a half cents per litre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The fuel tax on aviation gasoline for 
commercial or business purposes will also be effectively 
reduced to three and a half cents per litre. Our government will 
press the airline industry to increase its fuel services and 
improve airline service to the province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are committed to processing and 
manufacturing our resources within Saskatchewan rather than 
exporting processing jobs. An example of the benefits of value 
added processing is Canamino. Using biotechnology research, 
this company processes oats into a fine powder which is used in 
cosmetics. The export value of a tonne of raw oats is a little 
over $80. The value of a tonne of the processed powder is 
$9,000. 
 
By promoting value added processing, we are finding new uses 
for our agricultural products; at the same time, we are creating 
good, long-term jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We have encouraged the expansion 
of our manufacturing and processing industries in a number of 
ways, including the elimination of the education and health tax 
on direct agents. This strategy is paying dividends. 
Manufacturing shipments grew by over 17 per cent in 1994, the 
strongest growth in over a decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Two thousand new manufacturing 
jobs were created in 1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to announce that we are building on 
this solid foundation by introducing, effective midnight tonight, 
a non-refundable 9 per cent investment tax credit. This tax 
credit will apply to capital purchases in support of 
manufacturing and processing activity in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The credit will be applied against 
corporation income tax payable and will effectively reduce the 
cost of capital expansions in Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, effective July 1, 1995 the corporation income tax 
rate for manufacturing and processing firms will be reduced. 
The amount of the tax reduction will be tied to a company's 
presence in Saskatchewan. The more business activity and jobs 
located here, the more the tax rate will be reduced. 
 
For Saskatchewan-based companies, the corporation income tax 
rate for manufacturing and processing will be reduced from 17 
per cent to as low as 10 per cent, the lowest of any province in 
western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — These tax changes will encourage 
further expansion of our growing manufacturing and processing 
companies and create good long-term jobs for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Adding value to our products is also a key component of our 
agricultural plan, Agriculture 2000. To encourage  



February 16, 1995 

 
234 

diversification in agriculture, our government has created the 
agri-food innovation fund. This fund will enhance research and 
development in areas such as speciality crops, livestock, and 
non-food use of agricultural products. This is an important link 
in building on our agricultural biotechnology strength. 
 
Where would Saskatchewan farmers be today without canola? 
We developed canola here by investing in the necessary 
research. Last year Saskatchewan farmers grew almost a billion 
dollars worth of canola. By investing today to promote the 
development of new products, we are looking to the future. We 
want new products, expanded opportunities, and greater income 
security for our farmers today and into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Providing security for farm families 
is also the goal of our farm safety net programs, which have 
three components: the whole farm stabilization account 
provides protection against drops in income by encouraging 
saving during good years; the sector program provides 
protection against drops in revenue from grains, oilseeds, and 
specialty crops; and crop insurance provides protection against 
production and quality losses. 
 
Through the new safety net programs, crop insurance, and the 
farm fuel program, the Government of Saskatchewan will 
contribute more than $350 million to agriculture this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, our strategy to achieve 
our long-term ideal of full employment involves building on 
our agricultural strength, promoting value added processing and 
biotechnology, using targeted tax cuts to business, investing in 
infrastructure, and working in partnership with others in the 
community. 
 
Full employment must go hand in hand with full employability, 
ensuring that our people have the education, skills, and 
experience they need to get a job. We need jobs but we also 
need people with the skills, training, and experience required 
for those jobs. That's why we're working with the federal 
government to improve our training programs by providing 
better information about job prospects; working more closely 
with communities, education institutions, and industry to 
determine what kind of practical training will be required today 
and into the future. 
 
We are also committed to linking training and the workplace 
more effectively. That is why we are expanding our 
apprenticeship programs; that is why we are helping business 
provide immediate training, so that Saskatchewan people can 
secure the new jobs resulting from our economic comeback. 
That is why we are providing more funding to public training 
institutions, to allow them to give Saskatchewan people the 
skills they need immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Our youth merit special attention. 
Across Canada unemployment levels for young people are too 
high. Young people have told us they need help getting that first 
job so they can get work experience. We have listened. We are 
acting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, JobStart will provide new training and 
employment opportunities for young people to help them get 
that important first job. JobStart will provide work-based 
training that will lead to sustainable employment for young 
people who don't have a post-secondary education; 
opportunities for post-secondary graduates to begin their careers 
with small and medium-sized growth firms which need the 
expertise of graduates to develop new products and ideas; help 
for young people to move from welfare to work, but who also 
need training, counselling, and support. 
 
This budget will also assist another 2,400 students to get 
summer jobs to help them pay for their education and gain work 
experience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The 1995-96 budget also creates 
new summer jobs in reforestation. Due to poor forest 
management practices in the past, thousands of hectares of land 
were not properly restocked. We are beginning the long process 
of eliminating this backlog. Reforestation helps to preserve our 
environment, which is so crucial to our high quality of life, the 
same time it creates jobs for our young people. 
 
Preparing our youth for the challenges of the 21st century 
requires a quality and accessible education system. Mr. Speaker, 
I'm pleased to announce that funding for local school boards, 
universities, regional and federated colleges and SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
will continue at this year's levels in 1995-96. In 1996-97, there 
will be a 2 per cent increase in funding to these institutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Financial barriers to higher 
education will be lessened by improvements to the student aid 
program. These changes will help ensure that student loans 
more accurately reflect the true cost of living. There also will be 
a special grant program targeted at high need, under-
represented, and disabled students. 
 
Geographical barriers to education will be reduced with a 
distance education initiative. More than 100 education sites will 
be connected with the information highway. Because of this 
exciting new initiative, children and adults in rural and northern 
Saskatchewan will have access to advanced technical training 
right in their own communities. 
 
Quality education and good health are key contributors to our 
high quality of life. To save medicare, we had to change our 
health care system. Our system was outdated. It was out of step 
with health realities, such as the declining need for  



February 16, 1995 

 
235 

hospitalization and the greater awareness of prevention. The 
system was not coordinated. Its costs were sky-rocketing and it 
was not fully meeting people's needs. 
 
Our plan, working together toward wellness, is creating a 
people-centred health system by spending less on institutions 
and more on services for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Placing control of health services in 
the hands of local people. Giving people more control over their 
health by emphasizing prevention. Providing health services as 
close as possible to people's homes. 
 
Already much progress has been made. Cumbersome and costly 
administration has been cut and services have been expanded. 
More than 400 health boards have been replaced by 30 locally 
controlled district health boards. These health boards are cutting 
administrative costs. For example, in Prince Albert 13 
management and administrative positions have been eliminated. 
The savings are being used to enhance home care services. 
 
Home and community-based services have also been expanded. 
For example, the Saskatoon district health board has reduced 
expensive acute care services by over 5 per cent. These savings 
are being used to enhance home care services by nearly 60 per 
cent, and community-based services by nearly 20 per cent. 
 
Our health care changes have been internationally recognized. 
For example, the Pan American Health Organization said the 
efforts being undertaken in Saskatchewan could serve as an 
inspiration and impetus for change in our member countries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Now is the time to build on this 
solid foundation and provide health boards with the resources 
they need to improve the locally controlled home-based and 
preventative programs that people want and need. 
 
Home care is one of the cornerstones of seniors' independence. 
We have already increased funding for home-based services by 
nearly 60 per cent since 1991. But people, especially seniors, 
have said they want further improvements. 
 
We listened. We are acting. We are investing in home and 
community-based care to meet the practical needs of people. 
With the 1995-96 budget, funding for home-based services will 
have increased by over 90 per cent since 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This commitment to home and 
community-based services will allow districts to reduce fees, to 
make home care more accessible, improve palliative care, and 
offer respite for family members of the chronically ill. 

District health boards are already working on improvements to 
services as a result of the additional support provided in this 
budget. For example, Swift Current is providing round the clock 
home care services. The Battlefords is developing a program so 
that more patients can receive quality health care at home rather 
than in institutions. 
 
To take health care into the 21st century, we are also investing 
in a province-wide health information system which will help 
eliminate the waste and inconvenience of duplicate testing, 
determine which tests and treatments actually help patients. Our 
continued progress in renewing Saskatchewan's health system 
means that by the year 2000 we will have a sustainable system 
that is there when it is needed, provides the best and most 
appropriate care, prevents injury and disease, and is locally 
controlled by local communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, everyone in 
Saskatchewan contributed to eliminating the deficit. Everyone 
did their part. In return, this government gave two 
commitments. First, that we would work continuously to 
eliminate waste and reduce the cost of operating government. 
We are living up to that commitment. 
 
Since 1991 we have reduced the cost of running this 
government by over $75 million through such measures as 
cutting cabinet ministers' salaries by 5 per cent; reducing the 
number of government departments. This year, another $5 
million will be saved by implementing further common sense 
changes. Examples include implementing an energy 
management and conservation program for government 
buildings; processing Saskatchewan savings bonds applications 
in-house. 
 
Further, I make the commitment that this government will 
continue to review, on an ongoing basis, government operations 
to ensure that services are being delivered as cost-effectively as 
possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Our second commitment to 
Saskatchewan people was that as times improved, our finances 
improved, taxes would be reduced. Because we have achieved 
sustainable balanced budgets, we will meet our commitment to 
reduce taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to announce that effective July 1, 
1995, the deficit surtax will be eliminated for lower income 
earners and significantly reduced for all other provincial 
taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This will be accomplished by 
providing an annual reduction against the surtax of $150 per 
taxpayer and $300 per dual income family. This reduction will  



February 16, 1995 

 
236 

mean 6,000 lower income taxpayers will no longer pay 
Saskatchewan income tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Two-income families earning up to 
$34,000 will no longer pay the surtax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Two-income families earning up to 
$65,000 will see their surtax reduced by more than 50 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The tax cuts in this budget are 
responsible and affordable. Saskatchewan people can be secure 
in the knowledge that these tax cuts are sustainable — today, 
tomorrow, and into the 21st century. 
 
Because the deficit has been eliminated, the money raised from 
this surtax will now be used to assist in paying down the debt. 
The debt reduction surtax reflects our commitment to paying 
down the debt as outlined in our debt management plan. I'm 
pleased to table that plan today. 
 
Now that we have achieved sustainable balanced budgets, it's 
time to set out a new plan for the future and to begin to pay 
down the debt. People have told me many times they never 
want to return to the 1980s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The 1980s, when government gave 
irresponsible tax cuts, overspent, and racked up huge debts. 
We've already taken steps to guard against this by opening the 
books of the province. People are now being shown a true 
picture of the province's finances. The laws of the province 
require timely release of the public accounts, full disclosure of 
the activities of Crown corporations, and the use of accrual 
accounting, which forces the government to budget today for its 
commitments, a bit like a family being forced to throw away its 
credit card and live within its means. 
 
These and other changes have prompted the Provincial Auditor 
to report the government moved from providing what the 
Financial Management Review Commission viewed as the 
weakest and least useful financial statements in Canada to 
providing one of the most useful financial statements issued by 
a senior government in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — We have come a long way in 
improving accountability. And we have come a long way in 
ending the mortgaging of Saskatchewan's future. In the 1980s 
an average of $1 billion a year was added to the province's debt. 
One goal of our balanced budget plan was to stop adding to that 
debt. 

The next goal is to reduce that debt. Paying down the debt is 
like reducing the mortgage on one's house. As the debt is 
repaid, interest payments decline, leaving more revenue for 
other purposes. We have begun to reduce Saskatchewan's debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
announce that for 1994-95 not only did we balance the budget, 
we project a $119 million surplus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — For the first time in over a decade, 
we are reducing debt rather than adding to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The process of paying off 
Saskatchewan's mortgage has begun. We have taken the first 
step on the road to even greater financial security for our 
children and our grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1994-95, by operating with a budget surplus, by 
reducing Crown corporation debt, by renegotiating megaproject 
deals, we will reduce the province's debt by $540 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — In one year, our total debt will be 
reduced by over half a billion dollars. 
 
This is a giant step forward, but it is still only the first step. We 
are building on this solid foundation with our debt management 
plan and balanced budget legislation. 
 
Our balanced budget legislation will force governments to set 
out long-term financial and debt management plans for 
sustainable balanced budgets. 
 
Our debt management plan outlines how we are going to 
allocate surpluses and reduce the debt. From April 1, 1994 to 
March 31, 1999, this debt management plan will reduce 
Saskatchewan's total debt by $1.2 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — In 1994 our total provincial debt 
amounted to 70 per cent of Saskatchewan's gross domestic 
product. By 1999, this 70 per cent will be lowered to 51 per 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Over the next four years our debt 
management plan gives equal priority to three objectives: one- 



February 16, 1995 

 
237 

third will go to paying down the debt; one-third will go to 
reducing taxes; one-third will go to improving our quality of 
life by helping to create jobs, educating our youth, and 
improving our health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The goal of our first financial plan 
was creating sustainable balanced budgets. That goal has been 
achieved. 
 
Our new financial plan outlines how, with planned, regular 
payments, we can pay down the mortgage on Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we are turning our back on past problems 
and fixing our gaze firmly on tomorrow. We are leaving behind 
more than a decade of deficits. We are beginning a new era of 
greater financial security and freedom. We can look with 
enthusiasm to a brighter future. A future where economic 
growth and jobs are our main priority; where our quality of life 
can be improved; where we can dream new dreams for 
ourselves and for our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Together we have earned new 
freedom. But Saskatchewan people have also learned from the 
past to use our freedom responsibly and wisely, with 
moderation and balance. 
 
There will be those who say we should have spent more on 
programs and services. To them I say we cannot return to the 
days of spending money that we do not have. There will be 
those who say we should have cut taxes more. To them I say, 
remember the 1980s when irresponsible tax cuts led to higher 
deficit and higher taxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — There will be those who say that all 
of our additional money should have gone to paying down the 
debt. To them I say, repaying the debt is important but we must 
almost meet the needs of people today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — My friends, we have come a long 
way together. We still have some distance to go. But let us 
reflect with pride on what we have achieved together. We have 
secured our future. We have delivered on our promise to our 
children and grandchildren — there is a new day dawning for 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the hon. member from Riversdale: 
 
  

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Premier, hon. colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
I rise with honour to respond to the budget speech on behalf of 
the official opposition and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, a reduction in deficit financing is what every 
government should strive to achieve. 
 
The speech delivered this afternoon by the hon. Finance 
minister represents a balanced budget for which the government 
deserves its due recognition. The government also deserves 
recognition for how it achieved the balanced budget, but this 
recognition is one that the members opposite will not so eagerly 
like to hear. 
 
Let's talk about how you did it, Madam Finance Minister. Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn't take an accountant to note that this budget 
will be balanced entirely, entirely on the revenue side of the 
ledger. The budget clearly shows that a huge increase in oil and 
gas activities, much improved agricultural income, increased 
export activities, and a massive increase in tax revenue, were 
the primary catalysts for the reduction in the deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to briefly examine each of these. Mr. 
Speaker, I'm from the oil patch, and yes, it's booming. Last year 
the government received 250 more millions of dollars than it 
budgeted for from the oil and gas sector — a quarter of a billion 
dollars more than it budgeted for. 
 
This year, this year they're projecting revenues of $416 million. 
How did this come about? How did this come about, Mr. 
Speaker? It's not what the government did, but it's what they 
didn't do. 
 
Remember how the members opposite hated the oil companies? 
Remember prior to 1991 when those members considered the 
people of the oil and gas industry to be the great robber barons 
of the world? If they became government, they said they were 
going to raise oil and gas revenues and make those big, bad oil 
companies pay. 
 
Well last year, well last year, Mr. Speaker, it almost happened. 
Until somebody over there figured out that maybe the oil and 
gas sector wasn't so bad after all. Maybe they created lots of 
jobs and economic activity across this province. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, they left, they left the taxes on oil and gas virtually 
untouched. They got out of the way, to the benefit of the entire 
province. 
 
The same thing applies to agriculture. Except for our friends in 
the pork industry, Saskatchewan agriculture has turned around 
as a result of good crops and an increase in commodity prices. 
We can thank the weather for the crops and less government for 
the increase in the prices. A planned reduction in international 
tariffs was the answer. 
 



February 16, 1995 

 
238 

The same goes for trade. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier and his 
caucus colleagues dashed the Free Trade Agreement and 
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement); two 
agreements which are substantially reducing the role of 
governments in exports and imports. Well not any more. These 
agreements are now being embraced by the provincial 
government and the export of Saskatchewan goods and services 
to the U.S. (United States) and Mexico are now one of the 
saviours of our economy. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, somebody over there finally figured out 
that less government would be good for trade and good for 
Saskatchewan. The concept is simple: get government 
bureaucracy, red tape, tariffs, and taxes, out of the way of free 
enterprise and watch them go. Watch them grow. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this same, simple concept was not 
followed all the way through. The government decided that 
more revenue, more revenue, could be squeezed out of 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, to go through the litany of 
income tax increases, PST (provincial sales tax) increases, 
utility rate increases, and fee increases, would take the rest of 
my limited time this afternoon. 
 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people, are now burdened 
with one of the heaviest tax loads in this entire country, the 
heaviest tax load in this entire country. Last year revenue from 
taxation was up another $250 million from the previous year. 
This year they estimate another 30 million on top of last year. 
 
Crown Corporation revenues are reaping record profits from 
utility rate increases, so much in fact the government transferred 
an additional 75 million to general revenue. And they're finding 
even new ways to soak Saskatchewan families. The Premier 
decided that farm families didn't have it bad enough already so 
he took nearly $190 million from their GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) premiums and threw it into general revenue. 
 
And the government members are proud of this. The self-
esteem that beams from the Finance minister and the Premier 
serves to illuminate the truth, that this budget displays the fruits 
of a bumper harvest on the hard-working men and women of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, have you ever seen a government so proud of this 
accomplishment? Have you ever seen a Premier so pleased with 
the hundreds of millions of dollars generated through income 
taxes, provincial sales taxes, utility rates and fees — so pleased 
that the hard-working men and women of this province are 
really under the load? 
 
Take the case of the baker from Saskatoon, Waverly Stechyshyn 
who said in the Star-Phoenix and I quote: 
 
 How do I feel when I hear the government talking about 

balancing its budget? I feel depressed. Why? Because 
where does it come from? It all comes from small 
business, from taxpayers. 

He went on to say that: 
 
 Taxes, you gotta pay this, you gotta pay that. I mean, if I 

hadn't had to cover all these increased costs, I could hire 
more people or pay my employees more, or they could 
spend their money and create more sales. 

 
This comes from the front lines of the war fought on the wrong 
battlefield, Mr. Speaker, and it speaks to the very heart of the 
Premier's tax and spend policy. 
 
And economists agree with business and working people. 
University of Saskatchewan economics professor Eric Howe 
said, and I quote: 
 
 "The NDP is getting us out of our provincial budget 

deficit through higher taxes and higher utility rates," . . . 
"The effect of both of those things is to weaken job 
growth." 

 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn't have said it better myself. However 
someone else has said it better. This individual said on May 2, 
1991, and I quote: 
 
 . . . taxes are the silent killer of jobs . . . enough is 

enough . . . higher taxes do not create jobs, higher taxes 
take jobs out of the economy. 

 
That of course was none other than the Hon. Premier from 
Saskatoon Riversdale, just months before he launched into the 
most ambitious tax grab in the history of this province, the 
fruits of what we see in today's budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he had a choice. There was an alternative. He 
could have had the courage to start with his own government. 
He could have reduced spending. He could have just looked 
west to Alberta to see how deficit reduction can be done in 
conjunction with economic development — just look west — 
because truly, Mr. Speaker, this is the tale of two provinces. 
Alberta was faced with a massive deficit similar to 
Saskatchewan for many of the same reasons. Alberta has a 
Premier who had the courage to cut cabinet, cut spending, cut 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) pensions, and hold 
the line on taxes. 
 
Saskatchewan has a Premier who chose 18 cabinet ministers; 
increase spending in 19 of 26 departments in this budget; 
increase overall spending by half a billion dollars since 1991; 
and keep his own million-dollar pension. All in the favour of 
tax increases to the average Saskatchewan family. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to Maclean's magazine, total 
government spending in Alberta will have dropped 18.5 per 
cent, with revenues up only 7.2 per cent since 1992. In 
Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan, total government spending has 
increased by 3.2 per cent, up 3.2 per cent, with revenues, taxes, 
up 25.2 per cent since 1991. Both provinces are balancing their  



February 16, 1995 

 
239 

budgets ahead of schedule, but the tale of the two provinces 
doesn't end here. There's another chapter to consider. 
 
The Alberta Premier created 79,400 new jobs since taking 
power, compared to the Saskatchewan Premier's loss of 1,000 
jobs. In its mid-year report, the Fraser Institute said: 
 
 Alberta gives Canadians the ideas needed for revamping 

the contract between government and the people. In 
short, it provides a framework to move away from the 
dependency on government to self-sufficiency. 

 
Checkmate, Mr. Speaker. I can understand now why the 
Premier of Saskatchewan told Premier Klein that he really 
wasn't NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the people of Saskatchewan 
wanted their Premier to cut before taxing, and they got the exact 
opposite. They believed the Premier. They believed the Premier 
when he promised the PST was going to be gone on October 
21, 1991. They believed the Premier when he said, enough is 
enough; no new taxes. They believed the member from 
Riversdale when he said, $4.5 billion is enough of government 
spending. And now you spend $5 billion — $500 million more 
than in 1991 when he took over office. That's why the people of 
this province voted for him. 
 
They don't believe him any more. They don't trust him, and it's 
no small wonder. In spite of having enough tax money to 
balance the books last year, in spite of having more than enough 
to balance the books this year, the Premier's Finance minister 
said in today's paper that she won't reduce taxes now. She says 
the NDP plan to gradually reduce taxes over the next four years 
in a budget that will double — that will double as the NDP's 
election platform. She is saying, no tax relief until you vote us 
back into government. 
 
And the Liberal leader agrees. She is quoted in the same article 
as saying only the government is in a position to determine 
which taxes to cut and when the timing is right. 
 
The translation, ladies and gentlemen, the Liberal leader is 
really saying, vote for me and if I'm in government, I'll decide if 
and when your taxes will be reduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people don't trust politicians. People don't trust the 
Premier, people don't trust me, and they certainly don't trust the 
Liberal Leader of the Third Party, who continues to be 
everything to everyone, promising 300 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think we should allow the 
member to have his say this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal leader, the 
Leader of the Third Party, continues to try to be everything to 
everyone, promising already — and we're not even into an  

election campaign — promising already, Mr. Speaker, $350 
million in government spending. 
 
So how do we avoid the tax-and-spend policies and the politics 
that all governments love to employ, Mr. Speaker? The solution 
is simple. Take the decision away from the politicians and give 
it back to the people. The people know, the people of this 
province know we've hit a tax wall and they're not going to take 
it any more. 
 
It's time for the taxpayers to start restraining government instead 
of the other way around. Grievance before supply — what a 
novel idea, Mr. Speaker, and it works. It works. 
 
The experience of 23 American states suggests that taxes shrink 
in proportion to the constitutional control that citizens enjoy 
over the public purse. In the 23 states with tax and expenditure 
limitations, per capita spending fell from 6.4 per cent above the 
national average the first year they were enacted, to an average 
of 1.7 per cent above the U.S. national average. 
 
Yet when the official opposition brought forward legislation 
just the other day to bring this about for Saskatchewan people, 
the Premier squealed like someone who had his piggy bank 
taken away from him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, . . . (inaudible) . . . contains a provision that will 
force the provincial government to go to the people that they 
serve before they raise any more taxes. That means that in any 
given circumstance the Premier must cut his own spending first 
and foremost. 
 
We asked the Premier just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, if he would 
support our legislation that hamstrings the spending habits of 
his government and of all provincial governments in the future. 
All he said was that he's got his own legislation on the drawing 
board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've heard what he's been proposing. To be kind, 
it's weak and ineffectual. The Premier's proposals allow the 
government to run a deficit and to tax Saskatchewan families at 
will. And if you allow it to happen, it will happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier even says that on many occasions deficits are 
necessary. The Premier said it's easy to run up a deficit in 
Saskatchewan. In fact, he told the chamber of commerce just 
last December that he doesn't want to be forced to balance the 
budget every year because, he said, and I quote: a government 
can't control or plan for calamities like drought, a bad harvest, 
or a sudden decline in resource prices. Well what a revelation 
from the benches opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the mid and late 1980s, that's exactly what 
happened. And yet the Premier viciously attacked the deficits of 
the 1980s. He called those years Saskatchewan's darkest hour. 
But when asked if he believes he should be forced, he should be 
forced into balanced budgets, these things are now viewed by 
him as unforeseen events that government can't possibly  



February 16, 1995 

 
240 

forecast. It's that kind of policy and fiscal two-step that has the 
people of this province fuming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier says he's not NDP to other premiers when he's 
away from home. The Finance minister says she wouldn't dare 
lower taxes because the resulting economic development and 
job creation for Saskatchewan people would mean we might 
lose transfer payments from the federal government — a classic 
welfare mentality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The former Labour minister and now Associate Minister of 
Finance says that Saskatchewan business people are ruthless 
and greedy. It's all very confusing, Mr. Speaker, because, like 
this budget, these comments are based on fundamentally flawed 
thinking. The budget process which led to this balanced budget 
was as simple as tax, squeeze, and intimidate. 
 
Contrary to the thinking, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition 
has brought forward an alternative to the government's deficit 
reduction, one based on what we hold is a better way because 
it's based on ideals and beliefs which originated from the 
bottom up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our actions are based on the following. We 
believe in the almost unlimited capacity of the individual and 
that government should be . . . should allow the individual the 
maximum freedom to create and to achieve and to prosper. We 
believe in individual rights and freedoms, but we also believe 
that with every right comes an equivalent amount of 
responsibility and that people must take responsibility for their 
actions. We believe in law and order. We believe that we 
should start restraining government instead of restraining the 
individual. 
 
We believe in small business as the catalyst of our economy and 
that small-business men and women do not need direct help 
from government to build our economy and create jobs. All 
they need — all they need is for the government to get out of 
their way. 
 
We believe that government's compassion should not be 
measured by the number of people receiving government 
assistance, but instead by the number of people who no longer 
require government assistance. And we believe that the most 
important social structure in our society is not government; it is 
the family. And that most government programs aimed at 
families, no matter how well-intentioned they may be, do not 
build stronger family values but in many cases serve to erode 
those family values. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what I believe. This is what my party 
believes is what we will deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, knowing that this budget, this budget is built on 
the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayers, I will not be supporting 
it. There is much more to say and much more to do, Mr. 
Speaker, but in the interests of time I would move that this 
budget debate be adjourned until tomorrow's session. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 
 That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do 

now resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be 
resumed on Friday, February 17, 1995. 

 
I'd like to change that to: seconded by the member from Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:13 p.m. 
 
 
 


