






















































May 5, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 5, 1995 

 

 
2001 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
to present today from the people of Saskatchewan. The petition 
reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Rose Valley, 
Fosston, Clair area of the province. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to the federal firearm legislation. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 62 . . . 67 ask the government the following 
question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Agriculture and Food: (1) 

what was the cost of sending Bob Ford and Wes Mazer 
to the effective executive program at Waskesiu in 1992; 
(2) what was the cost of sending Ernie Spencer to the 
effective executive program at Waskesiu in 1993; (3) 
what are the names of all Agriculture and Food 
employees who participated in the effective executive 
program at Waskesiu in 1994; (4) what are all costs 
associated with these employees attending this seminar; 
(5) what are the names of all Agriculture and Food 
employees who have enrolled in this seminar for the 
current year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 
great pleasure for me this morning to introduce to you and 
through you to my colleagues in the legislature, 50 students  

from grade 5 from the town of Lumsden seated in your gallery. 
These students are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Ray 
Tourney and Mrs. T. Rieger. And I'm happy to say that they 
come here on a regular basis with their students, which leads 
me to think that they think the trip is worthwhile. 
 
I'm looking forward to meeting with them later, and I would ask 
everyone to join me in giving them a warm welcome. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join 
with my colleague from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden to welcome 
members of my community, grade 5. Mr. Tourney was my son's 
teacher many years ago — he'll be graduating from high school 
this year — and our legal assistant's son, Doug, is part of this 
class as well. 
 
I'd like everyone to join with me in welcoming them again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, two good 
friends of mine who are seated in the west gallery: Grant and 
Llona Sundholm who've ventured from Rose Valley to watch 
the proceedings. They're accompanied by their daughter Shelley 
from Regina. 
 
I welcome them here today, and I'd like all members to do the 
same. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Labour Force Statistics 
 
Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I know many of the members 
opposite will soon be looking for work, and being unemployed 
can be discouraging. But they should take heart in the latest 
labour force statistics. 
 
According to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan's unemployment 
rate for April was 7.4 per cent, which is 1.5 per cent lower than 
April 1994 when it was 8.9 per cent. 
 
Saskatchewan continues to enjoy the lowest unemployment rate 
in the country. We're almost a whole per cent ahead of Alberta 
and well below the national rate, which is 10 per cent compared 
to our 7.4, and way ahead of New Brunswick's 13.7 per cent 
unemployment rate. 
 
In various sectors, Mr. Speaker, there's also good news. For 
example, the number of people employed in agriculture was up 
by 3,000 for a 7 per cent increase. And in transportation and 
communication, 2,000 more people are working. Overall 6,000  



May 5, 1995 

 
2002 

more people have jobs in April of this year than April of last 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good economic policies, a balanced budget, and 
reduced taxation for businesses, has led to investor confidence 
in our province. Every day we hear more announcements of 
plant expansions and new companies. Saskatchewan is working 
again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future Skills Program in Biggar 
 
Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the risk of 
having too much good news announced in one week, I want to 
mention another successful, targeted, necessary, Future Skills 
program — this one in Biggar in my constituency. 
 
Recently the Minister of Economic Development announced the 
construction of a high-tech greenhouse in Biggar by Microgro 
International Research Inc. This greenhouse will use 
micropropagation to produce unlimited numbers of genetically 
identical plants from a specifically selected original plant. I will 
try and explain what I just said in lay terms after question 
period. 
 
The Quick Skills training option of Future Skills program is 
training 12 workers for employment in this greenhouse. Like 
the program mentioned yesterday by the member from 
Redberry, the technology for this greenhouse is so new that 
there are no prequalified workers nor existing training 
programs. So of necessity this program was work based. 
 
The project partners are the University of Saskatchewan, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
Prairie West Regional College, and North West Regional 
College. Another example, Mr. Speaker, of government, 
education, and industry, working together to provide jobs to 
service our expanding economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Forest Week 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as I may have mentioned once 
or twice here in the legislature in the past several months, 
Meadow Lake is the Forestry Capital of Canada for 1995. As 
well, we are no doubt the happiest, healthiest, prettiest, 
friendliest region in North America. 
 
Next week, beginning on Sunday, is National Forest Week, and 
in Meadow Lake we are taking this week to celebrate our close 
association with our forests. 
 
I want to say at the beginning, Mr. Speaker, that our activities 
will focus on the sustainable forest, not on the American-type 
Paul Bunyan chop-it-down and use-it-up approach to forestry. 
We want to begin by celebrating this week a hundred years 
from now. 

There are several . . . there are special activities, I should say, 
each day for people of all ages and interests; as well, exhibits 
and displays by town groups and by our forestry industries. 
 
For instance, Wednesday is seniors' day, Thursday is children's 
day, and Friday is civic celebrity day, a day for the town of 
Meadow Lake to show its wares. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, May 13, we will host a Texas 
golf and gala dinner. Notice Texas golf, not Texas audit. This 
dinner will feature Canadian humorist Dave Broadfoot, and 
other entertainment will be provided by first nations' dancers 
and drummers. 
 
I invite one and all to come to Meadow Lake for some or all of 
the activities for National Forestry Week. As they say, Mr. 
Speaker, be there or be square. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ogema Student and Canada Poster 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Beginning on 
Monday with the VE (Victory in Europe) Day recognition, and 
over the next several days and weeks, student across the nation 
are going to be paying close attention to Canada, its history, and 
its role in world events during this century. 
 
Of course Canada Day will also be the focus of this recognition 
and I want to commend a student at Ogema elementary school 
who has made special contribution to this day. 
 
Jessica Peterson, a 12-year-old student, has been recognized by 
the Saskatchewan Canada Day Committee for her winning entry 
in the 1995 Saskatchewan Canada Day poster challenge. Her 
poster was one of the few selected from out of 982 entries from 
schools across our province. 
 
A special presentation was made to her at school last week, 
which I was pleased to attend. The school, community, and her 
family, were all proud of her achievements. Each province and 
territory organizes its own competition, and here, the Canada 
Day Committee works closely with the Department of 
Education. A volunteer judging panel selects the winning 
entries. 
 
This year Jessica's poster and the three other winners will be 
used to produce the poster celebrating Canada Day in 
Saskatchewan. This poster will be distributed throughout all 
Saskatchewan schools in the province. 
 
Jessica's poster was an excellent work depicting her pride in her 
province and her country. I congratulate Jessica and all the 
other entries who have used their talents to honour our country. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 5, 1995 

 
2003 

Canadian Professional Chuckwagon Finals 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I 
attended a news conference which gave Lloydminster a 
two-year contract for the Canadian Professional Chuckwagon 
Finals 1995-1996. 
 
Lloydminster, for the third straight year, will be the site of the 
Key 83 chuckwagon finals. The event is sponsored by the 
Canadian Professional Chuckwagon Association, the 
Lloydminster Agricultural Exhibition, and CKKY radio AM. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the finals are very important to the world of 
chuckwagon racing. The association's Canadian professional 
champion will be decided along with the Key 83 finals 
champion. Also 17 finalists will be chosen to attend the Calgary 
Stampede. 
 
The chuckwagon finals have been an important boost for 
Lloydminster. Last year saw some 40 participants and 16,000 
spectators. The event is the city's largest sporting event. In 1983 
the chuckwagon finals received a tourism excellence award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year's finals will be as big or even bigger. The 
weekend will wrap up with a cabaret featuring Danny Hooper 
and Farmers Daughters. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I wish to invite everyone to the 
chuckwagon finals. I also want to congratulate the 19 sponsors, 
including CKKY, the Lloydminster Agricultural Exhibition, and 
the chuckwagon association, for another great show. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like, with leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
welcome to the Assembly this morning, 39 students from Sister 
O'Brien School in my constituency of Saskatoon River Heights, 
together with their teachers and chaperons. 
 
I'll be meeting them in the members’ dining room later where 
they're having their lunch, Mr. Speaker, and I will be able to 
answer any questions they have about the proceedings. 
 
I hope that they do enjoy question period. Look forward to 
meeting them later. And I'd like to ask all the members of the 
Assembly to join me in giving them a warm welcome here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Martensville Abuse Case 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, every day 
we get more questions about the Martensville case and no 
answers. Wednesday night CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) reported on a secret police report that came to the 
conclusion that the Crown did not have enough evidence to 
proceed with charges against John Popowich. However, Mr. 
Minister, as we all know, the Crown went ahead with these 
charges and ultimately ended up dropping the case due to 
insufficient evidence. 
 
Mr. Minister, what was the purpose of the report prepared by 
Sergeant Arnie Mainland? What was his role in the 
investigation? And why did your department ignore his 
recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I'm going to have to take 
notice of the question because I have not heard of the report, 
nor seen it, nor has it been drawn to my attention in any way. So 
I'm going to have to inform myself and come back and report to 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently that . . . I believe 
that is one of the real reasons we do need a public inquiry into 
the whole incident that has taken place at Martensville. This is 
exactly why the public need an inquiry, so these questions can 
be answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, as it was reported the other 
evening, John Popowich's sworn statement says that Mainland 
would be willing to provide his report to a public inquiry so the 
truth would be known about the investigation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe we all know in this Assembly that 
people across this province, certainly in that 
Saskatoon-Martensville area, want to know what happened, 
what went wrong, so that a fiasco like this never happens again. 
 
Mr. Minister, all people are asking for is an opportunity for the 
truth to be told. Why will you not allow an inquiry into the way 
matters were handled? We're not asking for a retrial; we're 
asking for an inquiry as to how justice was carried out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 
respect to the Popowich matter, I am of course severely 
constrained in what I can say because the matter is the subject 
of a court action and I'm not able to make comment as to 
matters that are at issue in that action. And this of course, the 
question of the hon. member, touches directly upon that. 
 
With respect to the more general question about an inquiry, I 
have tried to challenge the hon. member to say in this House or 
outside this House, anywhere he likes, what it is that he wants 
to be inquired into. Most of his questions has to do with the 
quality of the investigation, Mr. Speaker, the investigation into  



May 5, 1995 

 
2004 

the allegations that led in due course to the trial being held. 
 
And I keep making the point, and I think with great validity, 
that that was the main issue in the jury trial in Saskatoon that 
went on week after week after week. The kind of investigation, 
when the interviews took place, what happened at the 
interviews, videotapes of the interviews — all that is a matter of 
public record. And I am not at all clear what it is that remains to 
be inquired into. I think it received an exhaustive airing and I 
see no point in going over that same ground again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, it certainly appears that the 
justice system in many cases has run amok. And what has 
happened in the Martensville case is we have eight people have 
been dragged out before the public. We certainly have the fact 
that children's lives have been disrupted. We have 180 charges. 
 
And one has to ask at the end of the day, Mr. Minister: if an 
inquiry isn't undertaken to review how justice was meted out in 
the Martensville case, will this allow for a similar scenario to 
take place down the road so that innocent people are dragged 
into the public's eyes, basically convicted by the public without 
any chance to defend themselves. I think, Mr. Minister, that is 
the question that needs to be answered: how the Justice system 
conducted itself in the Martensville case and left so many 
questions unanswered. Why will he not allow for an inquiry 
into the operations that would look into how justice is handled 
in this province and whether or not we seek truth or are more 
interested in just laying charges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the member keeps asking 
me this same question and I keep giving the same answer. And 
it doesn't assist the member's case to suggest, for example, that 
justice has run amok. The member knows it has not run amok. 
The member knows that certain information came to the police 
in Martensville and that led to an investigation by the police 
and that led to the police laying charges. That led to the 
Department of Justice entering to prosecute the charges. I mean 
the system worked, as a system does. 
 
In Canada, as in other of the more fortunate countries in the 
world, first people have to be proven guilty before a jury and 
proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. The jury found that 
that standard hadn't been met. The system works and it worked 
there. 
 
And during that inquiry, as I've said before, all of the matters 
that the member is so worried about, was the subject of 
intensive investigation at the trial. It's a matter of public record 
now, and I simply don't know what's left to inquire into. And so 
that's why I've said no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister,  

CBC reported the other evening that, as I indicated earlier, there 
was more than ample evidence that would have suggested that 
no charges be laid against Mr. Popowich, and yet charges were 
laid, and Mr. Popowich was dragged through the public's eyes. 
And Mr. Popowich faced defamation by his peers, and certainly 
his career was really set in limbo. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we have people across this province, and 
certainly in the Martensville case, with a lot of questions. And 
the unfortunate part, Mr. Minister, is the fact that unless we 
raise these questions . . . For an example, regarding pensions 
and the stand by the Government House Leader yesterday, 
would you have changed if we would have not raised the 
question at the end of the day? Are we just supposed to drop it, 
or are we supposed to seek truth, honesty, and justice, and ask 
where our justice system is going, because, Mr. Minister, had 
the police and had the prosecutors followed the 
recommendations, Mr. Popowich would not be now suing you 
or your Crown prosecutors for malicious prosecution. And 
here's another example of the . . . more of the questions that are 
being asked. 
 
Mr. Minister, why will you not allow that public inquiry to take 
place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well with respect to the Popowich 
matter, as I told the member in response to his first question, 
I'm simply not able to discuss this matter in public. It is, as the 
member himself has said, the subject of a lawsuit against the 
prosecutors and others, and I simply can't enter into a public 
discussion of the issues in that lawsuit. 
 
As to the inquiry, I challenge again the member to say exactly 
what it is that has not been inquired into. What's missing here? I 
mean we know what happened. It went on for weeks and weeks 
before Mr. Justice Wimmer and a jury and there is simply 
nothing left to learn about it. We should learn important lessons 
from the Martensville case about the handling of the evidence 
of very young children and related sorts of questions. But I see 
simply nothing left to inquire into. 
 
The member asked, why was everyone acquitted? And I say, 
because the system worked. People have to be proven guilty 
beyond a reasonable doubt. That jury heard the evidence and 
decided on the evidence that it hadn't been proven. That 
happens. That happens. And thank heavens it does happen. Our 
system works. People are presumed innocent until proven guilty 
and that's the way it goes. 
 
Now I say to the member again, I want to know what it is that's 
missing. What is it that we should know about that case that 
would justify a public inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister. Certainly, Mr. 
Minister, this is a very debatable question. And there's a lot to  



May 5, 1995 

 
2005 

be raised and a lot of questions. And there's more coming out 
on a daily basis which points to the reason for an inquiry. 
 
But also, Mr. Minister, you're well aware of the fact that Mr. 
Popowich is now suing two of your Crown prosecutors for 
malicious prosecution. Yesterday we learned not only is the 
Department of Justice paying for these two prosecutors' 
defence, the Crown prosecutors are counter-suing Mr. 
Popowich. And guess what? Taxpayers are being forced to pick 
up the bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think it's fair that taxpayers have to pay for 
this counter-suit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Oh yes. I think, Mr. Speaker, that that's 
perfectly justifiable. No question about that. At all times they 
were simply doing their duty as prosecutors employed by the 
government of this province. Doing that, and if they're maligned 
or if they're libelled with respect to their performance of those 
duties, then the Crown simply has to stand behind them. We 
can't leave them out there on their own to defend themselves in 
those circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I'm not exactly sure the public see 
that as an appropriate fairness of our justice system. It's simply 
outrageous. While you say you don't have enough money to 
hold a public inquiry into this fiasco, you have plenty of money 
for two of the Crown prosecutors who botched the case to sue 
one of the people who ultimately was cleared. And maybe I 
should be careful about what I say about Crown prosecutors. 
Who knows, they might end up suing me for using . . . and use 
taxpayers' money to do it. 
 
Mr. Minister, it would appear, and the biggest concern is, that 
your department or the department you're responsible for is out 
of control. What is the policy regarding who should pay for 
counter-suits of this nature? And why should taxpayers be 
forced to foot the bill? Haven't enough taxpayers' dollars been 
wasted on this fiasco? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, each case has to be 
looked at and decided on its own merits. Each situation has to 
be carefully examined. 
 
But there is simply no question that when Crown employees in 
the performance of their duties, doing what they're hired to do, 
are treated in this . . . find themselves in this kind of a situation 
— let me put it that way  there is just simply no question that 
the Crown has to stand behind them. 
 
We can't just simply leave them out there on their own; we have 
to stand behind them. And we do, and we don't apologize for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lawsuit Against Justice Minister 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I have another question in regard to 
lawsuits. And on the news this morning — and I notice it's in 
the papers — I understand David Milgaard is now suing you for 
some comments you made in the media. And I guess when we 
were drawing up that . . . when you were drawing up a list of 
things that you shouldn't be saying, when you came back as 
Justice minister, you may have missed one. 
 
Mr. Minister, who will now be paying for your defence in this 
lawsuit? Are you going to be paying for it personally? Or will 
the people of Saskatchewan through your department pay for 
the counter-suit . . . or to protect you against this lawsuit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Well that remains to be decided. I want 
to say to the member that the remarks in question were made, as 
I recall, last November. And at that time I wasn't maintaining a 
list, I guess. 
 
I'll tell you though that at the top of the list of things that I must 
not talk about today is the action that the member refers to. I 
simply can make no comment about that. And the member will 
understand why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Reforms 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday 
the Provincial Auditor released his spring report. The auditor 
raised numerous concerns in his report regarding a lack of 
accountability, especially regarding the Department of Health 
and the district health boards. 
 
The auditor believes that it is impossible to measure how well 
health care is working when there are no benchmark or 
standards for the individual boards that would allow the 
evaluation of the quality of services being received in each 
district, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health: how can you know how 
well the health care system is working when the individual 
boards are not submitting so-called wellness reports as required 
in your legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the health district boards 
are in fact submitting descriptions of the health status of their 
districts and their people in public forums across this province, 
Mr. Speaker. I invite the member at any time that she wishes to 
attend any of those open and very public meetings, Mr. 
Speaker. And for her to accuse health care providers across 
Saskatchewan of not making this public is simply erroneous 
and wrong. 
 
Now I know what she's leading to, Mr. Speaker. She's talking 
about auditing, the auditing of health boards and the auditing of 
health services. And as of yesterday it's become very clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan where she would get her auditors  



May 5, 1995 

 
2006 

from — from Texas. She's talking about Texas auditing kind of 
procedures to be inflicted on the health care of Saskatchewan. 
That's the Liberal policy, Mr. Speaker. It was made public 
yesterday. 
 
Now I find this passing strange. We got rid of the Tories. What 
did they bring us from Texas? Well they brought us the Eagle 
buses from Texas, from Brownsville, Texas. Well we got rid of 
the Tories and now we've got rid of the Eagle buses. Now what 
do we have? The Liberal Party bringing auditing principles 
from Texas onto health care, Mr. Speaker. The people will just 
reject it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor raises another 
important issue regarding health care. This Assembly is 
responsible for the raising and allocation of all health care 
dollars, yet we are not receiving timely reports from each 
district board. The auditor recommends that all district health 
board financial statements be tabled in the Assembly. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health: will you support the 
auditor's request that would ensure this information is publicly 
presented in the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the fiscal reports of the 
district health boards, by legislation, are to be audited and 
presented by the end of June this year, Mr. Speaker. At that 
time, they will be made public. They are made public in the 
local communities. 
 
For the first time in Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker, our 
health care dollars are being made public and accountable on a 
community basis. Our district boards are talking about . . . 
they're going to the communities, they're talking about their 
budget plans — the first time that's ever happened. They'll be 
going to their communities with the audited financial 
statements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What our health care system does not need, Mr. Speaker, is a 
concept of American Texas auditing on health care in this 
province. We know that the Tories in Winnipeg, in Manitoba, 
brought in American experts to reform their system. Now the 
Liberals are bringing this American concept to health care in 
Canada. 
 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will 
reject American-made health care in favour of 
Saskatchewan-made health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor analysed the 
statements of six district health boards; of these six, five were 
paying their directors without authorization. Your own Health 
Districts Act states, and I quote: 
 
 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may determine any  

 easonable remuneration and reimbursement for 
expenses that are to be payable to . . . (the members of 
a) district health board. 

 
The auditor's recommendation, Mr. Speaker, states that orders 
in council should specify the pay and expenses of board 
members. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: why have you ignored 
your own legislation by paying board members without proper 
authorization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member was 
not present when I addressed this issue the other day. We have a 
circumstance where the per diems paid to the board members 
and their travel expenses have been publicly revealed here in 
this legislature through the process of estimates. We know 
we've had this experience now for a year, year and a half, of the 
district board functioning. 
 
We have established a review committee to review those per 
diems to ensure that they are appropriate to the Saskatchewan 
circumstance. I reported the other day that that review will be 
complete, will be completed, by July 1, at which time they will 
be established by order in council, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I think is more crucial in the debate is 
the position now taken by the Liberal Party in regards to health 
care and other government services  that we should be 
bringing into our systems some concept of American auditing, 
this Texas audit concept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that our friends south of the border 
are consuming a great deal more of their public resources and 
private resources to provide health care. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, there are 40 million Americans — 40 million 
Americans — who are today without or with very inadequate 
health care coverage. Now if that's the system that is being 
recommended by the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province will reject it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor adds that 1,400 
health care workers and the money to pay their salaries would 
be transferred from the Department of Health. This transfer of 
1,400 staff should have decreased the size of the Department of 
Health by, yes, 1,400 workers. But it didn't. According to your 
budget, the budget this year, department staffing was reduced 
by l,062 full-time equivalents. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health. This means that your 
department increased by 338 people. What is being done 
differently that requires 338 more people in the Department of 
Health, more people now than there were last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think I understand now 
why the Liberal caucus office has kind of a revolving door with 
its employees. If this is the kind of research that's being  



May 5, 1995 

 
2007 

provided to the members of the legislature by their caucus, I 
think the door better take another spin today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member will know and does know — 
unless she's just trying to play pure politics here — the member 
will know that full-time equivalents do not represent actual 
numbers of people, Mr. Speaker. Full-time equivalents will 
mean full-time equivalents. 
 
There may be indeed, and there are, people who will work 
part-time; individuals job-share. When we talk about the total 
number of people transferred, she simply then can't go back to 
the blue books and talk about full-time equivalents to try and 
make a political point. 
 
Now why would she be trying to make a political point today? I 
think, Mr. Speaker, it is to try and flee from what her leader is 
talking about, and that's this Texas style of auditing for health 
care. I think that's what she's trying to do. She's trying to divert 
from what her leader and other nominated candidates of her 
party are out talking about now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
couple of questions for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, 
next week we'll be going down to Ottawa to oppose the Liberal 
gun registry. While I agree with your objective of having 
Saskatchewan exempted from this law, I completely disagree 
with your strategy. 
 
It seems to me that we should be going to Ottawa armed with 
some real legislative weapons, and rather we are taking down a 
popgun down to Ottawa, which will be the only kind of gun left 
if the Liberals have their way when they get through with us. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's not too late. Will you give us a fighting chance 
in Ottawa next week? Will you pass our property rights 
legislation today, Mr. Minister, before we go on to Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — No, we will not, Mr. Speaker. We will 
not because, as I have tried so patiently and so often to explain 
to the Leader of the Opposition and other members of the 
opposition, that passage of that Bill that he refers to would do 
absolutely nothing to strengthen or buttress our position in our 
opposition to this gun control measure. 
 
The best thing we can do — the best thing we can do — is to 
maintain our unanimity on this question, and our stance, which 
we have set out so clearly, of being shoulder to shoulder on this 
issue and fighting the legislation, and not fighting among 
ourselves about some silly idea like the amendment of the 
Human Rights Code, imagining somehow that that's to improve 
the Saskatchewan position. It won't work that way and we just 
refuse to pay attention to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you keep 
saying that our alternative would be ineffective, and yet the Law 
Clerk of this building, of this legislature, says it would be 
effective. We believe very definitely that that is the case. 
 
Mr. Minister, I haven't seen your approach working all that well 
up to this point, Mr. Minister. In fact Allan Rock has already 
dismissed your proposal. So if you're really concerned about 
Saskatchewan gun owners, you should be thinking about some 
kind of stronger action. Mr. Minister, you have the entire 
resources of your ministry at your disposal. And the best you 
can come up with is a proposal that has us going cap in hand to 
Ottawa to plead with the government that has ignored us time 
and time again. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don't you pass some sort of legislation here 
in Saskatchewan that will force the Liberals to challenge us 
here, to come to Saskatchewan and to fight this battle on our 
turf? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, my cap is not in my hands. 
I don't know what's in your hand, but in my hands I have a very 
strong brief that makes very strong, logical arguments. 
 
Now if the members think that our arguments, which he and I 
have both made from the public platform, if he thinks that those 
arguments are nothing, stay home. We don't need you there. If 
you don't think those are powerful arguments against this 
unfair, unjust, unnecessary legislation, then don't come with us. 
I think they're powerful arguments. I think the argument against 
this legislation is logical, sound, strong, powerful, and will be 
effective if we can maintain our unanimity here. 
 
But if the member is saying that those briefs, that the brief, that 
the arguments that we're going to make are going to do nothing, 
then don't bother to come with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Repair Service 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for SaskTel. Mr. 
Minister, can you tell us why it now takes four days in rural 
Saskatchewan in order to get service interruption repaired? Why 
does it take four days if you have service interruption on a 
Friday? When your corporation made $88.6 million last year, 
why is it it would take that long in order to have service 
interruption repaired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member from Thunder Creek that SaskTel is the best 
telecommunications company in Canada today, from the point 
of view of the service that it provides and from the point of 
view of the technology that it has to provide that service. 
 
That's why we have Sears Canada choose to establish in  



May 5, 1995 

 
2008 

Saskatchewan; that's why we have the CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) choose to establish in 
Saskatchewan; that's why we have the most extensive fibre 
optic network in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member has a specific case with which he 
has a concern, he should address it with me and I will undertake 
to take a look at it. But the question  the capability, and the 
service that is provided for SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, is something 
going beyond, I think, a reasonable argument. 
 
And that doesn't surprise me because the Tories opposite have 
been unreasonable in this session for some time, particularly as 
we approach the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before we go on to the next item of the 
agenda, I wish to draw members' attention to — and this 
happened, I think, several times now — drawing impartial 
officers of the Assembly into the debate. You may acquire — 
order, order — you may acquire information but that 
information cannot be used in the debate in referring to the 
impartial officer. Order, order. 
 
This has been a standing tradition in this House and is in other 
Houses as well. And I think members know that. 
 
Order, order. Order. Order. Would the Government House 
Leader please come to order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
questions 73 and 74, I move they be converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 73 and 74, motions for return 
debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Interior Designers 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
minister responsible, the minister responsible to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, to please 
introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you. Today with me is Brian 
Woodcock, president of Sask Property Management 
Corporation, and Leslie Krug, legislative officer for Sask 
Property Management Corporation. 
 
Clause 1 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd like 
to welcome the minister and her officials. But, Mr. Chairman, I 
also believe that there's a very important debate that should be 
taking place, and therefore at this time, I move, seconded by the 
member from Souris-Cannington, that this Assembly, with 
leave, report progress and move to second reading of Bill. No. 
31, property rights. 
 
The Chair: — The motion is not in order. Although it's in order 
for the member to move a motion to report progress, it's not 
within the purview of the committee to decide to move to other 
business that is before the Assembly. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I think it's certainly important that 
we ask questions on the interior designers. But it would also be 
important for us to debate other issues and move into an area 
that would allow this Assembly to debate some important issues 
that affect people across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And therefore, I move at this time that the committee rise and 
report progress. 
 
The division bells rang from 10:46 a.m. until 10:56 a.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Boyd Swenson Neudorf 
Martens D'Autremont Toth 
Britton   

— 7 
Nays 

 
Thompson MacKinnon Tchorzewski 
Lingenfelter Shillington Trew 
Goulet Lautermilch Kowalsky 
Calvert Mitchell Penner 
Upshall Hagel Lorje 
Teichrob Cline Crofford 
Renaud Murray Hamilton 
Serby Draper  
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. I'm having difficulty hearing 
how it is that the members are voting because other members 
are talking and therefore I would ask for order. 
 
Whitmore Sonntag Flavel 
Scott Stanger Keeping 
Jess   

— 30 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, one 
looks through the Bill . . . and I think the Bill is a lot thicker 
than what may be the intent of the Bill and the real reasons are 
for the Bill. I realize that the Interior Designers of 
Saskatchewan are . . . or understand that they're the driving  



May 5, 1995 

 
2009 

force behind this legislation, that they've been working towards 
this for many years. In fact I believe they've been basically 
pushing for legislation like this since 1967, and they've been 
incorporated as a non-profit corporation since 1990. 
 
Is any specific reason being . . . for the legislation coming 
forward at this time or this year, Madam Minister? Or would it 
have been impossible to bring it forward . . . why are we 
specifically looking at this time rather than having had it 
introduced — say — a year or two earlier, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for his inquiry. I 
guess I would have to say that I have some control over the 
future but limited control over the past, so I can't answer as to 
why it didn't come before. 
 
I can only say that this is something that they have worked on 
for a long time, and I think it's partly to clarify the kind of work 
they do. But we're pleased to finally be able to get this done so 
that they can move ahead with implementing the provisions of 
the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — While we may wonder why it's taken us so long 
to reach this point, it seems to me what the Bill does then is 
designates the title of interior designers as a profession, if I 
understand correctly. How many individuals and businesses 
will be affected by this legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They have in their direct membership 
75, and I think one of the things they're hoping this Bill will do 
is to enable them to more clearly identify that membership 
body. 
 
As far as businesses, it doesn't affect them directly other than 
ensuring that when they hire people to do these kinds of 
functions that they're in fact getting someone who's up to speed 
on the building codes, etc., that affect the concerns that that 
profession deals with. So it really provides protection for 
businesses. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, by protecting the title interior 
designer as one belonging to the interior designers . . . it's IDS 
(The Interior Designers of Sask. Inc.), I guess, and I just forgot 
the last title. Will individuals that have been practising interior 
design, for example at The Bay, will they be adversely affected 
by the legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I think, first of all, we have to 
differentiate between what are interior designers and what are 
decorators. It's two different professions. And so interior 
designers really deal more with the management of space and 
building code issues, traffic flows, that kind of thing. And that 
would be differentiated from a person who's working in the area 
of decorator. 
 
Under the current title there was no other people whose actually 
existing work titles . . . that it affected in any negative way. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Point of order, Mr. Chair. 

The Chair: — What is the point of order? 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Today the official House agenda which I 
received indicates that we are at this moment . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I'm having difficulty hearing the 
member because other members are speaking. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. According to the 
official House agenda I received, at this moment we are to deal 
with item no. 8, Bill No. 58, and I have prepared for that 
situation. And I don't understand why we are on The Interior 
Designers Act. 
 
The Chair: — It's entirely up to the government to call the 
business before the House. This is not the House agenda that is 
distributed by the House Leader's office. It's not the official 
agenda of the House. The official agenda is the blues, but it is 
entirely up to the government to call whatever business it wants 
to call under government orders. 
 
So the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, would it be 
appropriate to say that this legislation provides a legal 
definition differentiating between interior designers and 
decorators? Is that part of the reasoning for the legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, it would provide clarification. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And how many members currently belong to the 
IDS? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As we mentioned in an earlier question, 
75. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So that 75, that number of 75 members, there are 
currently 75 members practising under the interior designers in 
this profession in the province of Saskatchewan. Was that what 
that number indicates? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Seventy-five who have been identified 
and who have membership in the organization. Now they don't 
have any official mechanism at the moment to identify people, 
so it's kind of, I guess, a search and rescue mission in terms of 
identifying people. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, I think consideration . . . are 
any considerations going to be given to those practising interior 
design, or should I say decorators that have been in that field 
for many years but do not have education or courses under their 
belt which . . . Will they be accepted under the Interior 
Designers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, there is a criteria, and some of that 
criteria is linked to training which is able to be upgraded. Some 
of it is linked to a combination of background and experience, 
but there is an ability to bring people in. 
 



May 5, 1995 

 
2010 

Mr. Toth: — When you were formulating the piece of 
legislation, Madam Minister, who did you consult with in 
bringing together the information and the details regarding the 
legislation in formulating the policies and all the different 
clauses of this Bill as far as defining what interior designers 
were? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — All the people currently identified in 
practising a related profession such as engineers, architects, 
people that utilize the profession, and as well there was public 
meetings held. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Was there any opposition to the 
recommendations that were brought forward in formulating the 
Bill from any groups that would be considered affected by this 
piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We would say that all major issues . . . 
There were no real major issues, but all issues were resolved. 
There was a small discussion over whether there should be a 
registered prefix on the title, and with further discussions it was 
decided not to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, section 8(1) states that: "The 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint two persons who 
reside in Saskatchewan as members of the council." And 
section 8(2) states that these individuals' terms will not exceed 
three years. 
 
Why, Madam Minister, are these clauses inserted into this Bill? 
What's the reason for these clauses? Why does the government 
need to appoint a representative on the council, and who will 
the government appoint to this position? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is a standard provision in 
professional Bills, and I think it's really just consistency and 
public interest that is the consideration in those clauses. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, can you give us an idea of what 
type of fees may be involved to register to belong to the Interior 
Designers of Saskatchewan or to be registered as an interior 
designer? And would any of these fees have been changed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's in the 3 to $400 range. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Would that be per individual or per company, per 
group that would be applying? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That's an individual fee. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what type of revenue does the government 
anticipate that they would derive from the legislation and the 
fees that will be charged? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is fees to the association. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying is the fees then are paid 
directly to the association, that nothing really comes into . . . or 
nothing comes into the hands of the government under this  

legislation and fees that will be implemented. 
 
Could you briefly go over the sections of the Bill dealing with 
disciplinary procedures, investigation, and professional 
competence — sections 21 to 30. And can you outline the sort 
of offences that interior designers would be charged with? What 
offence would lead to imprisonment as outlined in section 37? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The kinds of things that would require 
discipline is illegal use of title, gross incompetence, complaints 
from consumers over the kind of service they're receiving. It's a 
fairly standard disciplinary clause in a professional Bill. And 
they do have an appeal procedure to the courts if they feel that 
this discipline hasn't been applied fairly. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, it would seem to me that 
seems to be a fairly harsh discipline. And I'm not exactly sure 
what types of concerns or accusations could be brought against 
. . . I would imagine it's against a firm who's practising as an 
interior designer. It must have something to do with the type of 
workmanship or whatever. But it seems to me a fairly rigid type 
of offence and penalty that would be applied in that matter. And 
I guess I have a hard time determining how . . . the importance 
or why such a stiff penalty would be applied. I'm not exactly 
sure how you find an offence that would require that type of a 
penalty. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I think some of it stems from 
some of the misunderstanding about the work that these people 
do. These are not decorators; these are people who implement 
building codes, occupational health and safety standards, these 
kinds of things. 
 
So if they neglect to do that, it could either have big 
repercussions for their client to have to redo something that 
wasn't done up to code, or it may in fact create a safety hazard. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, Madam Minister, then this 
isn't specifically people who are into the decorating part of it, 
but it's establishing or working on the construction of buildings, 
engineering, design of buildings. Is that what you're basically 
talking of? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The interior design layout and how that 
complies with the code, yes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So it really has nothing to do with orange shag 
carpeting. I think we're ready to allow this Bill to move 
forward. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would confirm that there's no 
punishment for bad taste. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 47 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



May 5, 1995 

 
2011 

(1115) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to take a moment to 
thank the minister and her officials for the time, having taken 
the time to come to the Assembly to address some of the 
questions that we had re this Bill. Thank you very much. Have a 
good weekend. 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
minister to please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. On my left is the deputy minister of Finance, Bill 
Jones. Behind Bill is Arun Srinivas, taxation policy analyst 
from the taxation and intergovernmental affairs branch. Behind 
me is Kirk McGregor who is the executive director of taxation 
and intergovernmental affairs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if the 
minister might comment on the fact that the entire weight of 
this debt reduction is on the shoulders of individual taxpayers 
as opposed to businesses. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this particular piece of legislation of course affected 
individual taxpayers, but there were other tax changes brought 
in at the same time as this tax change which affected 
corporations and ensured that corporations paid their fair share 
as well. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I wonder if the minister could just briefly point 
out where the tax increases have been for businesses that 
would, if you will, correspond to the tax increases that you're 
posing on the individual in this case. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, I would 
refer specifically to three measures that were taken: an increase 
in corporation income tax rates, an increase in corporate capital 
tax rates which is a tax on basically the wealth of the 
corporations, and an increase in the resource surcharge. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I wonder if the minister could just give me 
those increases please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Annualized, the increases are 
corporate income tax, 7.9 million; corporate capital tax, moving 
it from 3 to 3.25 per cent, 1.3 million; the resource surcharge 
going from 2 to 3.6, 44.4 million  for a total of 53.6 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Sorry, Madam Minister, I couldn't write as fast 
as you could talk there. Could you just go over the percentages 
and the numbers just again? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Sure, Mr. Chairman, no problem.  

The corporate income tax general rate increase went from 16 to 
17 per cent; the revenue was 7.9 million. Corporate capital tax 
went from 3 to 3.25 per cent, annual revenue 1.3 million. 
Corporate capital tax surcharge increased from 2 to 3.6 per cent, 
for a revenue increase of $44.4 million  total $53.6 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — What years were those increases, what fiscal 
years? Were they in the last budget, or were they in the last 12 
months or last 18 months? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, these increases were announced in the May 1992 
budget, and they're detailed on page 33 of the May 1992 
budget. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, so you're saying there's been 
no increase in the taxation to business since 1992. Is that 
correct? And it came into effect in '93,. It's been in effect in '94, 
will be in effect in '95. But there's . . . for the last three years 
there's no change in the tax to business either in the corporation 
income tax or the corporation capital tax or the resource surtax. 
Is that right? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, in 1993 there was a further increase in the resource 
surcharge. But that was the only other change. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, could you give me that 
increase? In other words, I'd like the tax increases on business 
from '92 to date to compare to your surtax that you're putting on 
individuals to reduce the deficit. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the total of 44 includes both increases. So the total of 
44 includes the increases in '92 and in '93. 
 
But you asked me a different question. You said, did they all 
come in the '92 budget? No. The vast majority came in the '92 
budget, but the last part of that resource surcharge came in '93, 
but it is included in the numbers that I gave you. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So that there's . . . 
from '92 to date, there's been a $57 million increase in taxes on 
the basis of the corporate income tax, the corporate capital tax, 
and the resource surtax. That total is $57 million. I'll just ask if 
that's correct, and I assume that it is. 
 
There have been no other tax increases put on businesses; is 
that fair to say? 
 
And third, could you just remind me what you expect to raise 
from this new surtax that you're introducing in this Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the anticipated revenue from the debt surtax is about 
$50 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — And there were no other tax increases on 
business other than the 57 million represented here from '92 to  



May 5, 1995 

 
2012 

date; is that true? Or were there any tax decreases for business 
in that same period of time? 
 
I'm trying to be perfectly as clear as I can. I'm just trying to get 
the balance of tax increases and decreases on individuals versus 
corporations from '92 to date, to find out if you're being fair to 
the ordinary taxpayer versus the business community. So I'm 
just trying to add them up. How many tax increases and tax 
decreases have you had for business, and how many tax 
increases and decreases have you had for the ordinary taxpayer? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what you've asked me so far are taxes that are directly 
applied to businesses that affect nobody else. 
 
But the sales tax . . . about half of the sales tax is paid by 
business, so you would have to take into account any tax 
increases in the sales tax because half of that is paid by 
business. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, that's true. That's where 
individuals and businesses are treated about the same. They pay 
the sales tax, and the individual pays the sales tax. So I 
understand that. 
 
I guess I could ask you, if you like then, seeing that you raised 
it, how much has the sales taxes been increased since . . . over 
the same period of time for business and individuals? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the net increase in sales taxes is 94 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I'm sorry, Madam Minister, I didn't quite get 
that. I wanted to know the increase in sales tax for individuals 
and businesses over the last three years. 
 
I believe it's gone from 7 to 9 per cent for individuals and 
businesses. They were treated the same. And that is . . . I guess 
you could confirm that. And it's applied equally to both. And 
secondly, the amount of money that is raised from both those. 
In other words, how much comes from the individual versus 
how much comes from the corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I was saying to the member 
opposite is since 1991, since we took power, the net increase in 
sales tax revenue has been $94 million. And so what you would 
do is just divide that in half — about half comes from business 
and half comes from individuals. So that would mean about $47 
million from each from sales tax increases. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you give 
me the tax breaks — that's just the flip side of this — for 
business, and the tax breaks for individuals over the same 
period of time? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I'm assuming what he was saying was the tax breaks  

for businesses, and if that's correct, the answer is $51.6 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Fifty-one point six million for businesses over 
the last recent time. Could you, Madam Minister, please specify 
where they were, in what areas? It obviously wasn't in the 
corporate income tax or the corporate capital tax or the resource 
surtax, because they've gone up. Could you just briefly describe 
where the 51.6 million in tax breaks for business was targeted? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes. The most important one in 
terms of dramatic reduction was a reduction in the taxes on 
small business, which went from 10 per cent to 8 per cent. 
 
Also, there were tax reductions targeted particularly at 
manufacturing and processing companies. They had their direct 
agents exempted from E&H (education and health). There were 
tax credits in this budget for manufacturing and processing 
companies. Their corporate income tax rate in this budget was 
reduced, with a proviso that the more the company's activities 
were in Saskatchewan, the more their tax was reduced; 1-800 
numbers have been exempt from the E&H. 
 
So it's those sorts of . . . There's a long list here of those sorts of 
tax reductions targeted to particular parts of the economy that 
this government feels are likely to create significant jobs. Small 
business particularly, because most of the businesses in the 
province are small business — the vast majority — and 
manufacturing and processing because of the importance of 
processing resources here to the future of the economy and to 
the future of jobs. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Perhaps your 
officials could give me an approximate breakdown of the $51.6 
million in tax breaks to businesses. When you drop the small 
business tax rate from 10 to 8, what did that give you? When 
you reduced the manufacturing and processing . . . or eliminate 
the E&H or give the exemption, what is that likely to give you? 
And for the corporate income tax rate targeted reductions, about 
. . . I mean just give me three or four of the major ones so that I 
can have an idea of where the breaks are coming. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I'll give you the three or four largest 
ones in terms of dollar value. The manufacturing and 
processing investment tax credit would be the largest at $11.5 
million. The next largest would be again from manufacturing 
and processing, exempting direct agents from the E&H tax, at 
$11.3 million. And the third largest would be the tax reduction 
for small business from 10 to 8 per cent at $7.2 million. 
 
So those are the three largest. And then the value after that 
drops quite dramatically. For example, to give you an idea, 
number four is $4 million, and that's for reducing the corporate 
income tax rate for manufacturing and processing companies 
that have most of their activities located in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay. That pretty 
much summarized the tax breaks, I guess. I assume that's the tax 
breaks for business over the last few years. Could you give me 
the tax breaks for individuals over the same period of time,  



May 5, 1995 

 
2013 

basically the main ones? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The biggest single tax reduction that 
would have affected individuals and also business would be the 
deharmonization — $110 million in tax savings by taking the 
tax off things like non-prescription drugs, reading materials, 
electricity, natural gas, residential natural gas, children's 
clothing, adult clothing under $300, restaurant meals and snack 
foods, pet food. 
 
And then the other one that affects individuals is the tax 
reduction included in this session, which is the deficit surtax 
being reduced and renamed, and half of that benefit going to the 
families of the province where a taxpayer will get a tax cut of 
$150 per individual, $300 per dual income family. The value of 
that is $55 million. 
 
The value of the first one is 110. This one is actually, when you 
add it up . . . And put into that, one thing I should have 
mentioned, is there's an increase in the child tax reduction as 
well for low income families. If you add that all up, the total is 
$59 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That 
deharmonization of the PST (provincial sales tax) would be 
split about 50/50. Is that . . . Am I correct, between individuals 
and businesses? 
 
And would that apply as well to the deficit surtax reduction? 
The 55 to $59 million, would it be split 50/50 as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — In the removing of the sales tax 
from the items that I listed, the benefit would be much higher 
for individuals because of the nature of the things that we were 
taking the tax off. When you take the tax off non-prescription 
drugs, residential electricity, residential natural gas, children's 
clothing, pet food, these are all things that affect individuals 
much more than they affect business, so that that would . . . the 
50/50 rule would not apply to that. This would be much more 
heavily weighted toward individuals than the other tax 
measures. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So a guess might be 75/25 ballpark. The deficit 
surtax, would that apply as well? Was it 50/50, or how is it split 
up? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No, Mr. Chairman, the reason that 
we chose to reduce the deficit surtax rather than the E&H tax — 
one of the reasons — was because 100 per cent of the benefit of 
reducing the deficit surtax goes to families. It does not go to 
businesses at all; 100 per cent goes directly into the pockets of 
families. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You've given me the 
tax breaks for businesses, I believe, over the period, the tax 
breaks for individuals it looks like; I didn't get the tax increases 
for individuals since . . . over the same period of time, from '92 
to date. 
 

The Chair: — The member for Kelsey-Tisdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, with leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Chairman, to you and to all 
members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce, in the 
Speaker's gallery, Mr. Robert Zhao of Regina and his delegates 
that he is hosting from China. And that delegation is led by Mr. 
Li Ke Bin, Mr. Shen Ji Cheng, and Ms. Li Hong Cheng. 
Frederick Yan is the interpreter, and Dr. Young. 
 
Now the delegation is here, Mr. Chairman, to study agriculture. 
It's a fact-finding mission actually, and they have been in 
Saskatchewan since May 2. And their interests are in beef and 
pork and poultry genetics, production and processing 
technology. 
 
The majority of the delegates are from the Hubei province and 
from Shanghai. And I would ask all members to join with me in 
wishing them a very informative visit to the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 58 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, these have to be very . . . they can't be precise 
calculations because things like the sales tax, you're doing an 
estimate of how much of that is paid by business, how much by 
individuals. The same is true of other taxes. Fuel tax increases, 
you're doing an estimate of how much of that is paid by 
business, how much is paid by individuals. And same with any 
fees and charges. So an estimate would be $314 million paid by 
individuals, assuming some sort of standard breakdown there in 
terms of the taxes I've mentioned. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So approximately 
314 million in tax increases have occurred. The total annual tax 
increases, or how would you describe that? The tax increases, 
the cumulative tax increases from '92 to date for individuals. Is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — This is the gross number, the tax 
increases that have occurred over that period of time, not taking 
out the reductions. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Gross tax increases for both individuals and  



May 5, 1995 

 
2014 

businesses? Or just individuals? Just individuals. 
 
Madam Minister, if I've done my arithmetic right maybe your 
officials can help me. You've given me the total tax increases 
for businesses, the total tax increases for individuals. Now the 
total tax breaks for businesses and the total tax breaks for 
individuals. And it seems to me that the tax increases for 
individuals have been substantially higher than for businesses. 
 
And I can roughly do out the numbers and we can sit here while 
I do that, but it seems to me when I added them up . . . and 
you've given to me here like for businesses the tax increase was 
57 million; half of the 7 to 9 is 45; that's $100-and-some 
million. For individuals it's $45 million, another $50 million, 
and then you totalled them all up for me, frankly, for me — 
$314 million. 
 
Then we have your tax decreases for businesses, looked to me 
like about $80 million, and for individuals — I haven't got there 
yet — but it didn't anywhere match the 300-and-some million 
dollars in increases. 
 
So would your officials be able to help you there? All I'm after 
is sort of a balance between tax increases and tax decreases over 
the last few years for individuals versus business. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we're doing the calculations here on a quick basis but 
it's about the same, if you take the net, because the main thing 
that benefited the average person in this family was the income 
tax cut in this budget, which goes entirely to families — no 
benefit to business. And the fact that the $110 tax cut 
associated with taking the tax off things like drugs, electricity, 
residential gas — the vast majority of that goes to individuals. 
 
So it comes out to very close, and as I say, I'm reluctant to give 
you a precise number because we're doing quick estimates. But 
very close — they're very, very similar in terms of where they 
end up on a net basis. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well maybe you're entirely right and your 
officials are, but maybe you could just give me a rough 
estimate, sort of list them, add them up. Because I was doing it 
here, and it seems to me that the tax increases for individuals 
was substantially higher than that for business and the tax 
breaks for individuals was less than that for business. And 
when I netted it out, I got the ordinary, individual taxpayer was 
carrying the brunt of your fiscal policy. And obviously, I would 
like to see a fair balance. 
 
So if your officials have a broad summary of what you've just 
given me, because you gave me both the increases and the 
decreases in both individuals and businesses; add them up, and 
it's netted, can you just roughly lay that out, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What my officials have given me is 
this — $314 million increase in taxes on individuals. The 
deharmonization — 100 million of that went to individuals. 
Again the point I keep making, because of the nature of what  

was cut there, these are almost all people items — clothing, 
non-prescription drugs, residential electricity, residential natural 
gas. All of that is individuals and families; it's not business. So 
100 million there. 
 
And 59 million tax saving to individuals on the income tax side, 
meaning that the net for individuals is about 155 million. If you 
look at the tax increases on business, an estimate of about 212 
million, and the reductions of 51 million, leaving you net about 
151 million. So as I say, these are rough calculations that we're 
doing right here as we speak, but very, very close in terms of 
the net tax effect. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, I wondered why, in 
terms of this Bill, you wouldn't consider a better balance of 
collecting this money between individuals and businesses, 
because this focuses so much on individuals, as I understand it. 
And why you were hesitant to share that burden with the 
individual taxpayer to some of the . . . particularly the larger 
corporations, as you know, in some cases are capable of modest 
sharing in something related to deficit reduction. Particularly it 
would be those businesses that would encourage you to apply 
money towards a deficit. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well as I said to the member 
opposite, the reason we chose the reduction of the income tax 
rates rather than the sales tax, one of the reasons, is because 100 
per cent of that benefit goes right to families. And so we did 
studies, we looked at what happens if you would've reduced the 
sales tax by one point. And the benefit to an average family is 
much less significant than reducing their income tax, because as 
I say, 100 per cent, $59 million in benefits, goes right to 
families. 
 
Now with respect to the business tax reductions, they're there 
for a different purpose. They're not there . . . the tax cuts to 
individuals are there because people would like to see their 
taxes lowered. The tax cuts to business are there for a different 
purpose — to target particular parts of the economy that we 
think will actually grow because they have a lessened tax 
burden. And that's small business, because the vast majority of 
the businesses in Saskatchewan are small business. So our view 
is, by taking less money out of their pockets, it's more likely 
that they're going to invest that money and to create more jobs. 
 
And the other area that we have targeted tax reductions to is 
manufacturing and processing because in 1993 we reduced the 
taxes on manufacturing and processing. We saw immediately in 
the following years 2,000 new jobs in manufacturing and 
processing. 
 
And that's why in this budget we put more tax cuts in for 
manufacturers and processors because we are convinced we 
will also see, as a result of that, new jobs. When some of the 
companies that are moving into the province talk to us about 
why they're moving into the province or why they're expanding 
here, it's because of the tax reductions that have been targeted to 
manufacturers and processors. 
 



May 5, 1995 

 
2015 

So the purpose there is quite different than the tax reductions to 
individuals. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, I understand that. What I was 
saying, you're collecting about $50 million more here from 
individuals only. And $50 million is a lot of money to take out 
of the pockets of individuals, taxpayers. You're not sharing that 
burden with businesses. As I understand it, this Bill will take 
. . . I believe your number said approximately $50 million it will 
collect, and it seems to me entirely from individuals. 
 
Now I understand why you might want to give businesses a tax 
break on processing, manufacturing, and E&H associated with 
that. But what I'm asking is that just the logic behind why this 
seems to be focused on, if you will, individual family members 
paying this deficit down as opposed to a more equitable sharing 
with businesses. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I think what the member opposite 
has to look at is, the surtax used to be $109 million. That is, we 
used to take $109 million out of families' pockets for the surtax. 
That's now being reduced by $59 million. We're taking only $50 
million out of individuals' pockets. So in fact we're taking less 
out of their pockets for the surtax than we have in the past. So 
it's a tax reduction in terms of what we're taking for the surtax 
and for their whole income tax. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, this debt reduction surtax — 
how much money do you expect to raise this year, and if you 
would, maybe each year from . . . give me the next two or three 
years or four years, or say to another budget period, the next 
four years. How much per year and where's it coming from? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Probably the easiest way to explain 
it is, the way that it was in place in this tax year that you just 
filled out  people just filled out their income tax. In that year 
and ever since this tax has been introduced, the government 
would get about $104 million from that tax. 
 
When this tax change is in effect, fully in effect, the 
government will get $49 million from this tax. So the tax 
reduction effect will be $55 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So then, Minister, over the next four years, do 
you anticipate collecting about $50-some million year after year 
for the next four years? And do you have a time when you think 
you would terminate this tax? What's your forecast, what's your 
target, how long do you think that you would be . . . you would 
have it in place? 
 
And have you given any thought, in this period over the next 
three or four years, of reducing that burden from the individual 
taxpayer and shifting it — if not eliminating it altogether — 
shifting some of it to share it more equitably with the business 
community rather than just individuals? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well what I would say to the 
member opposite is that what our plan is, is to reduce taxes in 
the province as the tax cuts become affordable. This tax cut we  

thought was a reasonable tax cut because 100 per cent of the 
benefit goes to families. The other half of the surtax that stays 
there is applied to the debt and will continue to be applied to 
the debt. 
 
What we would have to do is, before we chose the next tax cut, 
we'd have to consult with the people of Saskatchewan. If they 
said that this was the tax cut that mattered most to them, 
obviously that would carry a lot of weight. If they said a 
reduction in the sales tax is what mattered the most to them, we 
would probably be much more likely to move on the sales tax. 
 
I think what we have committed to is reducing taxes as it 
becomes affordable and listening to what people are saying in 
terms of which tax is, for the average family, the biggest 
concern. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So, Madam Minister, you really haven't then 
given this any thought, to more equitable sharing of the burden 
of this tax — this $50 million a year that you've got it down to 
— with the business community. 
 
Secondly, you haven't really thought of a termination date. In 
other words, the general public can look forward to this tax, 
individual tax measure, indefinitely. Is that a fair statement? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well as I said, our commitment is to 
reduce taxes. If for some reason or other people said this is the 
tax that bothers them the most, obviously it would be the next 
tax to be cut. But I'm not sure that I'm hearing that from people. 
I think I'm hearing from people, other things. 
 
And the key thing about this tax is it's being applied to the debt, 
which is still a very significant problem in the province. And so 
I think from the point of view of the average person, the idea of 
a tax that goes directly to repaying the debt and lessening the 
interest payments is something that is acceptable to them. 
 
In the area of business taxes, I'm sure the member opposite 
knows that the capacity to increase taxes on business is limited 
because we are constantly in an environment which businesses 
are trading jurisdictions off against each other. 
 
So the capacity to go to a part of the business community and 
say, well I think you can actually have higher taxes here, I think 
is quite limited and I think you'd run into problems if you 
actually tried to do that. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well fair enough, Madam Minister. Likely we 
could say that this surtax will remain, as far as we can see, into 
the near future. 
 
To summarize what we've learned here this morning, it looks 
like there's been a $314 million tax increase on individuals over 
the last few years; a $212 million increase for businesses, for a 
total of something like $536 million in tax increases. 
 
You've had reductions that amount to 155 million and 151 
million for about $300 million. So we've looked at a general tax  



May 5, 1995 

 
2016 

increase in the province of Saskatchewan for businesses and 
income and individuals in the neighbourhood of $225 million. 
Does that sound fair enough? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Certainly in a net basis, the member 
is in the ballpark range. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay, well that's what I wanted to find out. 
We've had a general net increase, ballpark as the minister has 
said, of $225 million in increases in taxes in the province of 
Saskatchewan that is as a result of percentage increases, oil tax 
increases — that whole combination. I mean are there any other 
tax increases that the general public . . . in either fees or 
royalties or anything else that we should acknowledge here to 
be fair, in terms of looking at individuals versus companies? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — All fees, royalties, everything, are 
included in the numbers that we've given you. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay. Thank you. So all the tax increases that 
we've experienced — just to summarize again — over the last 
few years, and the tax decreases, the net on that in the province 
in Saskatchewan for people, businesses, everybody included, is 
a net increase of about $225 million in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now, and that, Madam Minister, you're saying is 
approximately split 50/50 between individuals and 
corporations, and I'll just assume that that's the case. 
 
Madam Minister, your revenues, your tax revenues, have they 
increased beyond the corresponding percentages? 
 
In other words, have you raised some taxes a modest amount 
but you found out that the increase . . . the fairly inelastic 
demand for the particular product or service, and your revenue 
went way up? Or is you dropped some taxes, as we've seen in 
the royalty business, and your revenues went up. In other 
words, it was an inverse relationship. 
 
It seems to me that your revenues are higher than the $500 
million that we've just summarized here in terms of taxes. Is 
that because of economic activity, is that because of elasticities, 
or what's the reason for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we'll get you the precise numbers. But the revenue has 
increased significantly because of growth in the economy, so 
that, for example, in the year that we increased the sales tax, 
retail sales that year grew in the neighbourhood of 6 per cent. 
So the increase in the sales tax revenue would come from, yes, 
the increase in the rate, but also because more people were 
buying more products and therefore we were getting more tax 
revenue from them. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Do you have 
a relationship between retail sales — we've asked this before of 
officials; certainly it was asked of me, I can recall — but the 
retail sales tax and tax revenue? The minister raised this point  

earlier and I would just like her opinion. Sometimes when you 
raise sales tax . . . In other words, Madam Minister, if you raise 
sales tax to 12 per cent, you probably wouldn't get the 
corresponding increase in economic revenue. 
 
I guess what I'm trying to determine here, are there specific and 
certain sectors in the taxation department where there is room to 
reduce taxes and also increase revenues? And we can get more 
specific, particularly as a result of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business and some of the things they've looked at, 
but I believe your officials would understand the question. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we're going to take a minute here because we're going 
to try to develop a case study of increases in sales tax and 
increase in revenue. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I appreciate that, Madam Minister. And maybe 
while you're doing that, I just had some small questions that you 
probably could just clear up. 
 
I believe that both of the ministers of Finance have been saying 
that up to $150 will be taken off the surtax as of July 1. 
However, if I read the Bill correctly, in section 5.1(2) for the '95 
tax year, the reduction is only $75, with the $150 reduction not 
coming until '96. 
 
In other words, it will be — if I'm correct — April of '97 before 
taxpayers actually see this $150 that you were recently talking 
about. Is this a contradiction, or am I reading this correct? It'll 
take until '97 to see this full reduction that we're experiencing. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what happens is, if you bring in a tax increase . . . 
well, for example right now, the budget of the province of 
Saskatchewan is not passed, this legislation is not passed. 
 
The federal government has to deduct this from your pay 
cheque and there are only two times of the year in which you 
can get them to change their deductions — the end of the year 
or halfway through, which is July 1. 
 
So as of July 1, they will start reducing the deductions from 
people's income tax. But because this means that there's only 
half a year involved, you can't obviously  you won't  get 
the full benefit because there's only the capacity to do it from 
July to December. 
 
So the average person would see $75 reduced beginning July 1. 
On their '96 income tax they will see a $75 tax reduction. And 
then beginning in January 1 they will see the full benefit, 150 
— January 1, '96 — $150 reduction for a taxpayer, $300 per 
family. And then they will, when they fill out their '96 income 
tax form, they'll see the full benefit on that form. 
 
Mr. Devine: — The reduction or the benefit of $50 million 
break; is it still accurate to say this is a $50-some million break 
to the taxpayer between now and a year from now? Is that what 
it's going to add up to? 



May 5, 1995 

 
2017 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It's about $35 million for this year. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Pardon me, Madam Minister, this calendar year 
or this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this fiscal year, which is different, yes, you're right. 
The tax year for the government . . . December 31 is the end of 
their tax year. For the province, the end of our budget year is 
March 31. So that's why there's a difference. That's why it's not 
exactly half; it's more than half. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Just to clarify it for the average homeowner or 
individual. The tax break is . . . it takes about a year and a half 
to appreciate the full value of it. You'll get, as you said, maybe, 
what, 65 per cent of it now, and then you'll get the rest of it by 
the time you get finished your 1996 income tax. You'll have the 
rest of '95 and '96 by the time you see it. So by January '97 
you'll be fully engaged in this. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. No, as of January 1996, when an individual gets their 
pay slip — January 1996 — the deductions will be down to 
reflect the full benefit in January 1996. So that they will 
actually see by January '96 the full benefit in terms of what has 
been taken off their income tax. It will be down to reflect the 
full 150 for a taxpayer, the full 300 for a family. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So your fiscal benefit this year of $35 million is 
less than the full benefit because your fiscal year in '96 only 
goes for the first four months. Is that what you're talking about? 
 
Madam Minister, you've been talking . . . the amendments to 
section 5 and section 5.1 say that there's a clarification 
regarding the taxpayer's residence. All reference to taxpayer's 
residence seem to be eliminated. 
 
What was the effect of the previous wording and why is this 
eliminated? How many people does it affect, and how much 
money's involved? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this legislation just reflects a practice that has been 
occurring, but we needed to put it into law to be sure that it was 
completely covered from a legal point of view. 
 
What it covers is a situation where you might have an 
accounting firm located in Toronto and the individual involved 
would be a partner in the firm, but the firm does business all 
across Canada. What Revenue Canada requires that person to 
do, that partner, is to allocate to Saskatchewan the tax 
associated with the work being done in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in the past, we have been deducting tax and we have been 
treating tax that way, and the federal government has been 
treating tax that way. But we've never really had complete 
legislative authority to do that. So all this does is put legislative 
authority behind a practice that has been occurring in the 
province for some time. 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister; just another 
related question. Under the definitions for this program, 
qualified property is identified as falling under the definition of 
the federal Act. Might you explain the provisions and 
definitions of the federal Act in reference to this term of 
qualified property? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this is a complicated area. Qualified property is 
defined as property used in association with the qualified 
activity. So what that would mean is property associated with 
manufacturing and processing. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Qualified property falls now under the 
definition of the federal Act. Is that correct? This is being 
consistent with the federal Act — is that the intent? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member opposite, yes, that's 
correct. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. Under 
clause (iii) of the qualified property definition, you stipulate the 
property involved could never have been previously used. What 
does that mean? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that means used 
equipment. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The calculation 
for the tax credit on page 4 is quite complex — and I'm sure 
we've both apologized for this — but for the sake of the record, 
could you briefly walk us through the calculation and perhaps 
explain the policies, decisions, behind several of these elements 
and perhaps give us an example of how it would function for an 
ordinary business person? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, it's a complicated process. But I'm assuming, first of 
all, you're talking about a reduction? Okay, and I'll start going 
through the process here. 
 
What you'd first have to do is define your manufacturing and 
processing income by going to the list of qualified activities. 
And so the qualified activities would include — and I'll read 
this to you — qualified activities include all activities directly 
related to manufacturing and processing. And these include . . . 
there's some other . . . these are the sorts of activities that they 
have listed: engineering designer products and production 
facilities; receiving and storing of raw materials; producing, 
assembling, and handling of goods in process; inspecting and 
packaging of finished goods; line supervision; production 
support activities including security, cleaning, heating, and 
factory maintenance; quality and production control; repair of 
production facilities; pollution control; all other activities 
performed in Canada directly in connection with manufacturing 
or processing in Canada of goods for sale or lease; and 
scientific research carried out in Canada. 



May 5, 1995 

 
2018 

So once you've decided that you've defined your manufacturing 
and processing income according to the list of activities that are 
acceptable, then you decide the allocation of those activities to 
Saskatchewan in order to determine the reduction rate. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, maybe your officials could 
help us here. But where does the largest area of credits, where 
would you . . . where do we tend to find the largest area of 
credits? Is it a block of them or a group? What typically kind of 
industry or kind of businesses would be most likely to get the 
benefit? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite. The 
largest examples of beneficiaries would be farm implement 
manufacturers, Flexi-coil; IPSCO, steel manufacturer; and all of 
the processing of raw materials that is occurring in the province 
— canola crushing plants, those sorts of activities. Those are 
the main beneficiaries of this. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Your officials 
were going to look at sort of the relationship of sales tax or 
various tax increases and revenue. While you're doing that, 
Madam Minister, we had determined earlier, with your help, 
that the tax increases that you have brought into the province of 
Saskatchewan of 225 to $30 million have generally been split 
between business and individuals. 
 
Would that apply likely to the increases in rates at utilities in 
terms of Crown corporations and others? Is it generally split 
between individuals and corporations? Would that be a rule of 
thumb? Would that be ballpark? In other words, if you raise 
your power rates, you raise your gas rates, you raise you 
telephone rates, how is that split? Pretty much the same? Down 
the middle? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. We are developing a technical problem, first of all 
even developing the model I talked about, because what we 
have here is current year numbers plus some last year numbers 
for comparisons. 
 
And we also have a problem with that question that you ask 
because we . . . The Crown Investments Corporation would 
have the information here with all the examples of the different 
Crowns. We don't have that information with us today so I can 
honestly not tell you what that sort of split would be. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well that's fair enough. Perhaps your officials 
could help us then and just . . . Generally I'm trying to get a 
flavour for this in terms of fairness as we're looking at 
individual versus corporations. 
 
Could you give me a ballpark summary of the rate increases 
from the utilities? Do you have a ballpark figure? I mean I can 
dig it up. I've got the last year's auditor's stuff and a 
combination, but it seems to me that . . . And maybe I'm out a 
little bit here, but ballpark you said your net increases in taxes 
here have been 230, $240 million. 
 

The net increases in utilities, would that raise about the same 
amount of money? And if we assumed that it was sort of split 
50/50, would that be out of line? Would that be fair to say, that 
the rate increases have raised about the same amount of money 
net? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I really do not have that information here and I would 
really be hesitant to guess because all I would do would be 
guessing. And what I would say to the member opposite is 
when CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
is here they can give you those numbers, I'm sure, in great 
detail. 
 
People . . . In terms of the number of clients that something like 
SaskPower would have, there would be many more residential 
clients. But in terms of the dollars, they also have huge, huge 
clients that would be paying significant dollars relative to the 
individuals. But I just . . . I'm sorry, I just don't have those 
breakdowns here. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I guess it's an ongoing dilemma that we 
have, Madam Minister. But when we're looking at tax Bills and 
tax measures, we're trying to get the fairness between the 
individual taxes and business taxes. 
 
The other thing that you're aware of, and certainly your officials 
are, I am, and I'm certainly the chairman is . . . and most of the 
public is becoming aware because of the auditor's remarks, is 
that we have a great deal — 40-some per cent — of your 
economic activity that is, as you've just mentioned, sort of 
outside the legislature. You can't talk about it; you don't have 
the numbers; you don't have access. You don't have the capacity 
to share with me, the picture. 
 
The problem that we run into, Madam Minister, in talking about 
this kind of Bill is that when I get to the minister in charge of 
CIC, he can't answer for your side of the ledger, and we need 
the complete picture. I mean anybody talking about taxes . . . 
and any legislature's the same. It's not isolated or confined to 
you or the Saskatchewan legislature. It maybe is a bit more so 
here because we have larger Crowns but . . . 
 
In other words, Madam Minister, I guess what I'm concerned 
about is, or I just ask about is, can you give me any indication, 
or can your officials, who borrow for the Crowns, and you, 
make the picture . . . I can give you last year's numbers, but are 
they . . . and it looks like the Crown corporations' revenue has 
been increased several hundred million dollars because of rates. 
Is that fair? I mean have you got a ballpark figure of what it 
might be? You must have; you put your budgets together. You 
sit at the treasury benches. 
 
The general tax increases of $200-and-some million. What 
about the utilities? Can you give me any idea at all? And I'm not 
trying to hold you to specifics, but can you give me, can your 
officials give me, any indication of what the average . . . Well if 
we just take the tax increases on utilities, if they've amounted to 
about the same — two or three hundred million  



May 5, 1995 

 
2019 

dollars — would that be fair? Is that average? Is that a ballpark? 
Do you have a ballpark figure for this committee or before this 
House so that we could have an idea of how fair your tax 
measures are here? 
 
If in fact, Madam Minister — and one of the reasons that I'm 
concerned about it is — if in fact the individual homeowner and 
the individual taxpayer pays a lot more of these utilities 
increases than the businesses do . . . because businesses 
obviously can use utilities as write-offs. Businesses can say, as 
a taxable allowance I can write-off my telephone bill, my power 
bill, my gas bill, my insurance bill. The individual homeowner 
or the individual employee can't do that. 
 
So it's quite critical, Madam Minister, and I think you'd 
understand — I'm sure you do — that if we're looking for 
fairness between how you've taxed people as individuals versus 
corporations, the other side of the ledger is quite important. In 
other words, how much have you taxed individuals versus 
corporations on the utility side completes the picture so we can 
talk fairly about the measure taken in this Bill. 
 
So could you give me a ballpark figure and even your best 
guess from your officials — and I won't hold you to it, I'll hold 
your officials to it — your best guess of the fairness in utility 
increases in terms of — or the balance — in terms of 
individuals versus businesses. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, they don't have a 
guess about that. They're separate activities. The taxes that we 
collect, the taxes that we've talked about all the time that we've 
been talking are used for the services that the province 
provides. That is, all these taxes, whether they're business taxes 
or individual taxes, are used for health, education, agriculture 
programs, etc. So that's one part of the equation. 
 
Utility rate increases are a separate issue — they're user-pay. 
They're what an individual pays a company for the service they 
get. And the increases that occur there, occur in other 
provinces. Bell Canada increases its phone rates, as well; only 
thing, it doesn't go to the government, it goes to Bell Canada 
instead of to SaskTel. 
 
So they're entirely separate. The only relationship between the 
two is, a dividend is paid from the Crowns to the government 
every year which reflects the fact that the Crowns don't pay 
taxes. 
 
So it's equivalent to a tax. I mean if these were private 
companies, we would be taxing the private companies. SaskTel 
would be paying a tax because it's a private company. It doesn't 
pay those taxes, so instead we take a dividend, which comes 
across and which you see a number for. 
 
Now this past year we didn't take a dividend. Next year, I think 
the estimate is $50 million. But they're absolutely separate 
activities. And there's no sense in which a utility increase is a 
tax. Because let's say the power corporation, the phone 
corporation, the energy corporation were all private companies;  

they would be increasing rates — and they have increased rates 
across Canada — and the individual would be paying the 
increased rates, and they wouldn't say this is a tax. So just 
because it's a government company, it shouldn't be considered a 
tax. 
 
Now in this year's budget, on page 83, we have a table in there 
in which we compare our rates — the cost of utilities, all of the 
utilities in Saskatchewan, to other provinces — and in fact what 
you find is that our rates are amongst the cheapest in all of 
Canada. If you look at the cost of basic things like telephones, 
auto insurance, electricity, to the average household, we are 
amongst the cheapest in all of Canada. 
 
So I think that's the kind of gauge that you need. Because as I 
say, were SaskPower a private company it still would be 
increasing its rates and nobody would say it was a tax. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Maybe, Madam Minister, to help, you can just 
give us a summary of the dividends paid by CIC then to your 
side of the ledger from '91 or '92 to date. You say you're not 
forecasting one this year, or you're forecasting one next year of 
50 million. What have they been? To give us an idea of how 
much money you've been taking from the Crowns in lieu of 
taxes. 
 
And while you're digging that up, Madam Minister, if I look at 
last fall's summary statement by the auditor, I find the Crown 
corporations had a net position of $600 million — $600.295 
million, to be precise. Now that's a lot of excess money. And 
I'm trying to find out, in generating that excess money, did it 
come from individuals or did it come from businesses? Because 
then we can get a sense of the fairness associated with . . . of 
utilities and taxes on businesses and individuals. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, to date the money that has come from the Crown 
corporations to the General Revenue Fund is $30 million. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Devine: — So from 1992 to date, the Crown corporations 
through CIC have contributed $30 million to the General 
Revenue Fund in total. Nothing else? You haven't got any other 
dividends from the utilities at all? 
 
Madam Minister, the rate increases . . . The average person 
would find that interesting. If the rate increases have resulted in, 
as the auditor has pointed out, hundreds of millions of dollars in 
net profits to the corporations, why do you . . . I guess the 
average person would ask, why all these rate increases if we've 
got these huge, if you will, monopoly profits in the utilities that 
the government can call on and draw on. 
 
And why would the minister not . . . could you maybe just ask 
. . . We could ask, why would the minister not want to see more 
contributions from these huge monopoly profits come to reduce 
the general tax burden on individuals? 
 



May 5, 1995 

 
2020 

It seems just a little bit . . . I guess, Madam Minister, it seems 
like taxation when your power bill goes up and your utility bills 
go up associated with telephones and gas and insurance. When 
those rates go up, it seems like taxation to the average taxpayer. 
 
And then when they see the monopoly profits and taxes still go 
up, they say well, where's the money going if there's 
$100-and-some million monopoly profit in Power or $100 
million monopoly profit in SaskTel, and you say you're not 
using it? They say, well why do we need these increases in 
monopoly profits if you're not using it and the Crowns have this 
surplus? And isn't it in fact . . . Doesn't it look like a tax 
increase to you, Madam Minister? 
 
And could you give us some idea, as you sit on the cabinet 
benches and treasury benches, why have they had all these 
increases if you're not using it to generally . . . as you described 
earlier, you can draw money over to help roads and hospitals 
and so forth. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what is also over in CIC are all the megaprojects. And 
the profits from the Crowns, one of the purposes, besides the 
fact that they have to build infrastructure in the province — 
they have to replace phone poles or whatever — are going to 
subsidize the megaprojects that are losing money and have gone 
to subsidize megaprojects losing money. 
 
But to go back to the point, utility increases are not taxes and 
cannot be construed as taxes, because I think what the average 
person would understand is that in Saskatchewan, SaskPower is 
a Crown corporation. In Alberta, Alberta Power is a private 
corporation. Both of them have increased utility rates, and I 
have some numbers available to show that Alberta Power has in 
fact increased their rate at a more dramatic rate in the '90s than 
has SaskPower. 
 
And the people in Alberta, when they have an increase in their 
rates by Alberta Power, don't say, well the Government of 
Alberta has increased taxes. They say Alberta Power has 
increased the rates, and it's exactly the same in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, could you . . . maybe you 
could just help out the average taxpayer here who must be 
probably wondering . . . if I could just give you an example. We 
would just like to know where . . . 
 
The auditor said last fall that there's $600 million in net money 
in summary statements in the Crowns. And we see — if I could 
just take a moment — SaskPower rate increases went up 4 per 
cent in '92; 4.9 per cent in again in '92; and 3.8 per cent again in 
'94. And the monopoly profits, the profit, net profit in 
SaskPower, for example, was $118 million at the end of '91; 
$107 million at the end of '92; and $81 million at the end of '93. 
 
Now that's 1, 2 . . . almost $300 million in net profits, and the 
rates went up 4 per cent, 4.9 per cent, and 3.8 per cent. And the 
general public is saying, well if those rate increases go up and 
the net profits keep going up, where is the money going? 

Madam Minister, you say you're not taking dividends from there 
over here. Could you briefly describe to the average taxpayer 
why you think that those rate increases aren't taxes and tax 
increases when the utility raises them, stores up the money; 
according to the auditor, has something like $600 million stored 
up. And you said you haven't used it. 
 
Madam Minister, can you just take the case of SaskPower with 
about $300 million net profit over the last three years. Could 
you explain to the average taxpayer where that money is? What 
you're doing with it? Do you have access to it? If you wanted to 
next year, could you draw $100 million out of there? Could you 
draw more than you've indicated? 
 
Like this year, you said you're not drawing any. Next year you're 
going to draw 50. How much could you draw? Why did you 
pick the number — say — $50 million for next year? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, as he would know, this is . . . I do not have the records 
of SaskPower here. That's not the information I have. But to the 
average person, you say let's say a Crown corporation makes a 
profit of $100 million, but they also have demands on the 
infrastructure of the province. 
 
For example, people in the north-west said we need gas 
pipelines coming through here, so we can take the product out. 
Where does that money come from? It comes from the profits 
of the companies involved. Otherwise you have to go out and 
borrow and add to the debt of the province. So some of their 
profits are used to build infrastructure — power poles. 
 
The other thing that occurs though is megaprojects are over 
there, on the same part of the government, and they continue in 
some cases to require subsidization. And the key thing is that all 
of this is laid before the legislature and the public — which 
wasn't true in the past. Here's where the money is coming from. 
Here's where it goes. 
 
So when you get CIC in here . . . Or you can actually do it right 
now; you don't need CIC if you had access to all of the different 
annual reports and the overview that CIC provides. The average 
person can see exactly where their money is going. 
 
But I think the key thing is that if these were private companies, 
they would be doing exactly the same thing. They'd be taking in 
money, they'd be using some of the money to build new poles 
or to build new pipelines as required, and they would be paying 
some of the money in taxes — except the difference here is we 
don't call it a tax, we call it a dividend. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, I have before me the 
summary statements of the Provincial Auditor, 1994, a few 
months ago. And it has all the corporations — SaskEnergy, 
SaskPower, SaskTel, Sask Transportation, Sask Water, Sask 
Forest, Sask Liquor, Sask Economic Development, 
Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund, Crop Insurance, 
Government Insurance, auto fund, Workers' Compensation, 
employees, and various adjustments. 



May 5, 1995 

 
2021 

Madam Minister, the auditor summarized it all up a few months 
ago and he says the net position of those corporations is 
$600.295 million — net. 
 
Now we're talking about a Bill to address taxes. If there is 
$600-and-some million net in utilities and you're not using it 
and you're saying . . . and this net. I assume, Madam Minister, 
that they've budgeted for their natural gas pipelines and they've 
budgeted for their various projects and they budget for their 
water and they budget for their bridges and they budget for their 
telephone poles. 
 
And if they've budgeted that and they are self-liquidating — as 
utilities are because they can raise the rates — and they have a 
surplus of $600 million, I'm just asking, Madam Minister . . . 
the taxpayer is saying — and you admit it now — on your side 
of the ledger you've raised taxes net, net tax increases since you 
were elected, 225 to $250 million — net. 
 
On the corporation side I suspect, Madam Minister, that you 
have raised tax equivalents, utilities, at least that much. The 
auditor said it's $600 million net. Now you don't want to seem 
to share that with the taxpayer or you're storing it up for 
something. 
 
But, Madam Minister, it's . . . I know that utility increases are 
like a monopoly and that you are going to raise them to run the 
utility. But, Madam Minister, we have a very large surplus there 
and you have access to it. I guess my next question would be, 
you don't think it's a tax, but you've got a huge surplus; Madam 
Minister, do you have access to the monopoly profits of CIC? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we're talking about income tax, and I would like to 
bring the member back to the topic at hand. And so what we're 
talking about is whether or not the opposition wants to pass a 
Bill that gives tax cuts to businesses and tax cuts to the average 
family, and that's the issue here. 
 
And you know, we can stand here and debate for hours and 
you're never going to believe me and I'm probably never going 
to accept your view. A utility increase has got nothing to do 
with taxes. It's a fee for a service provided that occurs across 
Canada. And if it's a Crown corporation it's paid to a 
government entity here. And if it's in Alberta, exactly the same 
rate increase occurs and it's paid to a private company. 
 
You will have every opportunity when CIC is here to go 
through in detail the sorts of questions that you're asking, but all 
I can say to the member opposite is that the books of the 
province are wide open. There is no money hiding around 
anywhere. And the Public Accounts account for the way the 
government spends money. There is no capacity on the part of 
the government to go and access huge pools of money. They 
don't exist. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, you just finished telling me 
that you are going to access $50 million for next year's budget 
from CIC. Isn't that what you said — $50 million? 

Now what I'm asking, Madam Minister, could you do a 
hundred? In other words, instead of having this tax break stop 
at $50 million, could you go all the way and take it out of CIC, 
because evidently they have in a net position hundreds of 
millions of dollars? 
 
So, Madam Minister, number 1, you agree you could take 
money out of there because you're going to budget it for next 
year. Number 2 is, can you take more? And why are you 
limiting yourself and still taxing individuals when you have this 
huge surplus on the other side of the ledger? In other words the 
taxpayer says, why are you still taxing me this way, either in 
income tax or sales tax, when you have all this money on the 
other side that the auditor said is frankly unaccounted for in the 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
He said about 50 per cent of the budget is not brought together 
with the rest of the budget. Now that's the auditor saying. So the 
taxpayer would like to know that too. If the auditor is right, that 
you have access to more money on that side of the ledger, why 
can't you take more of that money and reduce income tax in the 
province of Saskatchewan? That's the question, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, the auditor of course did not say that we have access 
to more money. We do not have access to more money. We 
have begun to reduce taxes, and of course as our financial 
position improves we will continue to reduce taxes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, would you explain to me then 
where you're getting the $50 million that you just talked about 
that you're going to take from CIC in the next budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. What I have said to the member opposite is it's a 
dividend. It comes from the profits of the Crown corporation. It 
is probably quite close to what those corporations would pay in 
taxes were they private corporations. 
 
Looking at the level of their profits, this is probably very close 
to the level of taxation they would pay if they were private 
companies. And the private companies would be paying these 
taxes over to the government, as do the Crown corporations, to 
provide health, social services, etc. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Fair enough, Madam Minister. Would you 
think it might be possible to take more than $50 million, given 
the large monopoly profits in the Crown? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we do not think it would be reasonable to be taking a 
lot more because what happens is part of their profits goes to 
providing infrastructure and paying down some of their own 
debt. So all you're doing is increasing debt on one part of the 
government to pay another part of government. So you take 
$100 million dividend. They go out and borrow more money. 
Their debt goes up, and you're just going in a circle which is 
what happened in the past. 



May 5, 1995 

 
2022 

So we take a level of dividend that we think is appropriate in 
terms of the level of profitability, but there's no point in taking 
more and just driving up the debt of the province. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, again what we're trying to get 
you to consider on behalf of the taxpayer . . . if you have raised 
taxes by about a quarter of a billion dollars net . . . and you have 
these large increases in utilities that generate the same: $100 
million in 1991, another $100 million in 1992, and $81 million 
in 1993 from SaskPower. You've got 27 million in SaskEnergy, 
$51 million in SaskEnergy in 1992, $68 million in 1993. 
SaskTel over the same period, Madam Minister  51 million, 
79 million, 88 million. Hundreds and hundreds of net millions 
of dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars  and you've taken 
that out of the average individual's pockets. At the same time, 
you've increased taxes. 
 
Madam Minister, what they're asking, the individual taxpayer is 
saying . . . and I don't want to necessarily get into the question 
of income tax and tax increases. Not only did you raise taxes to 
the individuals here in the province of Saskatchewan by almost 
a quarter of a billion dollars, but you've raised all these rates. 
And these rates, Madam Minister, add up to . . . in this case, it 
looks like even more money than you've raised in terms of 
taxes. And you've admitted now that you can take dividends 
from those Crowns and bring them over and use them. 
 
So, Madam Minister, the average taxpayer is just asking if we 
can take dividends from the Crowns to provide the money that 
you need in the neighbourhood . . . like you said, $50 million. 
Why couldn't we look for income tax breaks or sales tax breaks 
if we've had to pay these high utilities at the same time? 
 
In other words, Madam Minister, could you explain to the 
average taxpayer . . . is there a relationship between tax 
increases on the utility side and tax increases on the government 
side? And can the average taxpayer look forward to some relief 
from utility rate increases or dividends that can compensate for 
income tax more than you've done in the past? Or is it still 
going to be tax them in utilities and turn around and net tax 
them on income tax and sales tax and fees and rates and 
royalties and the combination thereof? 
 
See, Madam Minister, it just adds up to so many hundreds of 
millions of dollars that you have access to, but you're not using 
it, and you're not explaining it well enough. Why can't you have 
access to that money that the auditors talked about to help 
reduce the tax burden on individuals? 
 
If SaskPower, SaskTel, and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) have hundreds of millions of dollars in net money, 
why do you still have to have this net increase of $240 billion in 
tax increases that you promised you'd never do on income tax to 
the average individual and small business? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I'll say again, a utility increase isn't a tax. 

SaskPower increases utility rates for SaskPower. A private 
company as it is in Alberta, it's called Alberta Power. It 
increases utility rates. The people of Alberta, when they pay 
their utility rates to Alberta Power, a private company, don't 
say, oh my gosh, my taxes have been increased. This is 
incredible. Well just because this happens to be a public 
company here — and our rate increases, by the way, have been 
less than in Alberta — they say, oh, it's a tax increase. Of course 
they don't. They say, if this was a private company I'd be paying 
a rate increase exactly the same as I do in Alberta. 
 
The member opposite is actually revealing an important point 
here. And that is that the members opposite have learned 
nothing from what happened in this province in the 1980s 
because what he is advocating is exactly what happened in the 
'80s; that is, they took the Crowns and they said, my gosh, 
there's some money sitting there. And let's just take that money 
across and spend it. 
 
And then what did the Crowns have to do? They don't have the 
money because it's all being spent. They go out, and they 
borrow money to build power lines and to build dams and to 
build all kinds of things. And all of a sudden the debt of the 
province is ballooning. But it doesn't matter because you've just 
taken every bit of money you had, and you spent it. 
 
So I mean it doesn't work. If you spend money that you don't 
have, you rack up debt, and it just means you pay more later 
because you pay not only the money back but all the interest 
which is what we've come through. And it's astonishing to me 
that, having gone through the '80s, having done exactly what 
he's saying . . . That's exactly what happened in this province in 
the '80s. Dividends taken out of the Crowns to bleed the 
Crowns of all their money and then to carry on their activities, 
they have to borrow money and rack up debt. 
 
We're not going back to the '80s. We're going to manage things 
responsibly. We're going to not take money from the Crowns 
that they can't afford and force them to go out and borrow 
money for their activities. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Interior Designers 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 

 
Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:49 p.m. 
 
 

 



May 5, 1995 

 
2023 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
Hansard No. 61A, Thursday, May 4, 1995, 1:30 p.m., page 
numbers 1941 to 1968 inclusive should be renumbered to 1973 
to 2000 inclusive. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
[Note: The online version has been corrected.] 


