













































February 9, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

February 9, 1995 

 

 

59 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to present a petition, and allow me to read the lead-up to 

this petition: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

the legislature assembled, the petition of the 

undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly showeth that Mrs. Carol Krieger of Yellow 

Grass wishes to build a multi-bed personal care home in 

Avonlea; that whereas Mrs. Krieger owns and operates 

similar type facilities in the town of Yellow Grass and 

the city of Weyburn, and whereas the community of 

Avonlea supports this facility both in principle and 

financially, and whereas this is a private facility 

requiring no government funding but has a potential for 

cost savings to the provincial health care system, 

therefore we the undersigned feel the province of 

Saskatchewan is showing unfair treatment and 

discrimination against the community of Avonlea by not 

giving Mrs. Krieger a licence to build this facility. 

 

And this petition has been signed by a number of people from 

the Avonlea area. I so present. 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

a petition here from residents of the constituency of Thunder 

Creek. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, because this is a new 

petition, I should read the preamble in its entirety: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

the legislature assembled, the petition of the 

undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly showeth that Highway No. 42 is in extremely 

poor condition due to dense traffic, an extremely cold 

winter, and a heavy precipitation last fall; and that the 

condition of Highway 42 will deteriorate even further 

due to increased vehicular activity during the summer 

months because of grain trucking, tourism, and other 

secondary industry and processing traffic. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate the total amounts 

of funds garnered from the taxpayer for fuel tax, vehicle 

licence fees, and provincial sales tax on new vehicles 

toward the maintenance and capital costs of 

Saskatchewan roads, and further that the Government of 

Saskatchewan dedicate any monies available from the 

federal infrastructure program toward Saskatchewan's 

road system rather than provide these sums toward 

capital construction of casinos in Regina and Saskatoon. 

  

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to present these. 

These are citizens from Tugaske, Craik, Saskatoon, and others. 

And in following days, Mr. Speaker, there will be more. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call the next order, I'm not certain 

about, I would have to have a look at the petitions, but I hope 

members are only reading the prayer when they are presenting 

the petitions. I will have to check that to make certain, but I just 

want to remind members that only the prayer is read. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health: (1) how many 

employees of your department attended the Canadian 

public health convention in Calgary; (2) what was the 

cost of those staff attending, including their registration, 

travel, meals, and accommodation. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the department of Executive Council: (1) 

how much is being paid this fiscal year to Phoenix 

Advertising Group by your department; (2) what were 

the services that were purchased or commissioned; (3) 

were all the services paid for actually received; and (4) 

how was Phoenix Advertising Group selected to 

perform this service. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

take a moment to introduce to you, and through you to this 

Assembly, three individuals who are with us this afternoon to 

witness the question period. I'd like to introduce them and ask 

them to stand. Mrs. Carol Krieger from Yellow Grass, 

administrator of the private care home there; Gary Nelson, 

mayor of Avonlea; and Tim Forer, Avonlea town administrator. 

And I'd like the Assembly to welcome these individuals to the 

Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

welcome the members here that have come today from Avonlea 

and from Yellow Grass. And I'm very pleased that they're here 

to be able to witness question period, and just welcome here 

today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 9, 1995 

 

60 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like the Assembly 

to welcome a former colleague of some of theirs, Bob Long, 

and also a constituent of mine and a dear friend. Say welcome 

to Bob, everyone. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 

the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is my mother Antoinette Simard, 

and she's been here many times before but I have never taken 

the opportunity to introduce her. And I would like to say a few 

words about her today. 

 

Antoinette was born in Ituna, Saskatchewan in 1912 and she 

was born upstairs above her father's store. Her father also 

owned the first hotel in Ituna, Saskatchewan, which he later 

closed during prohibition because it was almost impossible to 

make a living. 

 

Antoinette's family moved to Meadow Lake in 1919. They were 

attracted to Meadow Lake because of the beautiful trees and the 

lakes, and the children were enticed there because of the spruce 

gum on the trees. They went in 1919, and at that time the 

village was called Lac de Prairie. I bet you didn't know that, 

Maynard. 

 

Antoinette's father was a homesteader, a freighter, a trapper, 

and a justice of the peace and her mother was a person who was 

extremely interested in education. She made sure that all of her 

four children got a post-secondary education which was — 

even though they were as poor as church mice — which was 

quite extraordinary back in those times. 

 

Mom taught for 36 years. Her first school was in Junor, 

Saskatchewan in a little log cabin with no electricity. Many of 

her pupils could not even speak English but to this very day she 

still visits with a number of them. She retired in 1976 and is 

still very active in her community of Meadow Lake. 

 

Although she does complain to me from time to time about 

getting old, and I'm trying very hard to understand, but I don't 

think she's getting that old. 

 

For me she's been a source of strength and comfort, and she 

certainly is every inch a mother and every inch a professional 

woman. And today I want to say thank you to this very gracious 

lady who has been my comfort and my inspiration. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wasn't 

sure how to begin here as well, but I smiled to myself when I 

heard the member from Rosthern introduce his constituency 

assistant as a person that made him look good. Well in my case 

it works, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to introduce to you and to the Assembly my 

constituency assistant, Susan Karpenko, who has been down for 

the week to witness the throne speech and to also view the  

proceedings during the week. So, Susan, if you'd please stand 

and let us welcome you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: — And also I'd like to take the opportunity to 

welcome my constituent as well, Mrs. Antoinette Simard, who 

took the opportunity to travel down with me as well. Thanks for 

coming, Antoinette. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Aberdeen Seed Processor 

 

Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

announce today to you and to the House a business project 

which is creating jobs and economic activity in my area, and 

further evidence of the positive economic environment in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Horizon Seed Processors is starting a business this month in 

Aberdeen, Saskatchewan. This plant, which was established by 

local farmers, will clean lentils, peas, and mustard to export 

standards and then ship these commodities by bulk to buyers in 

Montreal, Thunder Bay, and Vancouver. 

 

This business is expected to employ six people initially. This 

plant, which is situated north-east of Saskatoon, will provide 

farmers with new markets for their escalating production of 

specialty crops. This group of farmers came up with an 

innovative idea, Mr. Speaker, and now we see this project 

coming to fruition. Initially the plant will have the capacity to 

clean 500 bushels of peas and lentils per hour and 200 bushels 

of mustard per hour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that this plant will be a major 

boost to the local economy and will provide employment and 

support to local families in the community. I want to wish the 

group of farmers the best of luck as they establish this business, 

as I know it will prosper in the years to come. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Act 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Saskatoon 

Wildwood are concerned about domestic violence, as are we 

all. Contrary to the judgements of moralist Murray Mandryk, 

we in this legislature occasionally do something right. Even less 

occasionally, we drop party lines and get it right together. 

 

Last session, with the support of all parties, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Act was passed. After several months of 

preparation by police and the judicial system, the Act was 

proclaimed last week. And according to a report in the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: 

  



February 9, 1995 

 

61 

(Barely had the Act) been proclaimed as law when a 

Saskatoon police officer asked a specially trained justice 

of the peace to issue an emergency intervention order 

under the Act, and the JP agreed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that one sentence is contained all the elements 

of the Act and the reason for which it was created. An incident 

of domestic violence must be met and dealt with immediately to 

avoid incremental violence and to protect the victim — not to 

punish her or him. With the specially trained JPs (justice of the 

peace) and with police officers empowered to intervene 

immediately, victims can now be helped without delay, 

avoiding the red tape which previously had hampered effective 

action. Police support this Act, and they're a tough sell. All 

front-line workers helping victims of domestic violence help 

support it. 

 

We all lament the necessity for such an Act, but I think that 

each member of this Assembly can take some satisfaction in 

being a party to its creation. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Science Centre 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform you and 

the members about the remarkable success in 1994 of the 

Saskatchewan Science Centre which is located in the 

constituency of Regina Victoria. 

 

The Saskatchewan Science Centre attracted 240,000 visitors in 

1994, making it the number one year-round education and 

tourism attraction in Saskatchewan. This number includes 

36,000 students from across Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba, 

Montana, and North Dakota. Mr. Speaker, this tourist attraction 

means $3.7 million to the provincial economy. 

 

The Saskatchewan Science Centre is a community organization 

that brings science to life through entertaining hands-on 

exhibits, science demonstrations and shows, student workshops, 

and IMAX films. One of the outstanding projects in 1994 was a 

major outreach program called The Safari Project. As 

Saskatchewan's first-ever live, interactive television program, 

Safari linked provincial classrooms by satellite feed to a remote 

research team near Barkley Sound, British Columbia. This was 

all made possible with the help of the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network, SaskTel, and the Department of 

Education, Training and Employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Science Centre is to be congratulated for all of 

its success and I know that 1995 will be another record-

breaking year. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lumsden Park Manor 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the 

end of last month I was given the privilege of cutting the ribbon  

at the grand reopening of the Lumsden Park Manor in my 

constituency. I was also pleased to present a painting by 

Saskatchewan artist Bertha Dick to the residents of the manor in 

recognition of this happy event. 

 

Home to a number of seniors, the manor was severely damaged 

by fire last February. To restore the building and to return the 

residents to their home, the community of Lumsden, the 

residents and their families, and many groups and organizations 

from the surrounding area came together in an act of 

community spirit that is typical of Saskatchewan. The project of 

restoration brought even closer an already supportive 

community. 

 

The building has been restored and improved, the piano and 

shuffleboard table are being used again, and a library has been 

created out of a small lounge area. Books donated by the 

community will fill the shelves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents of Lumsden Park Manor were happy 

to be back in their home. They organized a tea and 150 guests 

joined us at the grand opening. The ribbon I cut was held by the 

two most senior seniors, Irene Irvine and Margaret Schropp, 

both in their 90s. 

 

I thank all the residents of Lumsden Park Manor for a pleasant 

afternoon and I congratulate Cheryl Ashurst, the manager; 

Terena Bannerman, chairperson of the board; and all who were 

involved in restoring this much-appreciated facility. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wheatland Souris Winter Games 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently it was my 

pleasure to participate in the official opening of the Wheatland 

Souris Regional Winter Games. This event, entitled Come Alive 

In 95, was held from January 27 to February 4 in the four 

communities of Pangman, Ceylon, Parry, and Khedive. The 

games drew 1,560 participants, both young and old, in 44 

events; events that varied from archery, hockey, karate, dance, 

bridge, Trivial Pursuit, gymnastics, and curling, just to name a 

few. The oldest participant was 93-year-old Mike Allewell and 

the youngest participant was 3-year-old Devin Sheppard, both 

from Pangman. 

 

One of the highlights for me was to participate in a celebrity 

archery shoot. My target, as displayed in my office, had a 

balanced budget, re-election, and full employment. I hit my 

mark twice, but in good co-operative spirit I also hit the target 

beside me twice. 

 

These winter games are a fine example of community 

celebration on Saskatchewan's 90th birthday. These 

communities came together to celebrate culture, community, 

cooperation, in the spirit of participation and fun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these kinds of events don't just happen. They're 

made to happen and made to happen by a games executive of  



February 9, 1995 

 

62 

19 members, countless volunteers, participants and spectators 

and hours of work and planning. The reward, a tremendous 

community event. Congratulations on a job well done. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Special Wedding Anniversaries 

 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

want to pay tribute to four people from Last Mountain-

Touchwood. And I want to start with the youngest of the four 

— John and Mary Werner from Cupar who this weekend will 

be celebrating their 75th wedding anniversary. In that 75 years 

they have three children, eight grandchildren, and 12 great-

grandchildren. And they have spent most of their life farming in 

the Cupar area. 

 

And I said they were the youngest because I also want to pay 

tribute to George and Julia Hubick who on November last 

celebrated their 77th wedding anniversary. Of that marriage 

came four boys, 14 grandchildren, and numerous great-

grandchildren. They farmed in Strasbourg area. 

 

So I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that Last Mountain-

Touchwood is a very good area to live in at longevity and I 

want to certainly say a special congratulations to these four 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

On-Reserve Casinos 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question this afternoon is going to be directed to the minister 

for gambling. Madam Minister, we have another day, and we 

have another flip-flop on the Premier's chaotic gambling 

policies which, I might add, is becoming a trademark of his as it 

becomes more and more entrenched. 

 

The media, Madam Minister, are reporting that the Premier, the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale, who swears he's against 

gambling, has now decided to allow full-blown Las Vegas style 

casinos on Indian reserves in Saskatchewan. Now many people, 

Madam Minister, consider this to be a display of weak 

leadership, I might add out of the deepest respect, Mr. Premier. 

 

So my question is to the new minister of Gaming, who may 

have been appointed as a rubber-stamp I would suggest to the 

Premier's edict. Now, Madam Minister, it's becoming more and 

more evident of that fact. The Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indians is reported to be tabling your agreement in their pseudo-

legislature. But I see nothing in this, I see nothing in this 

Legislative Assembly. And, Madam Minister, and Mr. Premier, 

I take that as an insult, an insult to this institution and to every 

sitting member in this Assembly. 

Madam Minister, I ask that immediately that you table that 

document in this legislature now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I think, member opposite, I want 

to thank you for your question and just start out by saying that 

you have me confused with the Leader of the Third Party. That's 

where the flip-flops occur, not over here. 

 

This issue has been on the table for three and one-half years; 

this is not a new issue. But as a new minister I am anxious to 

bring this discussion to a close. We had an original agreement 

that contemplated two casinos in Saskatchewan. Since that time 

circumstances have changed. There's been a change in the 

Saskatoon decision and we have a new chief for the federation, 

Chief Blaine Favel. This has required us to revisit our 

agreement and that's what we're doing. Discussions have been 

productive and we believe that an agreement is close, and if and 

when we know, an announcement will be made. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

that is precisely the problem that I am trying to identify and 

impress upon you. Once again, Madam Minister, your Premier 

has struck a secret deal behind closed doors — a deal that will 

literally affect thousands of Saskatchewan citizens — and you 

don't have the courage to open the books so that the people that 

represent them, the people, the men and the women of this 

Assembly, can see it. The people who represent the 

Saskatchewan native population are reported to be reviewing it 

today yet everybody else is being kept in the dark. If you don't 

have the courage to table the deal then you'd better be prepared 

to answer some questions right now. 

 

Madam Minister, how many Las Vegas-style casinos will be 

allowed? Where will they be located? And will any of them be 

located in Saskatchewan cities, towns or villages? Answer that 

now so that we know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

thank the member from Rosthern for his question. We've said 

from the beginning that our role is to limit, regulate, and control 

gaming in the province and I will take, as minister, whatever 

steps are necessary in order to make sure that we achieve that 

goal. We are not anxious to have a repeat of the unproductive 

situation that occurred at White Bear. It does involve the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indians directly, so we are 

discussing it with them directly. And I will let you know as 

soon as we have reached any decision on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

again I say to you, that is precisely the problem that I'm trying to 

address. We don't know what is going on. And I'm going to  



February 9, 1995 

 

63 

suggest to you that one of the reasons . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — And your colleagues keep the people . . . are 

proud of the fact that you're keeping the people of this province 

in the dark while you're going on with your secret plan. You 

either don't have the answer to that question because you're 

going by the seat of your pants . . . you don't have any complete 

policy worked out. You're doing everything in a secretive, in an 

incoherent and an incompetent fashion, Madam Minister. That's 

what I'm saying to you. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what happens with a deal with 

Saskatchewan's charities and exhibition associations? Will they 

get their 25 per cent of the winnings from the reserve casinos 

that will now pop up all over the province? And what will that 

piece be? I remind you, Madam Minister, that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member has already 

asked three questions and I think the minister should get a 

chance to answer them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member opposite 

for his question and we still have time for some more. 

 

We have made it our policy, and particularly myself, I've been 

involved in this discussion, to protect the community share of 

gaming revenues. Exhibition associations have been kept 

whole. Bingos and charitable gaming, we have held them at 

their all-time revenue-generating high in this province, not 

sometime in the past when revenues were lower. We have 

restored some additional funding to the lotteries that were lost 

when the sports groups were striking and we have restored 

some VLT (video lottery terminal) revenue to the communities 

 as much as we could responsibly do within the context of a 

balanced budget. 

 

So I would have to say that our approach to gaming has been 

responsible in every way and this will be too, and if and when 

any agreement is signed, you'll have a chance to challenge it 

and scrutinize it in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, what I'm asking you: is this 

an agreement? What is in the agreement that the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians is looking at right now, making a 

decision on? We want to know that. We are the legislators of 

this province. We have a right to know, as the representatives of 

the people, before you do a deep, dark, secretive mission and 

accomplish that on your own. 

 

So we want to know: what is the spoils going to look like? We 

want an answer to those questions. Are you prepared to give 

them to us now? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you to the hon. member from 

Rosthern. I don't want to be rude in reminding you of this, but  

having sat on both Crown Corporations and Public Accounts 

Committee, it was two years after most of your decisions that 

we were able to receive any reporting on what you had actually 

decided. In fact, your cabinet had people who met behind 

closed doors to make deals that nobody ever knew about — not 

even other members of your caucus. So I would have to say if 

we're going to talk accountability, when we have something 

concrete which can be discussed, which is not just a whole 

series of discussions, then it will be brought here for discussion, 

and I give you my word on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, the bottom line here is that 

you and your Premier have struck a secret deal behind closed 

doors, a deal that's fundamentally going to change the direction 

of this province, a deal that will affect hundreds of thousands of 

Saskatchewan citizens, and yet you do not have the courage to 

open the books, to let us know what is going on before it's a 

done deal. 

 

Madam Minister, are you prepared to present that document of 

yours that you have now presented to the FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations) pseudo-legislature; will you 

present that and table it today in this legislature so that we, the 

representatives of the people, can have a look at it before it is a 

done deal, so that the people of Saskatchewan can also have a 

say in it before it is a done deal? They want to have a voice in 

this, Madam Minister. Are you prepared to give it to them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I will remind the hon. member from 

Rosthern that we have had gaming in this province since 1969. 

Our directions remain the same as they have always been — to 

limit, regulate, and control gaming activities. 

 

You know, as well as I know, that it is not possible to negotiate 

in public. When we have something concrete to discuss, we'll 

bring it forward to the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Personal Care Home Licensing 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

allow me to begin by welcoming the member from Wakamow 

to the real position of Minister of Health. I look forward to 

addressing a number of issues with the minister through this 

session. 

 

But let me begin today, Mr. Speaker, by bringing to the 

attention of the member that the town of Avonlea and Carol 

Krieger have been trying to obtain a licence for a personal care 

home for almost a year, and to no avail to this date. In fact I just 

presented a number of petitions to the House regarding that 

matter. 

 

The town of Avonlea approached Carol to build a home in their  



February 9, 1995 

 

64 

community and held a meeting to see what kind of interest there 

would be for a home. And guess what? At that meeting, within 

the Avonlea community, people committed some $350,000 of 

their own money to help with this personal care home, to help it 

get started. They committed this money because they want to 

live in the community that they've grown up in. 

 

Mr. Minister, this will not cost taxpayers money. Mr. Minister, 

why is it taking so long for a licence to be granted? What is the 

hold-up? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

member I want to thank him for his question. I was concerned I 

might go through this session and not have a question. I thank 

the member for his question. And I appreciate the member's 

well wishes at the initiation of his question, of course. If he 

wants to make this job a little easier, he has a role to play there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue that the member brings before the 

House today, specifically Mrs. Krieger's application for a 

personal care home in Avonlea, let me say two things. On a 

general sense, we have been engaged within the department 

over a number of months on the development of a long-term 

care strategy total for the province of Saskatchewan. That work 

is coming very near to a conclusion, and I expect the 

department will be delivering to me a draft strategy very shortly. 

 

On the more specific issue of Mrs. Krieger in Avonlea, I know 

that Mrs. Krieger has met a number of times with the 

department and that she has been made aware of this work 

towards a long-term care strategy. And as soon as the strategy is 

in place, we'll be certainly in contact with Mrs. Krieger and 

with yourself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

listening to the minister's answer, I'm almost beginning to think 

we've got another gaming policy that's developing. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that the Health department has been 

reviewing this issue, as you indicated, and developing a 

strategy. And I have a letter signed by yourself, dated August 

25th, that states, and I quote: "This process should take three to 

four months." That four months ran out in December, and in the 

meantime, the waiting-list for this care home continues to grow 

to, at this time, more than 40 individuals. 

 

In addition, Mr. Minister, the Thunder Creek District Health 

Board have said they have no objection with the proposed 

home. The local community needs it — again at no cost to 

taxpayers. I think it sounds reasonable, Mr. Minister. 

 

So exactly what is the problem? If the community and the 

district health board want the home, why hasn't it been allowed 

to proceed? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat, we have been at 

work, as the member knows, as I corresponded with the 

member, on this long-term care strategy. At the point of letter-

writing to the member, I expected that that strategy would be 

complete by the end of the year. We're now looking at a time 

frame taking us into the new year. 

 

I want to say to the member and to all members, we are not 

about to start doing piecemeal strategies. We want to develop, 

as we have with all portions of health renewal, strategies which 

will be appropriate across the province, appropriate to all 

districts. This is an extremely important portion of health care 

delivery in our province — the provision of services for long-

term care. We're taking the time to do the strategy right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again to the 

minister. Mr. Minister, last April Carol Krieger was informed 

by your department that a moratorium was put in place by the 

minister and that perhaps personal care homes would no longer 

be able to be built. Mr. Minister, Carol has had to build 

additions onto the personal care homes she operates in Yellow 

Grass on two occasions because of the growing number of 

seniors who require aid. And, Mr. Minister, your government 

just promised us more jobs for the province of Saskatchewan. 

Well here is an immediate fix to some of the jobs you're looking 

at trying to creating, and you don't even have to spend a dollar 

for it. 

 

Given such needs, Mr. Minister, needs that cannot be solved 

through home care, why have you placed a moratorium on these 

facilities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again I repeat, Mr. Minister, it is our 

intention to work through policy decision making, particularly 

in the field of long-term care, that will be appropriate to every 

district and every region and every citizen of our province. And 

we're doing that carefully. We're doing that not piecemeal, Mr. 

Speaker. We're doing that in conjunction with the broad range 

of services that should be, are, and will be available to the 

seniors of our province particularly. 

 

If the member would hang onto his seat and listen for 

announcements next week in terms of community care, he will 

be exceedingly pleased at the kind of announcements that will 

be made next week in broadening services across our province 

in every district for the seniors of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question to 

the Minister of Health. It seems, Mr. Minister, you have money 

for a number of things in this province but you have no money 

to really look after seniors across the province — the seniors 

who built this place, seniors who built this province. 

 



February 9, 1995 

 

65 

Mr. Minister, as I indicated earlier, Carol Krieger has received 

no government funding such as grants to help with the 

construction or maintenance of her homes. And her residents do 

not receive a government subsidy. In other words, she is 

providing a service to the people of this province at perhaps a 

third to a quarter of the cost that the government is spending to 

keep seniors. Further, Mr. Minister, this is not an isolated 

situation. Many rural communities like Eston and Martensville 

need personal care homes, and they have raised funds to build 

them and are getting the runaround from the government. 

 

Mr. Minister, Carol has requested a meeting with the minister 

. . . with the former minister. To date, a meeting hasn't taken 

place. Will you take the time this afternoon, Mr. Minister, to sit 

down with Mrs. Krieger, the mayor, and the administrator of the 

town of Avonlea to discuss their concerns? Will you make that 

commitment, Mr. Minister? They're here to meet with you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — On the latter, given the constraints of my 

calendar, I'll be more than happy to meet with Mrs. Krieger and 

with the mayor and the town administrator of Avonlea this 

afternoon. But I can tell you, and I can tell all who will be 

listening now, the response will be no different than the 

response in this House: that we are developing the long-term 

care strategy and that strategy will be developed and presented 

to the minister, and I will approve or disapprove that strategy. 

 

Now I want to talk about the member's earlier comments about 

monies being made available to the seniors of our province. I 

can tell that member — and he should know this — that in the 

last few months, under the leadership of the former minister, we 

have established in this province a home IV (intravenous) 

program; we have established funding for home palliative care; 

we have established programing and funding for home renal 

dialysis. These are valued community-based, home-based 

services. 

 

Then he's got the gall, Mr. Speaker, to come into this House and 

say, why don't you folks have more money for the people who 

built this province? Well the people who built this province 

know why this government is in such difficult financial 

circumstances. It's the financial history and record of that 

particular party in government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Strategy 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

May 29, 1994 the Government of Saskatchewan created a new 

Crown corporation, the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, to 

oversee and manage casinos in Saskatchewan. The Gaming 

Crown has set up shop in a hotel across from the Union Station 

parking lot so that it can watch a sign that says, future home of 

a Regina casino. It must be an awfully important sign because 

the Premier has a lot of high-priced help making sure that 

nobody takes it down. 

I table information that we obtained recently which details the 

names, the salaries, and the job descriptions for all employees 

of the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. The president, 

$8,500 a month; the vice-president, $7,058 per month; the vice-

president of development, $6,400 a month; and the executive 

director, $4,750 a month. And the list goes on — $33,000 a 

month to keep an eye on a sign in a parking lot. 

 

My question is directed to the Premier. Why would the 

government hire all of these individuals at such great expense 

when there has clearly been nothing to manage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

question from the Leader of the Liberal Party. Obviously these 

people are working on the casino policy and much of the 

negotiations that the members of the official opposition were 

asking about earlier — who's doing the work; who's working 

through the arrangements that are being made for the policy? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think what's more important is this 

continued attack by the Leader of the Liberal Party on people 

who work in government. The day before yesterday it was the 

people in the Department of Economic Development — no 

good, she says, waste of money. Today it's the Gaming 

Corporation. But even more than that are the five former press 

secretaries who have worked in her office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't mind being attacked in this House by a 

fellow politician, but I think this continuous attack on the 

people who work in government by that member tells you 

something about the character and what she would do if she 

were ever premier of this province — attack innocent people 

who work in government. No basis in fact. And I say, why don't 

you cease and desist this attack on the civil service of 

Saskatchewan and try to deal a little bit more appropriately with 

your own press secretaries? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm wondering 

when the minister will cease and desist in being so terribly 

defensive and actually answer some questions for a change. 

 

It is again glaringly obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government does not have a plan, nor does it 

have any knowledge on how to administer gaming in this 

province. 

 

We now know that negotiations are being conducted to reverse 

yet another NDP policy decision regarding casinos in this 

province. The government's own study clearly indicates that 

Saskatchewan can support but one large casino. These new 

negotiations will create a framework for the development of an 

additional five casinos in this province, with the exhibition 

casinos still operating, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to table an excerpt from the Fox study  



February 9, 1995 

 

66 

commissioned by this very government, this very Premier, paid 

for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, which suggests a definite 

limit on the number of casinos that Saskatchewan can support. 

 

My question again to the Premier: does he believe, Mr. Premier, 

that it is responsible for there to be a Crown casino when this 

new competition that has now been presented might render it a 

failure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again I appreciate the 

question, and what I'm a little concerned about is the fact she 

says we have no experience on gaming. And I guess the fact 

that I haven't owned racehorses like this member has does give 

me a little bit of a disadvantage on my knowledge of gaming. 

But to say that we have no policy and no idea how to manage 

the gaming of the province completely flies in the face of what 

is in fact happening. 

 

We have had very close relationship with the Regina Exhibition 

Association on developing a casino strategy in Regina. The 

Regina Economic Development Authority has been very much 

involved. The downtown merchants are involved in advising the 

government. The Regina Chamber of Commerce with the 

previous administration under Mr. Boutilier, as well as Jamie 

Wilson who is the new president of the chamber, very much 

involved. 

 

And you can go on attacking all these people who are putting a 

big effort into development of the gaming policy, but you are 

very much in isolation, believing that you know more 

personally about gaming than anyone else. And maybe that's 

true because again you have had lots of experience with gaming 

— owning horses, racehorses. 

 

But I tell you that grandstanding in the House is not the way to 

accomplish what we're trying to do in a very sensitive way: 

build a gaming policy that is in the best interest of all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, the minister actually knows 

that his own studies indicate that Saskatchewan can only 

support the equivalent of one major casino regardless of all of 

the good work and good intentions that have been brought 

forward by people interested in having a casino in Regina. 

 

If the casino market is oversupplied, someone is sure to fail. 

There simply must be a re-evaluation of the market and an 

assessment done by someone with no vested interest to see what 

the impact of this new agreement will have on the viability of 

casinos in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you believe that it is sensible, that it is 

responsible, to move forward and build a Crown casino in 

Regina without objective evidence which indicates that it can 

succeed, given that you are now coming forward with added 

competition that was not in the equation before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee the 

member obviously that the partners involved in building a 

casino will do the economics on whether or not a casino should 

be built. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

appears the government simply wants to dig deeper and deeper 

a hole for itself. So far they've announced a deal that includes 

exhibition boards, gives $1.75 million to the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations to cover the costs of establishing 

a partnership. Then they set up a Crown corporation last May, 

some eight and a half months ago, that is paying for its four 

managers more than $25,000 a month to manage basically 

nothing. 

 

How is it, Mr. Minister, that you can justify spending precious 

tax dollars to employ people to oversee a casino that, once you 

get objective information, may never even be built? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on the one hand the 

Leader of the Liberal Party says we should do more analysis, 

more study; on the other hand she says we should spend less 

money and have fewer employees. And I just don't understand 

how you can have it both ways. 

 

It's a little bit like balancing the books of the province. You say 

on the one hand we should be doing more, cutting taxes, but on 

the other hand you've already announced that you would spend 

$300 million more if you were elected. You can't have it both 

ways. You can't say to the government, you should be doing 

more studies and more analysis but have fewer people. 

 

And I say to you that you are so confused on this issue, as you 

were on jobs, that the people of Saskatchewan are really 

beginning to wonder about your credibility on any issue that 

you get up and talk about in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Four Year Term/"FYT") 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move a Bill to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Four Year 

Term) be introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review 

Committee/"LURC") 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move a 

Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council  



February 9, 1995 

 

67 

Act (Legislative Utilities Review Committee) be introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Free Votes/"FREE") 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move a 

Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Act (Free Votes) be introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read the second 

time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Appointments Review 

Committee/"ARC") 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move a Bill to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(Appointments Review Committee) be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill. No. 5 — An Act to amend The Government 

Organization Act (Executive Council Reduction/"ECR") 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move a Bill to amend The 

Government Organization Act (Executive Council Reduction) 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the House to 

make a short personal statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 22, 

1995, I voluntarily withdrew from the New Democratic Party 

caucus as a result of charges which had been laid against me. 

 

I had not taken part in any caucus deliberations since that time. 

However I have written to the Premier this week informing him 

of my plans with respect to the decision last Friday by the Court 

of Queen's Bench. My case is still before the courts in that 

sentencing has been adjourned to March 10, 1995 and the 

normal appeal period would follow that date. 

 

It is my intention, Mr. Speaker, to carry on my duties as MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the constituency of 

Quill Lakes until this matter has been fully disposed of in the  

courts. However I also respect this institution and care for my 

party too much to continue to sit in the Chamber should this 

court decision stand. 

 

Therefore my letter to the Premier makes it clear that I shall 

voluntarily resign both as a member of the New Democratic 

Party and as a member of the Legislative Assembly should a 

conviction remain in place following either my decision not to 

lodge an appeal or all appeals have been exhausted. It has been 

my honour to represent the constituency of Quill Lakes in this 

house for 20 years, and as anyone who knows me should 

appreciate, this is a very difficult decision for me, but I feel it is 

the only appropriate course. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank my wife, Shirley; my 

family, Maury, Douglas, Lisa; my brothers and sisters; my 

constituents and others who have supported me throughout this 

difficult period. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to, with leave, move a 

motion to change a member of a committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Members 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview: 

 

 That the names of Mr. Kowalsky, Ms. Stanger and Mr. 

Knezacek be substituted for those of Mr. Thompson, 

Ms. Bradley, Mr. Whitmore on the Standing Committee 

on Private Members' Bills, and that the name of Ms. 

Lorje be deleted from the list of members on the 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview: 

 

 That the name of Ms. Murray be substituted for that of 

Ms. Crofford on the standing committee on the 

constitution. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for The Battlefords: 

  



February 9, 1995 

 

68 

That the name of Ms. Hamilton be substituted for that of 

Ms. Crofford on the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Canora: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Penner be substituted for that of 

Mr. Koskie on the Standing Committee on Privileges 

and Elections. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Kowalsky be substituted for that 

of Mr. Renaud on the Standing Committee on 

Municipal Law. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, second by the 

member for Regina Lake Centre: 

 

 That the name of Ms. Bradley be substituted for that of 

Mr. Thompson on the Standing Committee on Non-

controversial Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Rosetown: 

 

 That the names of Ms. Lorje and Mr. Sonntag be 

substituted for those of Ms. Crofford and Mr. 

Thompson on the Standing Committee on the 

Environment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, finally I move, 

seconded by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

 That the name of Ms. Stanger be substituted for that of 

Ms. Crofford on the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — I rise, Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What's the member's point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, a motion that was brought 

forward a few minutes ago in terms of substitution of 

committee members and, based on your ruling that you stated in 

the terms of verbatim of Hansard, referred to me as Ms. 

Whitmore. I would like that corrected, please. 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to inform the member that my 

eyesight is very poor. I can't tell the difference. 

 

The member's point of order is duly noted and a correction will 

be made. 

 

Order, order. Order. 

 

(1430) 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, yesterday in this 

House, the member from Saskatoon Wildwood raised a point of 

order regarding an intervention by the Chair when the member 

for Kinistino was making a statement as he himself said, as, and 

I quote, chair of a caucus committee, in the period for 

statements by members. I agree that some clarification of the 

position of the Chair and the purpose of private members' 

statements is needed. 

 

The Special Committee on Rules and Procedures designed the 

provisions for a period for statements by members during three 

periods in 1992. The Assembly used the new procedure for a 

short period on a trial basis that year. In 1994, the Rules 

Committee again discussed the proposal and recommended a 

permanent rule change to adopt a 10-minute daily period for 

members to make brief, timely statements on issues of personal 

concern not necessarily restricted to constituency matters. 

 

During its deliberations, the committee members wrestled with 

the question of the purpose and content of members' statements. 

I refer members to the verbatim report of the meeting of the 

Rules and Procedures Committee on February 15, 1994 where 

members repeatedly identified their chief concern about their 

earlier experiment . . . about the early experiment was that the 

period became less effective as an opportunity for private 

members as the statements became increasingly partisan. 

 

On page 4, the member for Rosthern said: 

 

 Unfortunately, the way it was developing . . . and I don't 

know why it developed into a partisanship kind of 

procedure at times. Now maybe it was because we had 

not laid down strict enough guidelines and strict enough 

rules as to how it was going to be employed. Maybe we 

didn't give Mr. Speaker enough persuasive powers to 

control the issues so that indeed it achieved the 

objective that we were trying to do, and that is make a 

statement of our constituency, non-partisan, with no 

rhetoric or inflammatory remarks included. 



February 9, 1995 

 

69 

On page 7, the member for Churchill Downs said: 

 

 . . . I think to ask the Speaker to determine what's 

partisan and what isn't, I think is very difficult, Bill. I 

mean I support your view, because I think they're much 

more effective if they're not (meaning not partisan) . . . I 

think the public kind of tune out when they get partisan. 

But to try to make a rule which says they can't be 

partisan and the Speaker's got to enforce that I think 

involves some very difficult value judgements. 

 

On page 7, the member for Elphinstone said: 

 

 What about the possibility, Bill, of members may make 

statements about subjects of interest or concern of a 

public nature, like just words that would at least lead us 

in that direction. Because in all honesty, if we could go 

back and do that period over again, I think we'd all be 

better off if we had, as House leaders, avoided them 

becoming political. 

 

My intervention yesterday reflected the views of the members 

of the Rules Committee regarding the intent of the members' 

statement period. The Rules Committee verbatim also shows 

that the committee felt unable to adequately define what was 

overly partisan and thus decided to leave the discretion to the 

member rather than requiring the Speaker to rule on that 

grounds. 

 

Therefore, as the Speaker of this House, I can only remind 

members that it is their individual responsibility to ensure that 

the period for statements by members retains its value as an 

opportunity for the views of individual members to be heard 

rather than become merely another opportunity to air the 

positions of party caucuses. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Bradley, seconded by Mr. 

Knezacek. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be 

able to continue on with my speech on the throne speech since 

we were interrupted by the clock yesterday. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to continue on where I left off 

to some degree yesterday with regards to economic 

development here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe that yesterday I covered some of the positive stories 

that were happening in my constituency in regards to economic 

development, with Norquay Alfalfa, for example; Sask-Can 

Fibre; and a group of farmers at Preeceville who are looking  

into the real possibility of establishing an intensive hog 

operation in that area; as well as the diversification of 

agriculture in regards to assistance from the Government of 

Saskatchewan with a group of farmers in Norquay who were 

progressive enough to look at establishing a feeder co-op there 

and a breeder co-op which has resulted in the addition of over 

300 bred cows in the Norquay farming area, as well as 100 to 

150 feeders going into a feedlot operation there, part of a 

backgrounding, overall backgrounding operation. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, I think is just a clear indication of the 

optimism that is felt out there in rural Saskatchewan, and in 

Saskatchewan as the whole, both urban and rural. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, has come about as a result of the clear sense by the 

people of Saskatchewan that there is a government in place here 

in the province today that knows where they're going, wants to 

rebuild this province, and has laid out a very worthy and a very 

optimistic path for that economic development to happen. 

 

As the result of that, Mr. Speaker, we see according to 

StatsCanada figures — and there's not too many of us that can 

argue with StatsCanada figures except of course those, Mr. 

Speaker, in the Liberal Party — that clearly indicate that since 

1992 there's been 7,000 jobs created in Saskatchewan. Some 

7,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker, since 1992. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

also over and above the total youth employment that has been 

increasing steadily, rising from an average of 74,000 in 1992 to 

75,000 in 1993 to 76,000 in 1994 — a clear indication, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government recognizes the value of our youth 

and the value that our youth needs to be trained, trained 

properly to meet the challenges of the future. 

 

As we all know, we're living in a changing world and a 

changing society. And the traditional jobs that you and I, Mr. 

Speaker, were used to being able to get involved in after our 

educational process had been completed and looked forward to 

having a career in that same occupation for 25 or 30 years, we 

well know Mr. Speaker, that that likely will not exist in the 

future. 

 

In the future, it is suggested that careers will last some five to 

seven years, and if we don't continue to upgrade ourselves, 

retrain ourselves, we will soon become obsolete to the company 

or the firm we may be working for. Well, Mr. Speaker, our 

government recognizes that and, as a result of that, we started 

embarking on a path of providing the facilities for training of 

our youth so that they can be well equipped to meet the 

challenges of the future. 

 

All this, Mr. Speaker, contributes to the optimism that is 

spreading like a wildfire across Saskatchewan. It is that 

optimism, Mr. Speaker, that has spurred the development of the 

7,000 jobs that I have referred to earlier. 

 

The development of those jobs did not take place at a 

government initiative. Yes, Mr. Speaker, government played a 

role in creating the atmosphere for those jobs, but those jobs are 

7,000 sustainable jobs in the economy of Saskatchewan because 

those jobs were developed and created by small and  



February 9, 1995 

 

70 

medium-sized business. And we know, Mr. Speaker, small and 

medium-sized businesses in this province are the engines that 

drive the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what sets us different from the other guys, Mr. Speaker, 

and I'll just refer you to some of the comments I made yesterday 

about the other guys. As the history of Saskatchewan has shown 

us, particularly the political history of Saskatchewan has shown 

us, that in Saskatchewan there is really only two political 

parties, and that is the NDP and the other guys. And the other 

guys, whether they're running under the banner of the Tories or 

they're running under the banner of the Liberals, they're still the 

other guys, Mr. Speaker, still the other guys with the same 

ideas, the same goals  now what scares me, Mr. Speaker  

the same hidden agenda. The agenda of delivering the economy 

of Saskatchewan to the hands of doomed-to-fail megaprojects. 

 

Doomed to fail megaprojects, Mr. Speaker, have been the 

record of both Liberal and Conservative governments in 

Saskatchewan. And that is exactly what the history of the Ross 

Thatcher Liberal government of Saskatchewan has indicated to 

us, and that as we all know, Mr. Speaker, the most recent Tory 

government in this province that has left us with a humongous 

debt and deficit situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan has built this province 

on a desire of cooperation, on a desire of community, and a 

desire of working together to build a society for all of us. And 

that common sense, community-based jobs creation approach is 

what is going to turn this economy around and what is playing a 

big role in turning the economy around as we view it today. I 

will build a better and stronger Saskatchewan for tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: — There is no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, as 

I meet with the town councils across my constituency. I had the 

opportunity just the other day to meet with the town council in 

Canora, the first opportunity I had to meet with them in recent 

weeks. And there was a positive atmosphere there, Mr. Speaker, 

a positive atmosphere because they realized that they're going to 

have to play a role in creating economic development for their 

community if they plan to survive in the changing world. 

 

We're already seeing some positive things coming out of 

Canora. Some two weeks ago or three weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, 

I had the opportunity attending a ribbon-cutting ceremony at a 

Turbo service station which was newly renovated, and it 

coincides with the central mall operation in the town of Canora. 

And that day the administrator of the mall told me, Mr. 

Speaker, that over 1,500 people had gone through that mall in 

that small town in that one day  a clear sense, Mr. Speaker, of 

optimism and a desire of the people of Saskatchewan to 

participate in the rebuilding of this province. 

 

Just recently, Mr. Speaker, Sask-Can Fibre, which operations is 

located in Canora, announced a partnership agreement between 

themselves and Cargill of Canada Limited to develop a pilot  

projects for the processing of flax straw fibre. And that pilot 

project will be launched in the very near future, creating some 

four jobs through the pilot project which will run for a period of 

approximately two years. And at the end of that pilot project 

will be developed a full scale processing operation. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, recent announcements in regards to the town 

of Canora has been the announcement by United Grain Growers 

of their desire to establish a large throughput cement elevator in 

the town which will facilitate the handling of grain and various 

agriculture crops grown in the area by the farmers there. But 

we'll also have the ability to supply fertilizer and also have the 

drying ability, and it will be basically a one-stop shopping 

operation there, Mr. Speaker. Those are just some of the 

indications of the positive things that are happening out in my 

constituency. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we also want to spend a few moments 

on recognizing the good work that's been done by both the 

former member and minister of SaskPower and SaskEnergy, as 

well as the present minister for SaskPower and SaskEnergy, and 

the recent announcements of the savings of about $45 per farm 

as a result of a reduction in natural gas prices of some 6.5 per 

cent. It's a clear indication, Mr. Speaker, that this government, 

as it recognizes savings, will pass those savings on to the 

consumers  a clear recognition, Mr. Speaker, of a fair and 

honest and a forward-thinking government here in 

Saskatchewan, very similar to what our approach has been in 

health care and health care reform. 

 

As we indicated early in the reform process, that the amount of 

money identified as savings within that health care as a result of 

the reform of health care would be pumped back into health 

care to provide a more efficient and a more effective system of 

delivery of the services. That we saw, Mr. Speaker, in last year's 

budget where there was some $10 million pumped back into 

rural health care. As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we are able to 

modernize many of those facilities out there. A couple I'll draw 

your attention to are in my constituency. 

 

(1445) 

 

In Norquay, for example, where we have a health centre . . . has 

now been able to acquire a new automatic defibrillator which 

has assisted in heart attack victims, and that equipment, Mr. 

Speaker, was not available before simply because of the cost of 

it. But because of the savings that's been identified within the 

district, that new modern equipment is now available in 

Norquay and Invermay facilities. And that, Mr. Speaker, is just 

a beginning, just a beginning of the good news that's going to 

be coming across this province, coming to health care and 

health care services. 

 

As we know, Mr. Speaker, the major part of our population . . . 

and I believe, if my stats are correct here, Mr. Speaker, that 13 

per cent of the Saskatchewan population are senior citizens. 

Well out in my area, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, we 

double that. Some 26 per cent of the population there are senior 

citizens. And we — in this generation, my generation — and  



February 9, 1995 

 

71 

we, as people of this province of Saskatchewan, owe a great 

deal to those seniors for those are the people who built this 

province. Those are the people who made the sacrifices and 

paid the price of building the Saskatchewan that we know 

today. Those are the people, Mr. Speaker, who are the most 

disheartened and saddened by the effects of the other guys on 

the economy of this province over the last 10 or 12 or 15 years. 

Those are the people that remember, Mr. Speaker, full well, the 

fine and prosperous province we had here in Saskatchewan 

prior to 1982. 

 

And those are the same people, as I meet them in the coffee 

shops and as I meet them in the senior citizens' homes, will tell 

me that keep up the good work. Pass on my message to the 

Premier. Keep up the direction you're going and keep rebuilding 

Saskatchewan because we know that you can make 

Saskatchewan the province that we all know it can be, and that's 

a province of prosperity and a province of opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have enjoyed my opportunity to rise here in the 

Chamber and offer my comments on the throne speech. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks now, and 

thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It is indeed my pleasure today to present to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan my 

address in reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Eight months have lapsed since we as a group left this 

Chamber, and a lot of changes have taken place in all of our 

lives in those eight months. I want to acknowledge some of 

those life events before I begin to speak to the throne speech 

that we heard this past Monday. 

 

During this intersessional period, I've seen many of the 

members here in various committee meetings, so I have been 

able to keep an update on some of their lives. 

 

To Mr. Speaker I want to extend my hearty congratulations on 

the birth of his grandson Benjamin, baby brother for his 

granddaughter Hannah. Mr. Speaker and I have been competing 

in the grandparents' sweepstakes for this last couple of years 

now. And on two occasions he has scooped me with the births 

of his grandchildren: Hannah, who beat the birth of my first 

granddaughter, Carson, and now Benjamin arrived considerably 

earlier than my second granddaughter Mckenna, who made her 

appearance on September 29. 

 

Also on the subject of new arrivals, I want to extend a warm 

welcome to our legislature to the new Clerk Assistant, Meta 

Woods. Now Meta has an extensive and impressive résumé, and 

it is easy to see why she was the successful one of 128 

applicants for the position. Although Meta commenced her 

work here in September and has already gotten her feet wet, so 

to speak, working on the Special Committee on Driving Safety, 

this is her first full legislative session, and I wish her well. 

Along with the changes in the Clerk's office, is the appointment 

of Greg Putz as Assistant Clerk, a role that he fills with 

remarkable calm and ability. Another familiar face that is gone 

from the Clerk's office is Joyce Rublee, who served as the 

administrative assistant to the Clerk until her recent retirement. 

I want to congratulate her replacement, Monique Lovatt, who 

has taken over those duties after serving as a back-up person to 

the position for several years. As well, congratulations to Pam 

Scott, who moved up from the personnel and administrative 

services branch to the Clerk's office, to fill Monique's former 

position. 

 

I want them all to know how much their hard work and 

experience is of great, great value to our members and our 

caucus staff. And while the positions they occupy may be 

different from those that they have had in the past when we sat 

here last, there is considerable comfort to the members in this 

House that such talented individuals are still here to perform 

their duties at their demanding jobs. 

 

Now I want to welcome the pages for this session: Rhonda 

Adams, Trevor Hande, Kristina Johnson, Leanne Notenboom, 

and Lisa Panchyk. I hope their experience as pages is a positive 

and memorable one. 

 

And I want to extend a very special welcome back to our Clerk, 

Gwenn Ronyk. Although I have had the opportunity to see 

Gwenn frequently over the past few months while we've been 

conducting budget deliberations and other matters at the Board 

of Internal Economy, I know that she and her staff have had to 

endure a very arduous few months. And as usual, however, the 

Clerk of this Legislative Assembly has handled herself with her 

trademark professionalism and grace. 

 

And welcome back too, to the broadcast services fellows, Gary, 

Kerry and Ihor. And on the technical side, welcome back to the 

Hansard transcribers and personnel whose meticulous work is 

very, very much appreciated. It is nice to see the familiar faces 

of our ushers and security personnel, as well. Their wit and 

charm are always refreshing to me as they are to everyone who 

visits this Chamber. 

 

Our corps of commissionaires staff has changed somewhat 

since we were here last, and I welcome those new people to this 

building. It is with great personal sadness that I want to 

acknowledge the passing of one of our commissionaires, Denis 

Blondeau, who died last December. Even when battling cancer, 

Denis's kindness and optimism never faltered, and I will miss 

Denis personally very, very much. 

 

Now to my fellow Assembly members, congratulations to our 

new Leader of the Opposition. I, perhaps more than most, can 

attest to what a gigantic task he has before him as he begins to 

rebuild his party. And while our views on how to tackle the 

issues facing the people of this province and perhaps our 

approach to addressing those issues may differ, I know that we 

share a commitment to serve the people of this province to the 

best of our respective abilities. 

 



February 9, 1995 

 

72 

To the member for Thunder Creek who served as Acting Leader 

of the Official Opposition over the last several years, I want to 

thank him for his cooperative relations with our caucus during 

his tenure. 

 

And on the government side of the House, I want to 

acknowledge the hard work and personal sacrifice that was 

made by the members for Regina Hillsdale and Swift Current 

during their years as members of Executive Council. Again 

while I may not have always agreed with their choices and 

actions, I certainly know and appreciate how much of their 

energy and their souls went into their work. 

 

To the two new members of cabinet, the member for Regina 

Lake Centre and the member for Athabasca, I wish them both 

well in their portfolios. I know they are both very capable 

individuals. And to the other members of cabinet who have 

assumed new duties, I wish them well too. 

 

Lastly, I want to extend a welcome back to all members of this 

House. We share a common and rare experience to have the 

opportunity to serve the people of this province as their 

government. That is a responsibility that I do not take lightly. I 

know that they all work hard to accomplish the things that they 

believe in, and that work often goes unappreciated or unnoticed 

by many. I hope that by setting an example of dignity and 

respect for one another in this Chamber we can set about 

changing that attitude that is unfortunately so prevalent among 

our public. 

 

As member for Saskatoon Greystone, I have the distinct 

privilege of representing what is currently the largest urban 

constituency in Saskatchewan. Saskatoon Greystone is a 

wonderful mosaic of Saskatchewan people which includes 

many seniors and children, labourers and academics, 

immigrants and families that are descendants of the original 

settlers of Saskatoon. 

 

My constituency borders on the beautiful campus of the 

University of Saskatchewan, and many of my constituents are 

students. The Sherbrooke Community Centre, which provides 

special nursing care to so many seniors and those with special 

needs, is an important part — in fact a core part — of 

Saskatoon Greystone. Because of that and the proximity to 

Royal University Hospital in my constituency, I have a large 

number of people involved in health care professions. Therefore 

the issues of health care are always front and centre in my 

discussions with constituents. 

 

As Leader of the Third Party opposition, the whole province of 

Saskatchewan becomes an extended constituency for me and 

for the other members of our caucus. Many of the issues that I 

will raise this session and in reply come to me from all corners 

of our province. 

 

One thing must be made clear at the outset. The message is 

consistent. Whatever optimism and hope the people of our 

province feel about the future does not translate into a feeling 

of optimism and confidence in our political system. It does not  

translate into a feeling of optimism and hope because of our 

government. 

 

People do see a coming together of many positive 

circumstances — generally those things that are outside of one's 

control. They feel much more reassured that we had probably 

one of the most beautiful spring, summers, and falls that we've 

had in many, many years. They have been optimistic about the 

lowered interest rates for a period of time, that crops were 

better, that resource prices are high. And yes too, we must 

admit that even the new federal government raised some 

optimism for people. All of these things have given people 

some hope. 

 

At the same time they watch their provincial government doing 

many things that they see as counter-productive: making 

decisions that erode and threaten the ability of an individual to 

take advantage of opportunities. 

 

My remarks this afternoon will reflect the hopes and dreams, 

the concerns, and yes, even some of the fears about the future 

that people have shared with me as an elected member of this 

Assembly. 

 

As I listened to the Speech from the Throne, I was listening for 

the things that the people of Saskatoon Greystone and other 

communities in the province would want to hear. I was hoping 

that the Speech from the Throne would define the government's 

vision, its short- and long-term vision, and commit to some 

measurable goals. Other provinces in Canada are actually 

looking at measurability; the province of Saskatchewan's 

government has not. 

 

I was hopeful that the government would have listened to 

people and would understand the people it serves and would 

strive to live up to their expectations. Mr. Speaker, these have 

been three and a half very critical years for Saskatchewan, three 

and a half years in which a great deal could have been done to 

set the stage for the future, three and a half years in which the 

government has had its focus locked on raising revenue to 

reduce the deficit with no understanding of how its approach 

was having an impact on people's lives. 

 

The Speech from the Throne talks about Saskatchewan from a 

government's perspective. The government's goal was to raise 

money so they can claim success. They saw the problem as a 

revenue problem: raise taxes, utility rates, increased every 

licence fee. They did not see this as an expenditure problem. 

 

But the people did not elect this government on the 

understanding that raising money would be the driving force 

behind its policies. Indeed there was no mention at all about 

addressing the deficit by raising more taxes. Every campaign 

promise was about how they absolutely could operate on $4.5 

billion. 

 

And I give another quote: to save enough in government waste 

and mismanagement to eliminate the deficit. End of quote. I, 

like most people, am a very hopeful and optimistic person by  



February 9, 1995 

 

73 

nature. I would not have been able to meet the challenges of 

rebuilding the Liberal Party from 4 per cent from the political 

ashes if I were not a hopeful and optimistic person. 

 

And like the people of Saskatchewan, I rely on faith and hope 

to keep looking to the future, to look to a better tomorrow, to 

keep believing that better days do indeed lie ahead. And that is 

why the provincial government has disappointed so many 

people. That is why there is such a dearth of a feeling of trust 

for government today. 

 

(1500) 

 

They knew in 1991 what people wanted to hear, this New 

Democratic Government. They knew that people were angry, 

were disillusioned, were fed up with deceit, incompetence, 

corruption, and dishonesty from government. The current 

administration knew what to promise in order to get elected, but 

the evidence is clear on their failure to deliver better, simpler 

government and government truly in touch with the people. It is 

tragic indeed that this administration was in a position to 

change all of the things that people were feeling so very 

discouraged about, that they were in a position to put the 

political system back on track in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to take a moment to just talk about something called 

opportunity. How often does one have a chance to make real 

and meaningful change that will preserve and protect the 

democratic process. The opportunity to overhaul government, to 

truly improve the process, to make it more accountable, is the 

opportunity that people gave to this government in 1991. People 

truly wanted to have a significant change. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this government I believe has wasted that opportunity; in fact 

tossed it aside because they did not really want to change 

anything substantive about the system as long as it allowed 

them to keep power and control. What old politics is really all 

about — as long as they could keep secrets safe within the 

system. 

 

And that is truly regrettable. It would have been so much easier, 

in fact so easy, for a government coming in with so much 

goodwill from people, to set election dates. It would have been 

so simple to have an independent commission to review MLAs' 

salaries and per diems and allowances in place in 1991. It 

would have been so easy for this government to acknowledge 

that there had been no accountability on the expenditure of 

caucus grants year after year after year, until it added up to over 

7 or $8 million for two caucuses in probably less than a decade. 

 

It would have been so easy to do the right thing. But it is so 

familiar to do things the way that they've always been done. 

 

The throne speech contains a promise to increase accountability 

from elected representatives. Well we do know that there has 

been considerable sadness caused by the cases of two sitting 

members in this House. In the time that it has taken to deal with 

what has transpired, to look at the investigations of allegations, 

to bring people to trial, to convict individuals, the entire 

Government of Saskatchewan, with a 53-member majority, has  

now finally after three and a half years, on the eve of an 

election, finally appointed an independent committee to do in 

90 days what it should have started and been able to do three 

and a half years ago. 

 

In the dying days of the last session before an election, the 

government has decided to let someone else recommend some 

rules. Again I ask the question on the minds of people all over 

the province. What has kept all of the 53 government members 

so busy that they could not have made this happen three and a 

half years ago? 

 

And what of accountability? For those 10 years, we do know 

that the NDP and PC (Progressive Conservative) caucuses have 

divided up close to $8 million of taxpayers' money to run their 

caucuses. The NDP was too unhappy to crack open the books 

and hand them . . . was only too happy is what I should say, to 

hand over the books of the previous administration to the Gass 

Commission to reveal the truth of the previous government's 

management. But why haven't they chosen to turn over their 

own caucus books for examination? If they are committed to 

open, honest, and accountable government, why don't they turn 

over their records from the 1980s and explain what they did 

with taxpayers' money? And that is at the crux of the matter, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

People believed that this government made a commitment to 

make real changes to the system, but that is what was promised. 

But instead of doing what was promised, the government chose 

to do other things that were not talked about at all going into 

that last election, and now they've chosen to not talk about them 

all over again in the Speech from the Throne either. The 

opportunity is not lost, Mr. Speaker, but it appears very unlikely 

that it will be this government that will truly change the system 

that they helped to create. 

 

The first act of a Liberal government will be to introduce an 

entire package of reforms that we ran on in 1991 and we believe 

in as much today as we did then. However as a final attempt to 

see these changes enacted before this session closes, we will lay 

the Liberal legislative reform package before government 

members. It is our hope that the individual members of this 

Assembly will see the value of endorsing these initiatives even 

though their own government has chosen to abandon its 

promises. 

 

The Legislative Assembly amendment Act is a series of reforms 

to the legislative process including free votes in the legislature, 

including set election dates and regular sitting dates. The 

Liberal legislative agenda will include a Bill to provide an 

enforcement mechanism for the code of ethical conduct that 

members of this House adopted in June of 1993. During the 

debate in this House on that code, I welcomed its introduction 

and adoption, but I cautioned members that this code stands 

only as a statement of principles and is not likely enforceable. 

 

I believe that this is a weakness, a weakness that can be 

addressed and which I will address through the introduction of 

a code of ethical conduct enforcement Act, also known as anti- 



February 9, 1995 

 

74 

corruption legislation. This Act will, among other things, 

provide for an independent body to review various actions that 

may take place in this particular House. And I'll obviously have 

much more to say about this legislation when it is introduced 

within the next few days. 

 

It has been with great disappointment to view the government's 

lack of commitment to real reform. In fact I think most of their 

reforms would be perceived, when we're looking relative to 

what's transpired in other provinces, as shallow. 

 

And I acknowledge the efforts of the official opposition to table 

legislation, but it is perceived by many to be a dead-end process 

when the government members are not free to support even the 

most common sense initiative even if it comes from an 

opposition party. 

 

The throne speech is sadly lacking in its treatment of the fiscal 

pressures that have been imposed by this government. 

Gambling and labour legislation, and tax and utility rate 

increases have damaged our economy. One can read the Burns 

Fry report which goes on at length about such things. Whether 

it be gambling or labour legislation or tax increases, utility rate 

hikes, the increase is to every licence fee in the province of 

Saskatchewan. All of these things are now part of the legacy of 

this government. But to read the Speech from the Throne, one 

would think that none of this had ever taken place. 

 

The most surprising thing, however, is that it does not appear 

that the government understands that the people of this province 

are fearful. Most of what they have done has been with total 

disregard for the impact on people and an arrogance that has 

made people feel that their input is not welcomed by the people 

who have been elected to serve them. 

 

In the last session, Liberals responded to the people's need to be 

heard. We introduced a private members' motion on gambling 

to offer government members an opportunity to voice their 

support for, opposition to, or suggestions concerning expanded 

gambling in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, not one of 53 

members of the government side stood and said one word on 

behalf of their constituents. Not one had anything to say on this 

particular motion. And I think that one of the things we should 

make reference to is precisely what has happened in the 

province of Saskatchewan under this administration. 

 

We have heard as recently as today how all of the charitable 

organizations should feel so much more secure because all the 

dollars have been returned to them since there was a hundred 

per cent increase in their fee — licensing fees. Now to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, of course, the NDP government, 

who probably doesn't really understand addition very well, a 2 

per cent to 4 per cent increase in a licence fee is not a 2 per cent 

increase. It's a 100 per cent increase. And what has transpired 

since the introduction of that licence fee hike has been the 

destruction of one charitable organization after another, as 

VLTs have been introduced and as bingo profits have gone 

down for these charitable organizations, non-profit  

organizations, and service clubs from one end of Saskatchewan 

to the other. 

 

Simply giving back that percentage of licence fee is doing 

nothing for these people who say, so tell us, is this going to 

change next month? Can we put this in part of our budget? Is 

this going to be predictable now? But no, it's the same ad hoc, 

flip-flop, not-knowing-what-they're-doing way of dealing with 

gambling. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it was mentioned even today — left 

out of the throne speech, of course, but mentioned today — that 

people should be satisfied with the changes in licence fee 

structure. Ask yourself about Sask Lotteries. One has to really 

think about what has transpired when Sask Sport, previous to 

this government, had to spend on a licence fee $7,500 to the 

government. When they came to power they increased that 

licence fee to $19.2 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it any wonder that sports, culture, and recreation for young 

people all across this province has been diminished 

substantially when most of the money now goes to the 

government instead of to the people and communities of our 

province? And they think that people should be excited in Sask 

Sport, throw up their hands and say, oh, thank you, thank you, 

for reducing this fee, when it's now reduced to $17.5 million, 

Mr. Speaker. From $7,500 to 17.5 million — that is nothing 

less than greed. 

 

And everyone's supposed to feel satisfied in Sask Lotteries and 

Sask Sport, that this obnoxious way of dealing with gouging 

fees and taking it out of the hands of people who could benefit 

from it, and going into the greedy hands of government — 

people are supposed to be satisfied with having a reduction now 

of going down to $17.5 million. I don't know if anyone in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, can even figure out the percentage 

increase from $7,500 to $17.5 million, but that's a heck of a lot 

of zeros. 

 

It is the lack of commitment on the part of members to convey 

their views, the views of their constituents, in this Assembly on 

that particular issue of gaming that is totally unconscionable. As 

if the people they represent don't have any point of view on this. 

As if the people they represent don't care about $1,000 on 

average every single week from every single VLT machine 

being vacuumed out of local economies. As if that's not having 

an impact on the lives of the people they represent. 

 

And they have not one word to say about it, Mr. Speaker — not 

one word  when they had an opportunity. And today they 

don't have one word to say about it in their throne speech. 

 

The Liberal caucus responded to the public's desire to be heard, 

Mr. Speaker. And we engaged in a consultation process that 

took us across the province asking for input, hearing from the 

concerns of all of the people who worked as town councillors 

and city councillors, individuals from the chambers of 

commerce, from charitable organizations, from non-profit  



February 9, 1995 

 

75 

organizations, service clubs, ministerial associations who can 

speak at length about the social aspects of this problem. 

 

And what did they report? That the .3 per cent of 1 per cent of 

all the revenues that were projected being able to be brought in 

for the greed of government and were spent on treating the 

social problems created by this government's gaming policies, 

that .3 per cent was doing nothing to help the problems in those 

communities. 

 

And we now have an announcement this week, Mr. Speaker, 

following the Speech from the Throne with not one word in it 

about gaming, we now have an announcement by the Minister 

of Health telling us that that's been increased from a measly .3 

per cent by another measly percentage of money that won't put a 

dent in the problem that has been created by this government's 

inept gaming policies. 

 

Every single place we went throughout this province, Mr. 

Speaker, everywhere the message was the same. Communities 

resented the top-down approach that was being taken by the 

government. Charities and community leaders resented the 

unfair gouging of revenues from their local economies. 

Hoteliers have found that VLTs added to their administrative 

duties and in some cases decreased the sale of their liquor to 

their patrons as well as food that was purchased by people. 

Even the workers in their establishments, the people who were 

servers — the waitresses — were no longer able to make the 

money that they previously made because instead of getting 

tips, people took the tips and put them into VLT machines. 

 

(1515) 

 

What we discovered of course was relative to other places. A 

lot of our hoteliers believed that, as much as they didn't want 

them there, they did indeed need them there. But 15 per cent 

was not enough. Because the message was clear to us, because 

we bothered to go and listen, we put forward a policy statement 

which was sensitive to the concerns of local people and which 

left a very fair portion of revenues in the community. 

 

I want to say that a great many people approached me at the 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

convention in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, to say that they believed 

the government would have offered nothing to them if the 

Liberal caucus had not forced their hand; that in fact the meagre 

10 per cent that the government is giving back to local 

economies would not even have been there. 

 

This is the great strategy, the great plan, of this particular 

administration, Mr. Speaker. They talk about their three-

pronged plan. It was no plan, Mr. Speaker. They didn't even 

know enough to project in the future that they were going to 

destroy local charities, that they were going to destroy local 

economies, that they were going to ruin the sports, culture, and 

recreation of this province by their own silly gaming policy. In 

fact I don't even know how they can call it a policy. It keeps 

changing every other week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that the government has 

chosen to ignore very sensitive issues in their Speech from the 

Throne. Quite frankly, it is precisely because they lack 

sensitivity. Once again, Mr. Speaker, it is a government that is 

not being judged on its promises but on its performance. For 

many people, the arrogance and unfairness that has been 

demonstrated on the gaming issue has been characteristic of this 

government on many other issues, and we all know about health 

care reform. 

 

But that is their legacy, and public attitudes have changed 

because of it. No longer will they ever take government at its 

word because actions are what speak louder than words. The 

Speech from the Throne talks of hope and promise. But as 

much as the government relies on luck and trying to manipulate 

truth, the people of Saskatchewan have come to the stark 

realization that this is all this government has to offer. 

 

But hope is not a strategy, Mr. Speaker. So in reviewing this 

Speech from the Throne, it is important to ask, what is the real 

strategy for the people of this province? What is the strategy of 

the Government of Saskatchewan for the people of this 

province? The government has talked for the past three and a 

half years about plans to create jobs and economic 

development. 

 

But we've not seen anything like a true plan unfolding, one with 

ongoing measurability. We have not seen . . . or we have seen 

the fiscal policies of the Finance department contravening the 

rhetoric of the Economic Development minister. We have heard 

statements about the need to strengthen rural communities, 

followed by gaming policies and health care policies that hurt 

local communities and economies. 

 

We've heard time and again the government does not create 

jobs; small business does. But the policies of this government 

have been roadblocks to job creation. In spite of the best efforts 

of the entrepreneurs of this province, it has been government 

policies that have limited our recovery of jobs and kept the 

province at the bottom of provincial . . . provinces of Canada. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, people looking for hope and direction and 

encouragement from this government have gotten the opposite. 

They heard from the Labour minister who appeared on the front 

pages of The Financial Post, they heard this pronouncement 

about the labour legislation in Saskatchewan brought in by their 

government  that it was brought in to protect the workers 

from the ruthless greed of business. If there's been any greed in 

the province of Saskatchewan, it has clearly been on the part of 

government, not on the part of business. 

 

Utility costs are another omission in the speech. They talk about 

job creation being a priority, Mr. Speaker. But this 

government's decision to charge unfair prices for utilities has 

made our businesses uncompetitive; 1,331 employers have 

disappeared from our province since 1991. And it's unlikely that 

they just simply left because they retired on their profits. It is 

more likely that they moved to a more affordable climate, a 

more affordable business climate, or they simply went broke. 



February 9, 1995 

 

76 

The fact is that if Saskatchewan were experiencing the 

phenomenal economic growth under a free enterprise 

government, if Saskatchewan had a government the people 

trusted, a government that would set high goals and eliminate 

barriers to investment, there would have been jobs growing two 

and three years ago when they began to substantially grow 

elsewhere. If we are in last place during the best of times, we 

will stay in last place during the rest of the times, as long as we 

have visionless government. 

 

The current government was elected on promises — promises 

that $4.5 billion was simply enough to run the province of 

Saskatchewan. And people feel betrayed again. They wonder 

why the Premier would say $4.5 billion simply has to be enough 

to run the province when the budgets were closer to $5 billion 

every single year since 1991. 

 

People have sacrificed a great, great deal. But the government 

gave up virtually nothing in comparison. The Premier allowed 

spending to go half a billion dollars over budget every year 

since the NDP were elected. The fact is the government had to 

collect that extra revenue to pay for that broken promise. The 

price tag works out to $6,000 for the average family of four 

since 1991. 

 

So people are very suspicious when the Premier now tells them 

all other kinds of things and simply believe in us one more 

time. The truth is, Mr. Speaker — and I've been all across 

Saskatchewan, including Melville last night — the truth is that 

no one trusts this provincial government. We believe that a 

responsible government should not expect people to give them 

carte blanche to run up deficits and then tax their way out of 

predicaments. The Liberals have advocated, since 1991, a 

taxpayers' protection Act, and we will use the legislative 

process to bring that legislation before the members of this 

Assembly. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, we would be delighted if the 

government members would ever be unshackled from their 

party chain gang long enough to be allowed a free vote on such 

a vote. But once again, both opposition parties are restricted to 

introducing legislation as a show of good intention, knowing 

full well that the chances of passing it are virtually non-existent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this would be an initiative acted upon in the first 

year of a Liberal administration in this province. It is simply not 

good enough to make promises without ensuring that you have 

to deliver on your commitments. 

 

The New Democrats have had every opportunity to do the right 

thing in this legislature. The Speech from the Throne talks 

about responsible financial management and how it calls for 

much more than a balanced budget in any one year. We knew 

that in 1991, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal Party and the people of 

Saskatchewan knew that in 1991. They expected the 

government to make this part of the plan from the very 

beginning. 

 

And what was stopping the government from putting that  

forward? What was stopping the NDP from taking a complete 

plan to Wall Street and Bay Street and saying: here is exactly 

what we are going to do with the financial situation of the 

province of Saskatchewan; we have a four-year mandate; these 

are the taxes that will be charged under the taxpayers' protection 

Act and we will live within this budget for 1992, 1993, and for 

the budget of 1994? What stopped them from saying, we will 

balance the budget in 1995 or '96 or earlier if we achieve extra 

revenues? 

 

The only thing that stopped this government from putting such 

a plan forward was politics — nothing but crass politics. They 

wanted to save balanced budget legislation as their ace in the 

hole, their grand finale before an election. Well I give them 

credit. It does make for good politics, but it is not the stuff of 

which good governing is made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech says that: 

 

 . . . The Balanced Budget Act will promote long-term 

financial stability and integrity in the administration of 

the province's finances. 

 

So all I ask is this: if government was most interested in long-

term stability and integrity, why would this not have been their 

number one priority as part of the first budget they ever 

introduced? Why not leave the political strategy out of it and 

just give people a break for once and concentrate on governing? 

 

Between the time this government started talking about 

legislating balanced budget, at least three other provinces will 

have introduced balanced budget legislation. Not what they 

keep going around the whole province telling people — three 

other provinces have done this. 

 

While other provinces have been busy building jobs to make 

balanced budgets sustainable, this government has spent three 

and a half years talking about what other provinces have just 

done as a matter of course. While other provinces have emerged 

from a recession with sustainable jobs and the ability to attack 

their long-term debt using the economy as a powerful weapon, 

the Government of Saskatchewan has lucked out on windfall 

profits and gambling money with no viable plan to sustain the 

cost of their big, big government and no viable plan to make 

government smaller. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has done all that they can do. Raising 

taxes and leaving big government untouched is going to be their 

legacy. Proliferating Saskatchewan with VLTs will be their 

legacy. 

 

The Finance minister says the spending cuts are behind us. In 

other words, the government has come through the worst 

financial crisis in the history of Saskatchewan intact while the 

people are left picking up the pieces on Main Street, 

Saskatchewan — victims of an insensitive and greedy 

government. 

 

The speech implies that all the problems are over. The Minister  



February 9, 1995 

 

77 

of Finance said it on CBC radio last night — all the cuts are 

over; all the problems are over. 

 

What they do is gloss over the farm debt crisis by saying that 

farm families faced high debt in 1991. They're talking as if 

there's no debt crisis for farmers any more in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And they quickly skip over this whole section in 

the Speech from Throne saying, we will not talk of debt-ridden 

farms. Well what a great relief for everyone who's debt ridden 

in Saskatchewan on their farms. 

 

Well not talking about a problem doesn't mean there is no 

problem. Farm families are enjoying a much-deserved and long-

awaited increase in their incomes. But the rural economy has 

been astonishingly attacked. 

 

The economic minister admits that there are thousands of jobs 

gone from the agriculture sector in rural Saskatchewan. The 

Economic Development minister says the jobs lost in rural 

Saskatchewan are ruining his numbers; that the jobs in 

agriculture maybe shouldn't be lumped in with all the rest, as 

though they don't really count somehow. And the minister also 

fails to realize that while prices are up, prices also come down 

eventually. But that is not the case with farm input costs which 

will continue to climb as the result of higher fuel costs, 

fertilizer costs, and machinery. 

 

The government seems to forget that increased utility costs 

mean less profits for farmers to apply to their debt. One dry year 

or higher interest rates or a drop in grain prices would put 

people right back behind the eight ball. Because there are still 

very high levels of debt in rural Saskatchewan and it will take 

farmers time to address them, just as it will take government 

time — as much they don't like to admit it — to address the 

debt of this province. And we are going to have to grow as a 

province, Mr. Speaker, in order to address that debt; not chase 

the people out of here, but to grow the population of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Government must have long-term strategies in place to 

encourage rural development so that the people of our province 

who don't live in Saskatoon and Regina can address their very 

serious challenges. 

 

The most striking thing, I think, in this speech is how the 

government tries to make us believe that it is taking initiatives 

to put the finishing touches on health care reform in rural 

communities. The finishing touches, Mr. Speaker? I don't know 

where all these members who represent rural constituencies 

have been, but if they think that the problems of health care 

reform are behind us, they aren't listening to anyone. 

 

(1530) 

 

They most certainly do not hear from the people that I hear 

from, the letters that flood our office, the tragic cases that we 

are hearing, from not only those people who require care but 

those who are no longer around to provide it. And to hear from 

physicians and surgeons who have to make choices about  

whether or not they give people full treatment because of the 

lack of things available to them to be able to supply people — 

such things as leg pumps to prevent blood clots in legs, and 

saying they're not available; can't put them on someone after a 

car accident. 

 

I mean what are these people doing, to think that in fact they 

can talk as if health care reform, the primary things, are all 

behind us and only the final finishing, wonderful touches are 

supposed to go on in rural Saskatchewan? I'm just astonished 

about this. Have we really seen any savings. Have the hospitals 

that were closed been replaced with adequate services. Who is 

going to be held accountable? 

 

Right now nobody seems accountable. The government doesn't 

accept responsibility. You ask any question and it's the 

responsibility of the district health board. You ask the district 

health board and they say it's not their responsibility; they don't 

have any control over dollars really. 

 

And then we find out that in fact of course — if there's anybody 

who has to catch the ball last — it's the physician, who 

apparently has absolutely no power whatsoever over anything 

any more. But that's the individual who's supposed to be left 

catching the ball at the end. 

 

Who's going to be held accountable for deficits and expensive 

bureaucrats and liabilities in all these district health boards? 

These are the questions coming in from all of the corners of the 

province. The government has drastically changed the system, 

the Finance minister said last night on CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) radio: It's been drastic, all right. And 

never once were people warned of drastic changes in 1991 

campaign and never has a plan been presented that explains the 

savings or the true improvements in health care for the people 

of Saskatchewan which have come about, supposedly, from 

these drastic changes. 

 

The speech talks about extending special licences to 

psychiatrists and medical health officers being transferred to 

district health boards. It talks about transferring all of the 

Health department staff to the districts, so that rural people will 

have lots and lots of bureaucrats in their communities. They're 

not excited, Mr. Speaker. They're not excited at all. What they 

want are doctors and nurses in their communities — and they're 

leaving. 

 

It talks about the information highway. It doesn't mention at all 

about the condition of the highways that rural people have to 

drive on to get to the nearest hospital, or why there are still not 

adequate services replacing those that hospitals used to provide 

in 52 rural communities. 

 

But it is uncheerleader-like to mention these unpleasant realities 

that have been left out of the Speech from the Throne, because I 

guess it makes people unhappy with the NDP government. So 

none of us are supposed to talk about it. Obviously none of the 

53 members of this Legislative Assembly on the government 

side are ever going to talk about it. They've never raised  



February 9, 1995 

 

78 

people's concerns that we've been hearing about gambling or 

what's been happening in local economies or what's been 

happening as far as health care is concerned. 

 

And these problems with health care don't simply take place in 

rural Saskatchewan. I find it rather astonishing that not one 

other member in Saskatoon has heard the kind of problems that 

I've heard, as a Saskatoon member, on health care. Not one 

person on the government side has heard about any of these 

difficulties. So we'll just talk about how everything's now nice 

and the final touches will be on health care reform. And that's 

what comes from the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't get paid to make the government happy. 

The taxpayers pay me to listen to their concerns. The taxpayers 

pay me to provide the government with their reality. But the 

NDP finds it unacceptable to talk about reality. Reality, it 

seems, makes them look bad. 

 

This is a government that claims to care about young people. 

But the Premier becomes indignant — in fact, mean-spirited 

and very un-premierlike towards a member of this Assembly  

when he is presented with constructive ideas to address the 

alarming number of youth who have ended up on welfare under 

this government's term in office, rather than acknowledge that it 

is absolutely imperative for all of us to work together to offer 

hope and opportunity to young people, by directing their skills 

and talents, by preparing them for the jobs he says that he can 

grow in Saskatchewan, rather than be gracious and accept our 

efforts to assist. 

 

And as a member called out behind me, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, one idea. Well there were 10 ideas there yesterday, 10 

ideas that were tabled in this House. And there are dozens and 

dozens more ideas in our platform document for putting this 

province back on track. Instead of accepting with graciousness 

and dignity, as a premier should, the ideas of another member, 

he chose instead to jeer and insult the member. Is this how he 

expects to foster a spirit of cooperation in our province? Is this 

what he does to investors when they come forward with ideas? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this session will not be about hope and prosperity 

for the Government of Saskatchewan. It will likely be more 

about more manipulation and deceit and political partisanship 

on the part of the government, the likes of which this province 

has not witnessed since the NDP could smell a campaign in 

1991. That's likely what this session will be about. 

 

So I say let them attack, let them manoeuvre, let them 

manipulate, and let them coerce. But they should take heed. The 

real people are not accepting this kind of behaviour. They have 

made their very serious sacrifices for this province and they 

want to see government do whatever is necessary to restore trust 

and confidence by being a model for the people, by 

restructuring a huge system that is not sustainable, and they 

want to see the people in this House behaving with dignity. 

 

The Premier and his cabinet become very irritated when they 

must answer questions or listen to legitimate criticisms. They  

claim to have balanced one budget. They raised taxes to 

unprecedented levels; done nothing to reduce the size of 

government. They have dismantled health care and plugged in 

VLTs to suck the money off the main streets of local towns and 

cities, and at the same time believed that this should give us all 

hope and optimism for the future of Saskatchewan. It is absurd. 

 

Furthermore, where they could provide hope, they don't. Blatant 

omission from the speech is the nuclear industry. The industry 

with perhaps the greatest potential to expand our economy, and 

the government chooses to ignore it rather than risk upsetting 

some of their left-wing supporters. 

 

How can a government talk about hope and opportunity in one 

breath, and ignore such enormous potential in the value added 

processing of uranium and all of the other opportunities in an 

industry where we should be in the driver's seat in this province. 

 

It is unthinkable that the NDP would devote an entire section to 

jobs and economic renewal, with not even a mention of the 

nuclear industry. Can it be, can it be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

this government is once again cowering in fear of the special 

interest groups that controlled its agendas in the past? Can it be 

that labour laws and tendering practices and costly 

environmental legislation is not the final price this government 

will make Saskatchewan pay so that these career politicians can 

stay in power? And these are the people who talk of hope. 

 

Well talk is cheap. But an acre of trust and an acre of 

performance is worth a world of promises. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

in spite of this government's lacklustre Speech from the Throne, 

in spite of their failure to put forward a measurable plan for 

health care or economic growth, I do remain very optimistic 

because things can change very, very quickly. 

 

I am optimistic that there is still time to repair the damage to 

our health care system. I very much believe in the people of this 

province. I believe that we can make fundamental change to 

government, fundamental change to this Legislative Assembly, 

and fundamental change to the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

People in Saskatchewan are not quitters; they are survivors. 

And they have just survived two administrations that depict the 

same old thing. Mr. Speaker, there are untapped opportunities 

and untapped potential. We can set to work quickly to reverse 

the damage caused by unnecessary labour legislation. Once it is 

withdrawn, we can sympathetically begin to unwind the 

complex rules and costs that government has imposed on job 

creators and investors in this province. And we will do it 

responsibly, within the context of fiscal restraint and legislated 

spending limits for government, legislated debt reduction, 

legislated rules for MLAs and government caucuses. There is 

hope because there is still a new horizon for a new economy for 

the people of Saskatchewan, and there still is on the horizon a 

government that could provide a very new way of doing things. 

 

Now time has not passed us by, but the clock is ticking. 1995 is 

our 90th anniversary as a province. I am very hopeful and  



February 9, 1995 

 

79 

optimistic that the people of Saskatchewan will say goodbye to 

the past with very fond memories and will meet the future with 

new energy, new enthusiasm and, obviously, a new 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I conclude my remarks today by saying the 

following. There were members of the Legislative Assembly 

who made mention of — in fact I indeed believe it's the 

member from Pelly in his reply today — talking about 

governments of the past. 

 

There was indeed a government of the past that they can read 

about in a book by Dale Eisler called Rumours of Glory  a 

government that ran this province through some of the most 

serious recessionary times possible; a premier of this province 

who said: it takes no wisdom or talent to balance the budget by 

raising taxes; that real creativity, real concern for the long-term 

best interests of people, means that you balance the books by 

keeping your own house in order. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that same premier is the person who 

assisted, in one term of office, economic development the likes 

of which has never been seen in this office subsequently  

created real diversification, and 11 per cent of aboriginal people 

were able to get off welfare in one term of that office. That was 

a Liberal administration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was an 

individual who in fact has been seen by, and cited by, Dale 

Eisler as the only person in charge of a government that created 

true diversification in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He also indicated as premier that if the people of Saskatchewan 

were not taught that health care wasn't free, that in 25 years the 

medicare system would be in trouble. I would say that his 

legacy is one of which we should take heed and probably pay 

some attention to. There is such enormous potential for our 

province to create a secure economy that takes us into the next 

century. 

 

There could be, under the right economic climate and the 

direction from government, limitless opportunity for the young 

people of this province to build futures for themselves and for 

generations to come. There is indeed hope on the horizon, but 

hope is not a strategy. 

 

And I strongly suggest that this Speech from the Throne, like 

the last four, contains no strategy whatsoever to provide the 

people of Saskatchewan with the leadership and direction that 

translates hope into action. 

 

During this session, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will try to convey 

alternatives and direct constructive criticisms that point out to 

the Premier, his cabinet, and the members opposite that there is 

a better way — a better way to approach the challenges facing 

our citizens and their communities so that we can contribute 

together to the future of our nation. 

 

I look forward to presenting the views of the people of 

Saskatoon Greystone and the views of people around the 

province who contact me on a regular basis. And I want to  

spend as much time as possible doing that in a helpful way in 

this fifth session of the twenty-second legislature of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 

colleagues. I hope you feel the same way at the end of my 

presentation as you do now, or maybe even better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start by quoting someone who said: what 

is needed is a bit more honesty in the system, said the Leader of 

the Third Party. The quote continues: so honest that you'll stand 

and admit when you're wrong. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 

the day when the Leader of the Liberal Party will stand up and 

admit that she's wrong. I expect her to do so tomorrow because 

I take her as an honourable person. And this quote comes out of 

the Yorkton This Weekend and Enterprise: What is needed is a 

bit more honesty in the system, so honest that you'll stand up 

and admit when you're wrong. 

 

(1545) 

 

When was the leader wrong? But a very few days ago at the 

SUMA convention in Saskatoon the Leader of the Liberal Party 

said: Saskatchewan is not going to have a future if the present 

trend lines continue. Our workforce is shrinking. That is fact. 

We have lost 9,000 jobs since 1991 and the NDP has no 

specific plan in place to recover these jobs. 

 

This direct quote from the Leader of the Liberal Party a few 

days ago in Saskatoon. Subsequent to this, we see StatsCan 

having assured the following: employment, jobs in 

Saskatchewan, has risen by 7,000 jobs since 1992. Seven 

thousand more jobs since 1992. Employment averaged, it says, 

450,000 working people in 1992, rose to 455,000 in 1993, and 

457,000 in 1994. 

 

The Leader of the Liberal Party a few days ago was bemoaning 

the situation with young people. I share some considerable 

concern but again, Mr. Speaker, the facts do not support what 

the Leader of the Liberal Party was saying then. The total youth 

employment has risen from an average of 74,000 in 1992 to 

75,000 in 1993 to 76,000 in 1994. 

 

The purpose of what I'm doing is not to quibble with, is a steady 

increase of a thousand jobs a year enough? Clearly it's not. 

Clearly we would love it to be bigger. The point of my rising is 

to remind the Leader of the Liberal Party what she states, 

quoted, what is needed is a bit more honesty in the system, so 

honest that you'll stand up and admit when you're wrong. 

 

Now this is the Leader of the Liberal Party's opportunity. I 

listened with a great deal of interest as she engaged in the 

throne speech. I didn't hear her suggest that perhaps she had 

erred. Certainly didn't hear her say she was wrong. In fact it 

seemed to me that the Leader of the Liberal Party was saying, I 

have all the answers. I have all the answers. It's real wonderful. 



February 9, 1995 

 

80 

The Leader of the Liberal Party said, well, you know, I 

promised an idea a week to us. That was promised some time 

ago and last time I counted we're about 75 ideas short because it 

was 75 weeks ago when she promised an idea a week for job 

creation. Makes us a mere 75 short. And one would have 

thought with the help of the member for Shaunavon that they 

could have at least come up with a half a dozen ideas in that 

time. But could they? No. No. 

 

Today I heard the Leader of the Liberal Party stand there and 

say, oh but yesterday we gave you 10 ideas. Well yesterday in 

question period the Liberal member for North West stood up, 

tabled a document that when our Minister of Education goes 

through says, yes, this document is essentially what the 

Department of Education shared with that Liberal member 

November last year. The Department of Education, wanting to 

work with all MLAs, with all the people of Saskatchewan 

because after all, the goal is improved education and an 

enhanced Saskatchewan that will benefit us all; all, regardless 

of political affiliation. 

 

In that spirit this government shares information, shares ideas, 

seeks some suggestions from a Liberal MLA who ostensibly 

was trying to be helpful. What's the result of that? A paper 

tabled in this House. A plagiarized paper plagiarized from our 

Department of Education. Plagiarized and tabled and claimed to 

be a Liberal first. A Liberal first. 

 

Well I'm not one to keep count as you know, Mr. Speaker, but it 

seems to me that's two things that the Leader of the Liberal 

Party can stand up and say tomorrow, when she has her 

opportunity, can stand up and say I was wrong; I apologize, I 

was wrong. I think it goes along with something that the leader 

was talking about, the Leader of the Liberal Party, the same 

person. What's needed is a bit more honesty; so honest that 

you'll stand up and admit when you're wrong. 

 

I shouldn't be surprised that the Liberal leader and the Liberal 

Party can do nothing much better than come up with plagiarized 

ideas. After all we're well aware that the Liberal policy vis-a-vis 

health care is nothing more than a regurgitated Conservative 

policy that was first put forward five or six years ago by the 

Conservative Party. 

 

Now I shouldn't be surprised by that, Mr. Speaker. We all know 

the story of the Liberal and the Conservative Party being like a 

chicken in the winter, standing on one leg to keep the other leg 

tucked up and warm and when that foot finally gets so cold, 

they have an election and the chicken switches to the other foot 

and stands on that one for a while until that foot gets cold, then 

they have another election. So they flip-flop between 

Conservatives and Liberals, but it's the same old chicken. 

 

The reason I'm suggesting that it's largely the same old chicken, 

you will recall the last session I spoke a little bit about one Ted 

Yarnton, a former Conservative bagman for the Regina area for 

the Conservatives who . . . I was shocked when it happened. 

But the same leader of the Liberal Party introduced none other 

than Ted Yarnton in the Speaker's Gallery as one of the family  

of Liberals. One of my team, she said, one of my team. Ted 

Yarnton, Liberal or Tory, same old story. And I can tell you he's 

probably as efficient as a Liberal bagman as he was as a 

Conservative bagman. 

 

Then I think of Cy MacDonald who was a Liberal MLA in the 

Thatcher Liberal days, sat in this very House, ran for the 

leadership of the Liberal Party. Well the last time I understood 

what was going on Cy MacDonald was in charge of making 

sure that Conservative supporters kids got summer jobs, 

amongst other things. But Cy MacDonald was very clearly a 

Tory, very clearly, announced it publicly. Said, well I used to be 

a Liberal but you know the Liberals have fallen on hard times 

so now I'm a Tory. 

 

I'm just wondering when the wind's going to change again. Is 

Cy MacDonald going to be able to make the jump back to the 

Liberal Party? Will the Liberal Party accept him? I see a Liberal 

head going yes, so there you are Cy, you got a home, just 

welcome with open arms . . . flip-flop, doesn't matter. Let's see 

it. Which way is the wind going? The list goes on and on. We 

all know Liberal, Tory, same old story. 

 

We know that Liberal policies are plagiarized. Usually, 

fortunately, their policies are usually plagiarized from the 

Conservatives versus from us. I spoke a little bit about health 

care. I just want to remind people that part of the Liberal 

platform was one of introducing health care fees based on 

income. That was part of their platform in the last election. I'm 

sure, I'm sure that I heard just a few minutes ago, the Liberal 

leader stand up here and bemoan increases in taxes and frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, I was a little bit confused. I always thought when 

you have a premium based on income, this is a tax. A health 

care premium by any other name is nothing but another form of 

a tax. So we have on the one hand the Liberal leader saying: oh, 

we wouldn't increase your taxes. On the other hand they say: 

but we'll introduce a graduated health care premium based on 

ability to pay. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .I hear a colleague 

saying, like Alberta. Only with one exception: Alberta's not 

based on ability to pay; Alberta's simply straight up, just about a 

thousand dollars a year per family health care premium. Full 

stop, period. 

 

And I remind the Liberals opposite and the Conservatives 

opposite, Saskatchewan has zero health care premium. I'm not 

going to stand here and pretend we have no taxes because that 

is a long way from honest. We have taxes in Saskatchewan. We 

have no health care premium like Alberta — Conservative 

Alberta. We have no health care premium like many Liberal 

provinces. We have no health care premium. 

 

I can't help it if the member for Shaunavon confuses E & H 

(education and health) tax with a health care premium. Sorry, I 

can't help it. If you can't read after this much time, can't read a 

budget item and understand what's up and what's down, it's too 

late. I can't help you with that. Saskatchewan has no health care 

premium; Alberta does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn't touch a little bit on  



February 9, 1995 

 

81 

some other comments that the Liberal leader made. I heard the 

Liberal leader saying that: gosh, is the NDP caving in to nuclear 

special interest groups? And I found that kind of puzzling 

because the people that I know that have some real concerns 

about the nuclear industry without exception are people who 

don't make a penny off the nuclear industry. Not a penny. 

 

Many of us tend not to have huge amounts of money but have a 

dedication to the anti-nuclear cause, if I can describe it that 

way. And I just want to ask, I just want to ask how much the 

Liberal Party of Saskatchewan and the Liberal Party of Canada 

and maybe even the Liberal leader benefits from the 

friendliness, the contributions, the financial assistance, the 

support, and the aid of Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. — 

AECL. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .I wonder if there are 

political contributions? I wonder why it is that at every 

opportunity the Leader of the Liberal Party stands up and 

speaks out so boldly saying, nuclear is the answer. 

 

An Hon. Member: — She couldn't be bought and paid for. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I hear someone saying she couldn't be bought 

and paid for. I guess we all have to come to our own 

conclusion. I could hardly believe that the Liberal leader could 

be bought and paid for when this same person is one so high on 

honesty and integrity and, you know, promises to stand up and 

admit when you're wrong. Stand up and say, gosh I was wrong; 

I said all this time, I said all this time, you're losing money . . . 

or losing — well she says we're losing money too — but losing 

jobs when in fact the reality is one of 7,000 more jobs, the 

reality is one of 2,000 more jobs for young people in 

Saskatchewan. The reality is one of growth, of hope, of 

renewal. And I'm really looking forward to the Leader of the 

Liberal Party standing up and admitting that she made an error. 

 

I think it should be fairly easy for the Leader of the Liberal 

Party to admit an error. I've heard the Leader of the Liberal 

Party saying that MLAs are overpaid and that we should be 

taking less money. 

 

(1600) 

 

This is the same Liberal leader that as soon as the member for 

Shaunavon joined her took a 37 per cent pay increase, 

becoming Leader of the Third Party — 37 per cent pay increase 

when the member for Shaunavon joined the Liberal Party. The 

Leader of the Liberal Party took a pay increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite the member for Shaunavon to listen 

carefully as I address the matter because it is the Leader of the 

Third Party, your leader, that took a 37 per cent increase in pay 

when you joined that party. This is the same leader that has 

promised to stand up and admit when she's wrong. I think she 

should be able to do it. 

 

This is a leader — I talked about jobs — promised to bring a 

project a week. Well I question how much follow-up there's 

been. I wonder how reliable her words are. I wonder, when 

they're 75 projects short, I wonder how much of what the rest of  

what the Liberal Party says can be believed. How much 

credibility is there there? 

 

The best they've been able to do thus far is to submit some 

plagiarized ideas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Party has talked about 

integrity. I want to keep coming back to that and I want to find 

. . . Here it is, this quote again. This quote: What's needed is a 

bit more honesty in the system; so honest you'll stand up and 

admit when you're wrong. 

 

Well I have before me the Liberal leader's MLA report to the 

Saskatoon Greystone newsletter of September 1994, for which 

she said she voted for the government's legislation on electoral 

boundaries — said so in her constituency newsletter: I voted for 

the government constituency boundaries, says your leader, the 

Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

The facts are, according to Hansard, April 13, 1994, there was 

a motion to accept the report of the Boundaries Commission. 

The two other Liberal MLAs, from Shaunavon and Regina 

North West, voted with the government to accept the report. 

The Liberal leader was not present, therefore vote not recorded. 

 

Third . . . then it goes on though, okay. You can say, well that's 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I just want to remind the member that 

he ought not to draw attention to whether or not members are in 

the House, were in the House, and ask him to keep that in mind. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm not sure exactly 

what I said. I'll try and be more diligent with it. 

 

The article goes on, the Saskatoon Greystone newsletter: Third 

reading of electoral boundaries legislation, the Leader of the 

Liberal Party was not present, the vote was not recorded, and 

the other Liberal that was there votes against . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Again I'm having . . . I want the 

member to pay attention to what I say, and that is that he ought 

not in his remarks point out that members were absent, not 

present, and to avoid that kind of discussion in his remarks. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I have a point of clarification with 

you I'd like to address. It was my understanding . . . this is for 

future. I thought I can't refer to whether a member is in here 

now. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I just want the member to carry on. I 

don't want the member to dwell on this and to carry on with his 

remarks. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Proof of the pudding is 

in the Saskatoon Greystone newsletter in which clearly the 

Leader of the Liberal Party has misled her constituency . . . her 

constituents. And I expect the Leader of the Third Party, the 

Liberal leader, will stand up — so honest that you'll stand up  



February 9, 1995 

 

82 

and admit when you're wrong. I look forward to the Leader of 

the Liberal Party doing that, probably tomorrow. We have a 

growing list of things for which she is welcome to stand up and 

admit she was wrong. 

 

Right now would be a fine time to do it . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Actually that's a very good point. I would yield 

the floor if the Liberal leader wished to stand up and admit that 

she had made some errors. I'd be willing to yield the floor right 

now. 

 

But I guess I will carry on. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party 

makes a fair amount of to-do about being in touch. I heard the 

Liberal leader moments ago saying, we want to be in touch with 

the people of Saskatchewan; the government has lost touch with 

the people of Saskatchewan. And yet it draws a kind of a funny 

picture in my mind. Because I have this picture of the Leader of 

the Liberal Party driving the highways of Saskatchewan with 

Senator Herb Sparrow in the back of a limousine — getting in 

touch with the people, travelling our highways in a limousine. 

 

Now how many MLAs have ever ridden the highways of 

Saskatchewan in a limousine? Well I only see one. How many 

MLAs have the gall to say, oh, but I was riding around in the 

back of a limousine trying to get in touch with my constituents, 

the people of Saskatchewan. Oh, only one. Only one. Well it's a 

grand way to get in touch — riding in the back of Senator 

Sparrow's limousine. A great way to get in touch with the 

grassroots. 

 

I grew up on a farm, which doesn't have a whole lot to do with 

the story, except we never saw any limousines on our farm. Did 

see some grass roots, and I can tell you that if you're playing 

mind games and you say, what comes to your mind? You know, 

someone might say pop; you might say Coke. Someone might 

say milk; you might say cow. But grass roots and limousine 

aren't the sort of the automatic word associations that I make. 

 

Grass roots and limousine. Well maybe we're on to something 

here. Maybe there is. I guess Senator Sparrow and Ted Yarnton 

go together. Senator Sparrow, Ted Yarnton — yes, both Tories. 

Both Liberals now. Grass roots, limousine. Well I still have 

difficulty with that connection; but getting in touch, riding 

around Saskatchewan in the back of a limousine courtesy of 

Senator Herb Sparrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is one of about hope and 

opportunity. We have indicated that what we're going to be 

doing this session is introducing the first balanced budget in 

nearly a decade and a half, the first balanced budget which is 

going to now offer some hope for the present and for the future 

of our Saskatchewan. With the first balanced budget since the 

Hon. Allan Blakeney sat in this legislature as premier, we have 

got opportunities and potential. 

 

And every day that feeling is growing throughout 

Saskatchewan. Every day the optimism is growing. Every day  

we're seeing more and more of the benefits. It's going to be like 

a bit of steamroller, and I think it's going to just get better and 

better. 

 

Are our efforts enough? I would argue no. If I thought they 

were enough, then it's clearly time for us to get out of the way 

and let somebody else carry on the job. But our efforts have . . . 

We've not reached the goal. We're struggling along to that New 

Jerusalem, but we're not there. Seven thousand jobs created 

since 1992. That's not enough, Mr. Speaker. But it's 7,000 real 

jobs. It's 7,000 jobs closer to our stated goal of 30,000 jobs by 

the year 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have implemented a number of changes. It'll 

come as no secret. It's certainly not a surprise to anybody. I 

come from a farm background, but I also have a reasonable 

degree of labour background, having been at one time a 

member of the International Woodworkers of America. Another 

time was a steelworker and another time was on the Grain 

Services Union executive and bargaining committee. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to say that since we formed 

government we've increased the minimum wage. And when we 

did that, while the NDP government increased the minimum 

wage, the Liberal leader opposed that increase, according to the 

Leader-Post, November 6, '92. 

 

We then went on. We enhanced, changed the Workers' 

Compensation Board Act. The Liberal leader spoke against the 

changes. That, according to Hansard November 6, 1992, in 

which she actually went so far as to say: Workers' 

Compensation Board actually belongs to workers. She spoke 

against it; we delivered it. 

 

Then while the NDP government was introducing changes to 

the occupational health and safety area, the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, quoted in the Yorkton Enterprise and This Week, 

says, quote: What are these yahoos doing, dealing with 

legislation that is completely irrelevant? 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I got up and spoke in private members' 

statements. And I talked a bit about safety; talked a bit about the 

great work that the Saskatchewan Safety Council is doing. My 

friend the executive director, Harley Toupin over there, and all 

his staff, all of the volunteers, continue to work very diligently 

to enhance safety throughout Saskatchewan. It is a very, very 

worthwhile goal when you've got anybody willing to do 

anything to try and enhance the safety, to try and reduce 

accidents, and to try and make the workplaces better in our 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we passed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — For a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 



February 9, 1995 

 

83 

The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Well in listening to the member's speech 

from Regina Albert North, I note that he on different occasions 

referred to the voting of other members of the House. I look in 

Rules and Procedures, rule no. 29 prohibits that member from 

reflecting on the vote of other members. And I was wondering 

if you would give a ruling to this. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the member . . . speaking to 

the point of order. The member opposite ought to know full 

well, Mr. Speaker, that rule refers to regurgitating the debate 

and talking about the debate. But the matter of anybody's vote is 

a matter of record at any time. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton makes a good point. The members are not 

to reflect on whether a person has been here for a vote or not, 

because that will indicate whether the member was present in 

the House or absent from the House. And 29 has nothing to do 

with how a member voted, whether a person votes for or against 

a particular item. But you must not reflect on what the 

Assembly has done in a particular item in the past and criticize 

the Assembly for what it has done. That's so . . . the member, I 

did not catch what his words were, but that was the intent of 

rule no. 29. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 

Albert North I think made two errors in his speech to the 

legislature — that being he reflected on whether or not the 

member was present, but also rule 29 as I read it, states that no 

member may reflect upon any vote of the Assembly, and not 

whether they were present for a vote or not, but the vote itself. 

 

(1615) 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I do not agree with the member's 

interpretation of rule 29. That has obviously not been the 

practice in the past and I do not agree with his. But if the 

member from Regina Albert North is reflecting on a member's 

absence or presence in the House, then clearly he's out of order 

and I think the Deputy Speaker has ruled on that. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what I'm 

going to say in summation, just to wrap up, this government has 

. . . one will have to ask whether we've done enough. That's 

clearly an answer that as individuals we all have to answer. And 

when we come to draw our conclusions from, have we done 

enough, are we going in the proper direction, I guess that many 

of us will draw some conclusions as to how we should vote in 

the next election. And that's a very serious task that the 

electorate have. 

 

I am simply trying to point out with respect to labour 

legislation, on every single item we've got the Liberal leader, 

the Liberal Party, opposed to increasing the minimum wage, 

opposed to changes in the Workers' Compensation Board, 

opposed to The Occupational Health and Safety Act 

amendments that improved it, greatly opposed to The Labour  

Standards Act amendments, opposed to The Trade Union Act, 

and opposed when we tried and succeeded in seeing that union 

collective agreements and workers' rights stayed intact as the 

health districts were set up  six major items where we have 

the Liberal Party on record saying we're heading in the wrong 

direction, we being the NDP government. We're heading in the 

wrong direction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for people who work for a living, for people 

who have family who work for a living, I think it's pretty crystal 

clear what their choices are. I've gone about pointing out some 

of the things in terms of making it meaningful to individuals. I 

will have more to say on that at a later time, but for now I will 

be thanking the legislature for their attention through this 

speech, and I want to thank my constituents, those of Regina 

Albert North. 

 

I want to close by saying what an honour it has been and 

continues to be for me to represent those constituents, to try and 

speak out on their behalf, and try and make Saskatchewan a 

province with a real future, a Saskatchewan of hope and 

opportunity. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it certainly 

is a pleasure to again take a moment to stand in this Assembly 

and make a few comments in reply to the Speech from the 

Throne delivered by His Honour on Monday, this Monday past. 

 

As we indicated last year and we've certainly indicated this 

year, our caucus will not take a lot of time just trying to stall or 

hold up the proceedings of this Assembly by long-winded 

exhortations regarding the Speech from the Throne. But we 

intend to indeed confine our remarks, make then brief, bringing 

out some of the points that we would like to raise, some of the 

concerns, and some of the lack of content that the speech 

basically had. 

 

It seems to me that, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Assembly 

and how it operates, the time frames or the cost on a daily basis 

of the operation of the Assembly are something that maybe we 

should look at as politicians in addressing the costs of running 

the government of this province and making the House and this 

Assembly and the members of this Assembly more accountable 

to the public, in view of the fact that many, many people around 

this province certainly would raise these same concerns with us 

on a daily basis. 

 

I think just getting on with the House business is a simple thing 

that we all can do as members to make government cheaper and 

more efficient for the people of the province. However, 

possibly our discussions even in the Assembly today, in light of 

most of the public, may not really mean a lot in view of the fact 

the last few days the media have been making comments — 

well, our politicians are back at work, they're back in the 

Legislative Assembly, and they're back so we know that we're 

actually getting some benefit out of the . . . and some value for 

the dollar that we're paying them. 



February 9, 1995 

 

84 

Which leads me to believe that a lot of people may think that 

the only job of a politician revolves around this Assembly, or 

the job of an individual elected to serve as a MLA revolves 

around this Assembly. I can assure you that there's more to my 

responsibilities or the responsibilities of MLAs in this 

institution, that reach far beyond the Legislative Assembly that 

sits here in the capital of the province, the city of Regina. 

 

But allow me just to take a few moments just to mention a few 

areas that as an opposition we would like to raise, would like to 

bring to the attention of the government, certainly to the people 

of the province, in view of the concerns and matters that have 

been raised with us over the past number of months. 

 

Financial accountability. Mr. Speaker. If imitation is the 

greatest form of flattery, surely the government has flattered the 

official opposition with its remarks on this subject. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of the fact that people 

are looking for a balanced budget, and over the past number of 

years, the government has played a balanced budget legislation 

and played on . . . Their record has basically been a repeat of a 

balanced budget and how they're going to achieve it. As we 

hear in the Speech from the Throne, the government is saying 

that they're going to balance it this year rather than in 1996 

when they had originally pinpointed a time period when they 

were hoping to balance it. 

 

One would have to ask, well was that achieved through solid, 

sound practices by this government? Or as we all know, the 

achieving of a balanced budget this year is related directly to 

the fact that there has been somewhat of a turnaround in the 

agricultural sector and, certainly, the resource sector and the 

over $1 million that were passed on to government coffers 

through land sales in the energy sector this year. 

 

And the thing is, Mr. Speaker, in view of that fact, I think it's 

presumptuous for the government to all of a sudden jump to the 

tune of, well we've balanced the budget. But what happens next 

year? We may not have that resource revenue. We may not have 

the revenue from agriculture. Where is the government going to 

find . . . or what plans has the government made or are they 

making today to address those concerns? 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the government is not running out 

to tell the national press how they have taxed the people of the 

province to death rather than touching the bureaucracy and 

other government . . . the over . . . the largeness of government 

that are the root of the major problems, not only in this province 

but in this nation. It seems to me on many occasions we have 

heard the government try to vilify the Alberta model as slash 

and burn, while this government seems to have no aversion to 

the rob and pillage method that they have chosen to use. 

 

After years of ignoring our calls for balanced budget and MLA 

accountability legislation, it is reassuring to note, Mr. Speaker, 

and to see that the government is finally starting to listen to us 

even though it is in a half-hearted manner. 

If the government members truly want meaningful balanced 

budget legislation, I would encourage them to support our Bill 

which will give teeth to the concept of balanced budget 

legislation. The fact that no other jurisdiction with balanced 

budget legislation has done this is no excuse. The people are 

demanding more from us and we must be prepared to lead the 

way in reforming government. And that's why the party I 

represent is proposing and bringing forward Bills to address a 

number of these issues and specifically balanced budget 

legislation. 

 

Likewise this Assembly must be prepared to lead the way in 

extending the accountability of Crown corporations and other 

mechanisms of government. For this reason we will once again 

be introducing legislation proposing a legislative utilities review 

commission to protect the public from the predatory actions of 

the Crown monopolies. And we were certainly pleased 

yesterday to hear the Minister of Energy reducing by six and a 

half per cent the fees that SaskEnergy has been charging or the 

utility fees in SaskEnergy. However that's for this year; one has 

to wonder what it will be next year. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about that, nobody 

disputes the fact that SaskEnergy must run and be able to 

manage its accounts and manage its affairs and operate with a 

balanced budget as a department. But at the same time, should 

they gouge from the public of Saskatchewan so that they can 

take from their large millions of dollars of revenue, net revenue 

at the end of the year, to pour it into a fund that the government 

then can draw on at will? And those are some of the questions 

we continue to ask and that's why we suggest that there is a 

place for a utilities review commission. 

 

We will also be asking the members' support for all-party 

committee to review major government appointments. And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that is something that the public would 

really appreciate. If the members of this Assembly are serious 

about rebuilding public trust and credibility, they should put 

partisanship aside and consider the merits of these pieces of 

legislation. 

 

Regarding jobs, Mr. Speaker, another theme explored at length 

in the throne speech is that of job creation. And it's something 

that we've heard for the previous three throne speeches and 

certainly again is brought to the forefront. 

 

It is astonishing or astounding that the government has the gall 

to bring this topic up in view of the fact that year in and year 

out the government says job creation is its top priority yet year 

in and year out job growth falls drastically short of the 

projections of the government. Maybe it's time the government, 

instead of talking about jobs, talk about ways of creating jobs 

rather than talking about the few extra jobs that are created 

through student summer employment. 

 

The government started in the fall claiming to have created 

12,000 jobs. When StatsCanada said they had lost jobs, they 

still maintained that they were right. Now they are parading 

around as though it is a tremendous victory that their job  



February 9, 1995 

 

85 

creation projections were only 10,000 short of what they really 

projected; but they had created a few jobs. 

 

Well one would question where the jobs came from. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, as we look back over the period of this 

government, it's interesting to note that we don't have to go that 

far back, three years ago, when the former minister of Finance 

was building all his hopes on the very projects that the previous 

government, through some very difficult economic times, had 

initiated. And the only job creation was from those projects, 

and that's what the government was crowing about. Have they 

done anything to create jobs? No, they haven't. 

 

You can even look at my constituency, a number of small 

businesses that have closed the doors because of the problems 

they find with the increase in utility rates that have cut into their 

profits. And certainly the difference in taxation even between 

the province of Saskatchewan and Manitoba has knocked 

businesses out of my community . . . many of my communities. 

And those businesses, Mr. Speaker, with them have taken jobs, 

anywhere from 2 to 20 individuals. So I find it interesting that 

this government talks about jobs while at the same time it is 

killing the very businesses that create and have been the 

economic stimulant in our province. 

 

It's worth noticing that the government used to promise 

dramatic changes to the job picture by the year 2000, and in this 

speech that date seems to be pushed back to the year 2005. 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day I'm not exactly sure 

if the public of Saskatchewan will even allow this government 

to be . . . or this party to form the government to be able to 

achieve hopefully their job numbers by the year 2005. Whether 

it's in the upcoming election or the following election, I think 

the people of Saskatchewan will speak as they see what the 

long-term problems that are going to be projected by decisions 

this government has made over the last three years. 

 

Over the years the government has had an endless series of 

excuses regarding job creation. Last year the Minister of 

Economic Development maintained that the job loss figures of 

the past four years were due to the winding down of 

megaprojects in '92 and '93. This year they can point the finger 

at conflicting figures coming out of StatsCanada and other 

places. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't really think the public is interested in any 

more excuses. They want jobs. And it's high time that the 

government admitted that their job creation strategy is a sham. 

It is high time that they abandoned their welfare mentality of 

ignoring the unemployment problem so that they can boost 

federal transfers. 

 

Even in the throne speech, beyond their usual hollow words 

about job creation, their only concrete proposals are a pair of 

dodges. On the one hand, they want to dump responsibility for 

economic development onto the regional communities through 

the use of regional economic development authorities. And on 

the other hand they set themselves up for federal infrastructure 

grants with the transportation partnerships program. 

(1630) 

 

And coming back to the regional economic development 

authorities, one group of individuals indicated to me today that 

their community bond program has had a commitment from 

people in their community, and has dollars sitting in the fund, 

but they're probably going to be looking at giving the money 

back to the people because the taxation and the policies of the 

government in this province have interfered with anyone 

looking at coming to the province and establishing a business. 

And I think those are some of the things that this government is 

going to have to take a serious look at if it intends to make 

some of the job projections that they're putting forward. 

 

The government should be ashamed of the way that they have 

scurried and hidden away from the challenges of economic 

development and employment in the province. 

 

Regarding agriculture. It is perhaps the most telling part of this 

throne speech that it hardly mentions agriculture. Agriculture, 

Mr. Speaker, is the backbone of this province. It is the 

economic drive behind the economy of this province. And yet 

this province continually ignores agriculture. Is it because this 

government, with the redistribution of seats, is not really all that 

concerned about rural Saskatchewan any more because 

basically there are enough seats in the two major centres and a 

couple of small centres around for the NDP Party of this 

province to continue to form government for a long time. Is that 

what one of the problems is? 

 

After destroying GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), 

eliminating the ADF (Agriculture Development Fund), raising 

input costs, and attacking rural Saskatchewan in numerous 

other ways, the paltry few programs offered up in this speech 

are merely band-aids for wounds which the government itself 

has inflicted on Saskatchewan's most important industry. 

 

In general, indeed much of the throne speech can be seen as an 

attempt by the government to cover its tracks on its tax on the 

Saskatchewan way of life. They are hoping that serving up 

warmed over versions of old programs will be enough to make 

people forget about four years of high taxes and declining 

services. 

 

From the sounds of it, JobStart is nothing but a resurrection of 

the student summer employment program. Their supposed 

commitment to sustainable resource development amounts to 

nothing but another bunch of government studies. Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely nothing new is being done for health care. The little 

said about it in the throne speech just confirms that the 

government is going ahead with the same disastrous policy it 

has followed for years. And as we saw earlier this afternoon, 

Mr. Speaker, that is why communities are looking at alternative 

methods of providing good, sound, solid health care for their 

residents. 

 

And then this anniversary . . . we don't seem to have money to 

help the people of this province, whether they be seniors or 

students. And it seems, Mr. Speaker, we've got money to put  



February 9, 1995 

 

86 

into a lavish birthday program. In the midst of this poverty of 

ideas, poverty of policies, and poverty of overtaxed citizens, the 

government wants to throw a party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would think that this government, if it was really 

concerned about the citizens of this province, would be looking 

at ways in which they could really help the residents of our 

province, whether they be seniors, whether they be students, 

whether they be the unemployed. And, Mr. Speaker, 

unfortunately I didn't see a lot in the throne speech that would 

give a lot of people any reason or any hope at looking at either 

staying in the province of Saskatchewan or moving into this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe as we go through this session, you will 

see that my colleagues and I will take and make every effort we 

can to point out to the present government, to this NDP 

government and to the Premier, that there are some alternatives 

that they maybe should look at. There are alternative methods of 

addressing some of the problems we have in health care and 

education, the problems we have as far as . . . And my colleague 

from Thunder Creek raised the question of one of the highways 

in his area. And certainly I have highways in my area that need 

some work on them, that need to be looked at. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we must find ways in which we can provide 

the essential services that are needed, rather than throwing bad 

money and band-aid solutions. And all I saw in this throne 

speech was band-aid solutions rather than a long-term, serious 

commitment to benefit and to build this province and to 

encourage people to look at coming and making this province 

their home. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think at the end of the day, what people will 

be looking for is credibility, credit ability in their elected 

representatives. And it is our job as MLAs, and certainly the 

caucus I represent, my colleagues and I, will make every effort 

to show that we can be a credible opposition; that we can 

provide a credible alternative and that we can give the people of 

this province something to believe in and something to look 

forward to with hope for tomorrow. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the debate that will 

continue to take place and offering alternatives and solutions to 

many of the problems that face us. I thank you for your time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is as 

always, a great privilege for me to stand in this House and 

represent the people of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden. 

 

I'm very pleased to be back here in this Assembly with my 

colleagues and with you, Mr. Speaker. As in past sessions, we 

look to you for fair judgements and wise counsel in our 

deliberations. We know you will ensure that this House will run 

with the decorum the people of Saskatchewan expect and 

deserve. 

 

I treasure the freedom that allows all of us to stand and speak in 

this House. If I may, a few words about my constituency, 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, and the people who have chosen to live 

there. It is surely the most beautiful in the province, although 

my good friend, the member from Meadow Lake, will contest 

that. From the picturesque Qu'Appelle valley in the north to the 

plains of Wilcox and Gray in the south, it reflects Saskatchewan 

with its farms, small rural communities, and larger centres. 

 

In the past three and a half years, I have travelled throughout 

this constituency, met the people, and discussed with them their 

plans, their dreams and their concerns. I have also visited with 

many groups, businesses, and organizations such as RM (rural 

municipality) and town councils to ensure that government at 

all levels works cooperatively. I am always aware of what a 

privilege it is to represent these people. 

 

I also want to compliment my good friends and colleagues, the 

member from Bengough-Milestone, for moving the Speech 

from the Throne and the member from Saltcoats for seconding 

it. We all appreciate what an honour it is to be asked, and they 

have acquitted themselves admirably. Well-spoken, indeed. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to single out from an exemplary 

group, the ministers of this government, two special people — 

the member from Regina Hillsdale, the former minister of 

Health, and the member from Swift Current, the former 

Associate Minister of Finance. 

 

Under the leadership of the member from Regina Hillsdale, this 

government has implemented some of the most innovative and 

impressive reforms ever in health care. With her guidance, we 

have preserved medicare; we have guaranteed its future. This 

has not been easy. But with the support and the understanding 

of the people of Saskatchewan, we are well on the way to 

ensuring sustainable community-based health care. 

 

We have integrated and coordinated all the health services in 

the community and this fall we will be electing representatives 

to the district health boards — a Saskatchewan first. This 

achievement is greatly to the credit of the member for Regina 

Hillsdale whose responsibility it was. 

 

And now the member from Swift Current — what a very 

special person. In his renegotiation of the contracts for the Co-

op upgrader in Regina, the Husky upgrader in Lloydminster, 

and in his work generally as an associate minister, he took a 

leadership role and worked tirelessly for the betterment of all of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can honestly say that I have never heard one 

critical comment spoken of this man. This is one colleague we 

shall all be particularly sorry to see leave public life. His 

integrity and honesty set an example for us all. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the member from Kindersley 

for his election as Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party 

at what is clearly a very critical and challenging time. 

 



February 9, 1995 

 

87 

I also extend a warm welcome to our new Clerk Assistant, Meta 

Woods, and to our pages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few days before this session began I found 

myself in a lively discussion with a constituent, not a supporter 

of this government by any means. I found myself in this 

discussion reminding him what the people of this province and 

its government have achieved in the last three and a half years. 

 

Now there isn't time in my brief remarks to relate the entire 

conversation nor would you want to hear it. But I'd like to touch 

on a few of those achievements we talked about. 

 

Besides the reform to the delivery of health care to which I have 

already alluded, the major accomplishment is returning this 

province through sound management to financial stability, to 

financial freedom. 

 

The leaders of Canadian finance know and recognize this. But I 

sometimes wonder if Saskatchewan people — people like my 

constituent — really appreciate the scope of this achievement, 

which now allows us in our Speech from the Throne to speak 

not of deficits but of sustained balanced budgets. This is 

something that this province has not seen since 1982 — 1982; 

that's 13 years. And this has happened because we have had a 

plan — a balanced budget plan that has taken this province 

from a deficit of $842 million to zero. And we have done it 

with compassion and fairness. And I'm proud of that, as we all 

are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this constituent, bless his heart, is a retired farmer, 

and in our continuing discussion he agreed that not since the 

'70s has the agricultural outlook been as positive. Net farm 

income is up, way up, as is the net value of each farm and ranch 

in the province. There has been a dramatic increase in the 

growing of specialty crops — canola, lentils, flax — an increase 

in fact of 119 per cent. 

 

We have a new farm safety net. We have changed our approach 

to agriculture as laid out in our Ag 2000 policy. We are 

encouraging diversification and more value added production. 

Agriculture is beginning to look good, very good, in 

Saskatchewan once again, which, I am hopeful, will encourage 

young men and women to live on and earn their living from the 

land. 

 

As our conversation continued, he told me about his two 

granddaughters of whom he is justifiably proud, and of his 

hopes for their future in this province. So I was able to talk to 

him about our Partnership for Renewal paper — this 

government's economic plan. This plan was created in 

consultation with business, labour, the aboriginal community, 

financial institutions, and other organizations with a vested 

interest in our economy. And it's working. 

 

I was pleased to be able to tell him about our increased retail 

sales — the highest on the Prairies. About the increased activity 

in the oil and gas sector, the tourism industry, the 

manufacturing industry — especially in the manufacturing of  

farm machinery. Right in our own community of Pilot Butte we 

have a very successful business, Dutch Industries, which is 

expanding, creating jobs, and leading the way in conservation 

farming and wind energy application throughout the world. 

 

In communities like Fort Qu'Appelle, White City, and McLean, 

new business have been started and are thriving. In Lumsden, 

Ken Kelln of Ken's Consulting has created new jobs and is 

currently in Ghana, bringing solar energy to a new community 

there. This economic renewal means jobs for young 

Saskatchewan people — people like his granddaughters who 

want to stay in this province. It was wonderful to be able to tell 

him that this economic renewal meant small and medium-sized 

businesses were creating new jobs in Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and 

in this province — 7,000 of them since 1992. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we discussed in our usual lively way many 

other initiatives of this government — the child action plan, 

Future Skills, democratic reform, and the accountability of 

elected officials. My colleagues before me have spoken 

eloquently of many of them, and I know those speaking after 

me will do the same. 

 

(1645) 

 

I enjoyed my telephone debate with this constituent, and I look 

forward to the budget which our Minister of Finance will 

introduce next week, because I know he will call again and I 

know I will have even more good news to share with him then. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's been my pleasure to speak briefly in this 

debate. The throne speech has set out the vision and the task 

before us, and I'm very proud to support it. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to enter into this throne speech debate in 

this fifth session of the twenty-second legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in preparing my remarks for this debate . . . and I 

acknowledge that the member from Shaunavon is eagerly 

waiting to hear what those remarks are and I advise him to just 

be patient, Mr. Speaker, because we will get to them shortly. 

But before . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And he is expressing 

a great deal of desire, Mr. Speaker, to hear the mouseland fable, 

which I know is one of his favourite stories. Having been an 

individual who has a hard time figuring out whether he's a black 

cat, a white cat, or in fact a mouse, Mr. Speaker, I can 

understand why he would have great interest in that. But I hate 

to disappoint the member from Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker; I did 

not intend to get into the mouseland fable just this year. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, before getting into some of the 

substantial debate, I would like it first of all, Mr. Speaker, to 

extend my congratulations to the member for Bengough-

Milestone and the member for Saltcoats for their very fine 

addresses in this Assembly as they outlined their views from  



February 9, 1995 

 

88 

their own constituency of what I think has been a very fine 

Speech from the Throne. And I extend my congratulations to 

them for both the honour and having carried the honour 

remarkably well. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, do want to again commend you for your 

ongoing task, bringing order to what at times has the potential 

to be a disorderly exercise in this place, and I wish you a very 

orderly session in this sitting of the House. 

 

In addition to that, I do want to acknowledge and say welcome 

to Ms. Meta Woods. Meta was someone that we came to get to 

know and develop a great deal of respect, both for her skills as 

well as her motivation in coming to this House, when she 

served as one of the Clerks to the Select Committee on Driving 

Safety that I'll want to make some remarks about in just a few 

moments. So a special welcome to Ms. Woods as well as to the 

pages. 

 

And also my congratulations to the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, coming to the House for the first time in that 

capacity. And also my congratulations to the former leader and 

the member from Thunder Creek, my good friend the member 

from Thunder Creek, for having served with dignity in his 

period as the Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having recognized some very important people 

and their role in this Assembly, I'd like to address some 

comments then about the thrust, the main thrust of the Speech 

from the Throne as I understand it. When I listened to that 

Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, the thing that stood out 

in my mind was that it is the beginning of the end, or in fact it is 

the beginning of a new beginning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What was announced in the Speech from the Throne is that we 

will hear, we will hear next week when the Minister of Finance 

takes her place in this Legislative Assembly to bring the budget 

for the Government of Saskatchewan for 1995-96, we will see 

in this House for the first time in 13 years a balanced budget for 

the government and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And, Mr. Speaker, in recognizing that 

accomplishment I want to say thank you, not just to the 

Minister of Finance and the members of the Assembly who 

have been a part of providing the leadership to bring us to this 

point, but particularly to the people of Saskatchewan who have 

accepted the challenge that has been put forward to them over 

the past three and a half years, and contributing to 

Saskatchewan's fiscal responsibility that puts us in the position 

now in 1995 where realistically we can start to look at new 

beginnings. Putting money, Mr. Speaker, spending money, to 

prevent hurts instead of only being able to spend money 

bandaiding hurts that are felt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be a number of announcements I know 

in the area of social services and health and employment that 

will come about as a result of the new-found freedom for the  

Government of Saskatchewan to respond to the desires of 

Saskatchewan people because of the sacrifice that all of 

Saskatchewan people have made, and I want to say thank you 

for that. 

 

I also want to, Mr. Speaker, say how proud I am to be a member 

of a government that is going to introduce in this session the 

requirement for balanced budgets into the future through 

balanced budget legislation that will put into law the 

requirement to do what has been happening for the last three 

and a half years, that will put into law the requirement to have 

responsible fiscal management in the long-term, best interests 

of the province, that the people of Saskatchewan from this day 

forward will be able to look forward to responsible fiscal 

management and never, ever, ever again will be subjected to the 

consequences of the irresponsible fiscal management that we 

have seen for the previous nine years before the New Democrat 

government took office in late 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I'm encouraged by the promise of a 

balanced budget, by the commitment to legislative requirements 

to balance budgets in the future. I am encouraged by the 

consequences of changes in the approach to employment and 

the management of the economy that we have seen just within 

the last couple of days, pointing out that here in the province of 

Saskatchewan over the past three years we have seen a growth 

in employment in this province, Mr. Speaker, of 7,000 new jobs 

— 7,000 new jobs, taking into account, Mr. Speaker, that there 

has been a decline of 9,000 jobs in the agricultural sector. In 

other words, Mr. Speaker, in the non-agricultural sector an 

increase of 16,000 jobs — well on the way to the target of 

30,000 new jobs by the end of the decade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 

acknowledge that there has been an increase of 3,000 jobs for 

the young people of Saskatchewan. And along with that, Mr. 

Speaker, along with that the indications in the Speech from the 

Throne that there will be some additional programs, some new 

programs, to help make that link from training to employment, 

from real training to real jobs for real people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and I look forward to that as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn't take the few 

moments that I have available to me to acknowledge the hard 

work that has been taking place by eight members of this 

Assembly over the last two and three months, being in touch 

with the people of Saskatchewan, listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan about their concerns in a very important area, and 

that will be part of the legislative agenda that we will all be 

dealing with in the course of this sitting of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to be the first to admit that I am pleasantly 

— I don't know if it's even fair to say surprised  but I am very 

pleased to be able to report to this House that there has been a  



February 9, 1995 

 

89 

fine non-partisan effort in the interest of traffic safety that has 

been taking place with five members of the government, two 

members of the official opposition, and one member from the 

third party who have been part of a tour, Mr. Speaker, who got 

onto a bus in the second week of December, the third week of 

December, and again in the second week of January, toured 

around the province of Saskatchewan and listened to 

Saskatchewan people tell us what their recommendations were 

and their advice was regarding dealing with some driving 

problems. And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate 

reality of fatalities that is our history here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the realities are this: that we have a 

challenge, all of us. That we'll have a chance to work on them 

this session when the Select Committee on Driving Safety 

reports to the legislature. And the important task that we're 

going to try to remedy has to do with the fact that in recent 

years here in the province of Saskatchewan, that we have been 

losing a teenager on our roads in Saskatchewan, on average 

about once every 10 days. Also the sad reality, Mr. Speaker, 

that here in Saskatchewan, the reality is that over recent years 

every two weeks we lose an average of 3 people on our roads in 

an accident that involve a drinking driver. Mr. Speaker, we are 

not proud of those statistics or of the fact that we rank among 

the worst in the nation in that area. 

 

And I'm so proud to say that, in the finest of democratic 

parliamentary tradition, this House had the wisdom, and I 

believe will successfully conclude the work of members of all 

three political parties represented in this House who have 

chosen to set aside our partisan differences to deal with a 

subject that doesn't have any partisanship about it — the saving 

of human lives on the roads of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the tour of the Driving Safety Committee we 

heard from nearly 4,000 people. And what they said is that we 

need to get tougher with impaired driving, and we also need to 

deal very realistically with the problems experienced by new 

and impaired drivers in order to save lives. 

 

And I think one of the really pleasant spin-offs of the whole 

exercise that none of us had anticipated, Mr. Speaker, was the 

involvement of Saskatchewan's teens. We heard from nearly 

3,500 teenagers in the province of Saskatchewan, many of 

whom may very well be directly affected by some changes that 

will come forward as a result of the study, and bring to this 

House the report and the government's response to that. 

 

And what we found is going on in Saskatchewan today, Mr. 

Speaker, is something that we came to refer to as reverse role 

modelling. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, we were all 

pleased and proud to discover that here in the province of 

Saskatchewan there are a good number of teenagers who are not 

only talking about, but doing responsible things when it comes 

to separating the act of drinking from the act of driving and 

talking about and doing things that many in their parents' 

generation find hard to accept. And as we listened to 

Saskatchewan's teens give reasoned reflection and advice to 

legislative proposals, many of which can be interpreted as being  

more restrictive to them, what we found is that they were very, 

very responsible. 

 

All of us came away as a result of this, Mr. Speaker, I believe, 

thinking that there is a good, solid reason for optimism about 

the future of Saskatchewan based on the kinds of thinking and 

the kind of spirit that we saw in the young people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think all of us come away as well feeling that there is room for 

Saskatchewan to show leadership through the introduction of a 

process that I came to refer to as wellness on the highway; 

where we begin to develop a link between our traffic safety 

system in this province and the health of the people of our 

province and to use those two systems together to bring about 

the shaping of a better, a healthier, a safer world for all of our 

citizens, young and old. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was an exciting prospect for all of us to have 

been a part of, and I look forward to the conclusion of the work 

of the Driving Safety Committee, which will be meeting again 

this evening to continue to do our work in our deliberations, 

having listened to the people of Saskatchewan, to bring our best 

recommendations to this House next month; recommending 

what we think will be good pieces of legislation; legislation that 

will be fair and reasonable; that will be seen to be fair and 

reasonable, and that will be enforceable; and most importantly, 

that will lead to the saving of lives on the roads of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

All of that, Mr. Speaker, because we got together believing in 

the finest of the traditions of parliamentary democracy and that 

politicians are capable of setting aside their partisan differences 

to work on tasks and solve them together. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is with a lot of enthusiasm about what I see 

for the future of Saskatchewan and a great deal of enthusiasm 

about some of the things that I think we're going to see during 

this session — some legislative moves, some program moves, 

some balanced budget, some guarantee for the future of 

balanced budget for the province and the people of 

Saskatchewan. And so, Mr. Speaker, it is without a doubt in my 

mind, and on behalf of the very fine constituents of Moose Jaw 

Palliser, that I am proud to say as I take my seat in my debate on 

the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, that I will be voting 

in favour of the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


