
























































March 20, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 20, 1995 

 

 
955 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
here that says this: 
 
 That the residents in rural Saskatchewan have had to 

bear the brunt of unnecessary and unfair acute care 
funding cut-backs by the provincial government, and as 
a result of these cut-backs, the Prairie Health Care 
Centre in Cabri has been forced to eliminate acute care 
beds and will be left with only a 12-hour observation 
bed, and that the citizens of Cabri . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Is the member just reading the 
prayer? 
 
Mr. Martens: — Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — Is that all part of the prayer? The member may 
proceed if that's the prayer. 
 
Mr. Martens: — 
 
 . . . that the citizens of Cabri and surrounding area feel 

care services are not adequate to address their needs and 
that a minimum of one acute care bed is essential. 

 
 Therefore we urge the provincial government to address 

the needs of Cabri and area and provide the funds 
necessary to ensure that a minimum of one acute care 
bed be available at the Prairie Health Care Centre. 

 
These petitions come from Cabri, Pennant, and Lancer. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to present 
petitions on behalf of the people from the Shaunavon and Gull 
Lake area today. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'd be happy to table these now. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
prayer: 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with criminal use of 
firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these constituents are from the Assiniboia, Mossbank, 
Glentworth area of my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Lancer, Portreeve, Abbey areas 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the 
double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
I'm delighted to be able to introduce to members of the 
Assembly, members of the Canadian Bar Association who are 
in the corporate counsel section. They had a luncheon meeting 
in the members' lounge, and are able to join us for question 
period. 
 
The people who are in the gallery — and I'll ask them to 
perhaps stand — Valerie MacDonald, John Comrie, both of 
IPSCO; Robert Cosman, who will be known to all of us; Mark 
Guillet of SaskEnergy; Charlene Sawatzky, also of SaskEnergy; 
and finally, Mike McDougall of Sask Water. I'd ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these eminent lawyers to 
Regina. 



March 20, 1995 

 
956 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: — Merci M. le Président. Je voudrais présenter à 
vous et à tous les députés dans la chambre aujourd'hui des gens 
ici avec nous aujourd'hui, des gens tres importants dans la 
communauté francophone. Ils sont ici ce matin pour participer 
dans une fonction officielle de culture de la Semaine 
francophone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to the members of 
the Assembly some very distinguished guests we have here. 
These individuals are part of the leaders in the francophone 
community and certainly they do a lot of work to try to preserve 
and promote the French culture and language. I would ask them 
to rise as I introduce them. 
 
Monsieur le Président, Association canadienne-française de 
Regina, Mme Margaret Potié; Association culturelle 
franco-canadienne de la Saskatchewan, M. Denis Magnan, M. 
Ronald Labrecque, Mme Lois Ross; Association des juristes 
d’expression française de la Saskatchewan, Mme Renée 
Bilodeau; Association provinciale des parents fransaskois, Mme 
Michelle Arsenault; Commission culturelle fransaskoise, M. 
Jean Liboiron; Conseil de la coopération de la Saskatchewan, 
M. Peter Situ; Conseil scolaire des écoles fransaskoises, M. 
Florent Bilodeau; Coopérative des publications fransaskoises, 
M. Francis Potié; Les éditions Louis Riel, M. Marc Masson; 
Service fransaskois d’éducation des adultes, M. Claude Shink; 
Société historique de la Saskatchewan, M. Albert Dubé; 
College Mathieu, M. Louis Julé. 
 
J’demanderais à tous mes collégues de les accueillir 
chaleureusement ici à la chambre aujourd’hui. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all the members to cordially welcome them 
here to the Assembly today. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Agriculture Week 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, this week has been proclaimed 
Agriculture Week in Saskatchewan. It is a time to pay tribute to 
the people who make this industry such a big success: the 
Saskatchewan farmer. 
 
I am sure that throughout history there is no other group like 
farmers who have demonstrated such an unshakeable hope in 
the future. As our Saskatchewan farmers prepare for spring 
seeding, there is a sense of optimism when they face the new 
challenges and changing times. 
 
The celebration of Agriculture Week was instituted by the 
Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association about 25 years 
ago to recognize the importance of this industry that accounts 
for about 12 per cent of the gross domestic product. 
 

I ask all members to join me in saluting Saskatchewan farmers 
and farm families and farm organizations and all other 
agricultural and food stakeholders for their contribution and for 
the hope they bring for the future. Thank you. 
 

AgriTrends Conference 1995 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 
member from Turtleford has said, this being Agriculture Week, 
I wish to report on an important conference taking place at this 
very moment. 
 
The 1995 AgriTrends conference is under way at Kinetic Park 
in Swift Current. Like many events in Saskatchewan, this one 
was developed through the cooperation of several groups: the 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration), the Swift Current Agricultural 
Association, and the Canada-Saskatchewan Agriculture Green 
Plan Agreement. 
 
The theme of this year's conference, Mr. Speaker, is farming for 
a healthy environment. Topics to be discussed include 
watershed planning, biotechnology, conservation tillage, and 
the future of agriculture. Through conferences like this, farmers 
will gain a high-tech advantage for future practices. As well, 
they will develop methods to guarantee that farming is 
completely sustainable. 
 
I want to acknowledge the contribution of all those involved in 
this conference. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the first day 
of Impaired Driving Awareness Week. The purpose of this 
week is to encourage each person to respond in his or her own 
individual way to the problem of drinking and driving. 
 
Last year in Saskatchewan, 54 people were killed and 1,131 
were injured in traffic accidents where alcohol was involved. 
Real progress will come with public determination combined 
with personal commitment to eliminate the combination of 
drinking and driving. 
 
The Saskatchewan Safety Council and Saskatchewan driving 
without impairment programs around the province are two 
Saskatchewan bodies who know what is at stake. In particular, I 
want to acknowledge the efforts of Students Against Drinking 
and Driving, or SADD, whose chapters work very hard to make 
the two actions of drinking and driving totally separate. 
 
This week is the time for people to tie a red ribbon to their 
vehicle's antenna to signify their personal decision to separate 
the acts of drinking and driving. It's also a time to decide to use 
a designated driver when celebrating with friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, roads will be safer because  



March 20, 1995 

 
957 

more and more people in Saskatchewan decide to make them 
that way and that's what Impaired Driving Awareness Week is 
all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Francophone Week 
 
Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make a statement 
regarding National Francophone Week. 
 
Merci, Monsieur le Président. J’aimerais signaler à tous les 
députés qu’ aujourd’hui, désigné Journée internationale de la 
francophonie, marque le début de la Semaine nationale de la 
francophonie  une occasion de célébrer les réussites des 
communautés francophones de tous les coins du Canada. 
 
La première Semaine nationale de la francophonie a été 
célébrée en 1993 a l’initiative de l’Association canadienne 
d’éducation de langue française (ACELF), organisme national 
voué à la promotion de l’usage de la langue française dans 
l’enseignement et les activités quotidiennes. Le but de cette 
semaine; insuffler aux francophones de partout au pays un 
sentiment d’appartenance à une communauté nationale et 
renouveler leur fierté à l’égard de leur langue. 
 
Ici, en Saskatchewan, nous avons une communauté 
francophone fière et dynamique, les Fransaskois. Cette semaine, 
le drapeau fransaskois flottera avec fierté dans les villes et 
villages, partout dans la province  de Regina à Bellegarde 
jusqu’à Zenon Park. Une foule d’autres événements  
expositions d’art, réceptions, et spectacles  sont prévus pour 
mettre en valeur la créativité et la diversité des francophones de 
la Saskatchewan. 
 
La vigueur culturelle exemplaire des Fransaskois a fait d’eux 
des artisans importants de notre riche héritage provincial. Ils 
font face à l’avenir avec la même détermination de préserver et 
d’illustrer leur langue et leur culture. La Semaine nationale de 
la francophonie leur en fournit l’occasion. Merci, Monsieur le 
Président. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to bring to 
the attention of all members of this Assembly that today, as 
International Francophone Day, marks the beginning of 
National Francophone Week  a time to celebrate the 
achievements of Francophone communities from all parts of 
Canada. 
 
National Francophone Week was first celebrated in 1993. It was 
begun by the Association canadienne d’éducation de langue 
française, a national organization dedicated to promoting the 
use of the French language in education and day-to-day 
activities. The purpose of this week is to give Francophones 
across the country a sense of belonging to a national community 
and renewed pride in their language. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we have a proud and dynamic 
Francophone community, the Fransaskois. This week, the  

Fransaskois flag will fly with pride in cities and villages across 
the province, from Regina to Bellegarde to Zenon Park. A 
number of other events  art openings, receptions, and variety 
shows  are planned to showcase the creativity and diversity of 
Saskatchewan’s Francophones. 
 
The exemplary cultural vigour of the Fransaskois has made 
them important contributors to our province’s rich heritage. 
They face the future with equal determination to preserve and 
promote their culture and language. National Francophone 
Week provides them with such an opportunity. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to comment 
on National Francophone Week. Today is the beginning of 
National Francophone Week, and it is a week during which 
many citizens of Canada who are of French heritage can 
celebrate their country and their culture and their contribution 
to the nation. 
 
It is very important for us to acknowledge the many 
francophone citizens of our province who are equal in 
percentage of our provincial population as Saskatchewan is in 
its percentage of the national population. 
 
I know that this week will be marked by many events such as 
theatre performances, gatherings, and dances. And I hope to be 
able to participate with members of the francophone community 
in some of their events. 
 
This morning I notice that the Fransaskois's flag is flying from 
the front balcony of the Legislative Building to mark this very 
special week. And I also note that the association culturelle 
franco-Canadienne de la Saskatchewan has a display in this 
building's rotunda. At a time when our country is in the midst of 
a very serious national unity crisis between the English and 
French, I urge all citizens to use this week to further their 
understanding of the rich and colourful francophone culture in 
our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Day of Spring 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today is the first day of 
spring. Actually spring begins in about 45 minutes. Once again 
in Saskatchewan we have beaten the odds, as the member from 
Rosthern is fond of saying. We have survived another winter 
and now look forward with optimism and lightened hearts to 
the real beginning of the year. 
 
The signs of spring are everywhere about us. The member from 
Indian Head has already delivered himself of his annual report 
on the migratory progress of the creatures not afraid to visit 
Saskatchewan in March. The fountain of Regina, the mighty 
Wascana, is practically overflowing its banks and wafting its 
own announcement of spring through the air. 
 
But the surest sign of spring, Mr. Speaker, is that the mascot of  



March 20, 1995 

 
958 

the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Murray Mandryk, is shedding his 
thin skin, as he and other members of his species do on an 
annual basis. He recently delivered himself of the heretofore 
unheard-of proposition that politicians use the media, just as the 
media use politicians. 
 
This amazing discovery caused him such discomfort that his 
skin was gone in a moment and the rites of spring were 
completed once again. 
 
As a politician, I am glad for Murray that we continue to play 
our role in this symbiotic relationship. And to show my, and 
our, appreciation for this ongoing closeness, I offer to him this 
springtime quote from Shakespeare, the first political 
columnist: like the cuckoo in June, he was heard but not 
regarded. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation Of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It must be spring fever, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Justice: Mr. 
Minister, on February 13 of this year, the former minister of 
Justice assured you and the members of this Assembly that the 
decision not to charge Phoenix Advertising in the kickback 
scheme to a former NDP (New Democratic Party) cabinet 
minister was being investigated. On March 9 the current 
Attorney General promised that a full report would be made 
available to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the public, who grow 
more suspicious by the moment. 
 
On one occasion, the Minister said and I quote: 
 
 Mr. Speaker, the matter is being investigated. I do not 

have that report. And I will share it with you when it 
arrives. 

 
On another occasion he said, and again I quote: 
 
 When I have a written report from the prosecutors, it 

will be made available to the House. 
 
My question is to the Attorney General. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that there's a report available. Will you now make 
that report available to this Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The public prosecutions branch of the department of the 
Attorney General is not political and has never been politicized. 
That stands to the credit of this government, and I think it's fair  

to say it stands to the credit of the former government, through 
some trying times. 
 
It has never been the policy . . . After making those comments 
in the House, I revisited the matter with the Attorney General's 
department, was informed that these reports have not been 
made public and have never been made public through various 
governments and indeed, I'm told, are not made public 
anywhere in Canada. Neither police reports nor prosecutors' 
reports are ever made public. There are few if any exceptions in 
that. 
 
The reason — I explained this last week to the media and to the 
hon. member actually — the reason for this is I think relatively 
convincing when you hear it. If you file the reports in the 
House, that reports becomes the subject of controversy, and the 
decision then becomes inevitably politicized. If you do that very 
often, you wind up politicizing the public prosecutions branch, 
something we don't want and something I don't think members 
opposite want either. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is our policy not to file 
prosecutors' reports. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, I think it's quite evident that the evidence is very clear, 
and it's quite unequivocal. Mr. Minister, we asked why the 
Crown prosecutor would say things like, it is not always in the 
public interest to prosecute the giver of a kickback, and 
sometimes people are pressured into giving kickbacks. That was 
the question. 
 
Hansard shows that you said a report was being compiled on 
the actions of the Crown prosecutor in relation to Phoenix 
Advertising kickback to one of your former colleagues in 
cabinet. Now, Mr. Minister, you're telling us that it wouldn't be 
appropriate to release that information. I think, Mr. Minister, 
what it basically points to is that, while on one hand the 
prosecution says it wouldn't be in the best public interest . . . 
and at one time you and your colleagues agreed that it would be 
appropriate to release this information; now apparently it is not. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is it not appropriate? We can use all the 
arguments you want, but that, Mr. Minister, will not satisfy the 
public. It really doesn't satisfy this side of the House. Why will 
you not release that report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As explained to the member 
opposite, both a moment ago and some days ago, it is 
impossible to file those reports without politicizing the decision 
and in due course politicizing the public prosecutions branch. 
 
One of the strong suits, one of the very desirable features, of 
public prosecutions in this province and in this country, is that 
those decisions are made free of any political interference. We  



March 20, 1995 

 
959 

want to maintain that; I'm sure members do opposite as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, I can appreciate your F. Lee Bailey 
impersonation, but your own colleagues on the dream team 
defence counsel disagree with you. 
 
The former attorney general agreed with our thoughts on this 
matter. He said if someone was found guilty of the offence of 
accepting a secret commission, it should also be an offence to 
offer the secret commission. That is what is at stake here, Mr. 
Minister, whether or not the law is being applied fairly. And I 
believe, Mr. Minister, you'll agree with that as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made a promise to this Assembly. Why will 
you not come clean now and indeed release the information that 
you promised to show the public that indeed there is fairness 
being applied in this situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member opposite is careful, I 
think, to avoid any suggestion that we'd want to politicize the 
public prosecutions branch. I think members opposite agree 
with that. That was your policy, that's ours. 
 
As I've explained, if a report is filed, that decision then becomes 
a subject of political comment. If you do it very often you 
politicize the public prosecutions branch. We don't want that; 
we don't think you want that either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Patronage Appointments 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, prior to 
the last election, the current Premier called political patronage 
an endemic, virulent practice. He said that party people and 
defeated MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 
candidates ought not serve on government boards. And then he 
went on to say: if we don't succeed and continue to appoint 
party hacks, then I've gotten nowhere. How are you doing so 
far, Mr. Premier? 
 
In today's paper, there are 73  73  former NDP MLAs, 
NDP candidates, NDP campaign managers, and NDP executive 
members who have been appointed to every type of board, 
commission, judgeship, and position in the public sector. 
Seventy-three, Mr. Premier, and the article notes that the list 
would even be higher if immediate family members of current 
and former MLAs, people who have lifetime NDP 
memberships, and those who lost NDP nominations were added 
to that list. 
 
Mr. Premier, I'd like you to explain how this list squares with 
your promise to quit appointing party people and defeated 
MLAs and candidates to government positions. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, let me tell 
the members opposite that the way we appoint to boards and 
commissions in this province is very different than the previous 
administration. Competence is the main criteria. And I want to 
say to you that out of the 1,700 members of the general public 
that we have appointed to various boards and commissions, 
there are many people from various political backgrounds. 
 
I understand a couple of them have run for the Liberal Party as 
candidates. There are a large number of Conservative 
supporters, and some of course, given the background of the 
province, would be from NDP backgrounds. But included in the 
names of some of the non-New Democrats that we have 
appointed, well-known names like Dale Botting; Owen Mann; 
Don Black; Cliff Wright; Mel Watson, the past president of the 
chamber of commerce, who I'm sure no one will accuse of 
packing an NDP membership; Glen Penner, who many of you 
will know in the Liberal Party. So the fact is in Saskatchewan 
that in appointing members to boards and commissions, 
competence, regardless of their political background, is the 
main criteria. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Premier, you people are pathological. You have a Health 
minister who says that you have . . . no hospitals have been 
closed. You have a gambling minister who won't admit VLTs 
(video lottery terminal) cause gambling addictions. You have a 
Labour minister who spent two years denying your government 
was developing a union-only tendering preference policy. You 
have a Social Service minister who quotes fictitious reports on 
welfare fraud. And now we have a Premier who won't admit to 
making patronage appointments, even after seeing a list of 73 
such appointments in today's paper. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, you would have had to sign all of those OCs 
(order in council); virtually every one of them I understand you 
signed yourself, sir. Why are you and your ministers so 
incapable of simply telling the truth? Will you start by 
admitting that political patronage is just as extensive under your 
government as it ever was, so we can get to work, so we can get 
to work on fixing the problem. Will you admit that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
the member opposite who, in his sanctimonious way, gets up 
and talks about the political appointments so-called, but I want 
to quote to him from March 28, 1994, Star-Phoenix, and the 
headline is: Tkachuk defends patronage. And in that story it 
says: 
 
 Tory MLAs were clearly unsettled by (how do you say 

his name?) Tkachuk's remarks. 
 
And I quote because this is the important part: 
 
 That was the most eloquent defence of the most 

indefensible thing in government today, said Kindersley 
MLA Bill Boyd. We, the former Tory government, 
carried it to a point where the flag girl on the highway 
crew had to be identified as a party member. As  



March 20, 1995 

 
960 

politicians that's where we have the greatest problem. 
 
And it goes on: 
 
 Dan D'Autremont, Souris-Cannington, told the meeting 

he was asked by the Tory officials to ensure members of 
the highway repair crew had correct political 
background. Political patronage was one of the 
downfalls of the Devine government, he said. 

 
Now for you to come here today and say that, because we have 
appointed, for example, members who have run for the Liberal 
Party in the past and are running: Ken Krawetz, Linda Trytten, 
Dale Botting, Glen Penner, many well-known people from 
other political parties, is simply unbelievable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, Mr. 
Minister, you exactly make our case. That is the reason why, sir, 
we have brought forward a Bill into this legislature calling for 
an all-party commission to decide on political patronage 
appointments. That is exactly the reason we have brought that 
forward, sir. It happened in the last administration; it happened 
in administrations previous to that; and it certainly is happening 
under yours, sir. 
 
Between 1982 and 1990 no fewer than 15 former or defeated 
PC MLAs were appointed to Crown corporation boards, 
commissioners, or departments. The NDP called that a most 
disturbing and intensified trend. Mr. Premier, the list in the 
paper today of your people includes 29 NDP MLAs or defeated 
candidates in a list of 73 party members. I guess it's not quite as 
bad, somehow or another, when you people are doing it and if 
it's different than anyone else that's doing it. 
 
Mr. Premier, why have you and your party broken your promise 
to the people of this province? Why is political patronage 
suddenly acceptable now that the NDP is the one that's handing 
out the jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
that when you have on the list, I believe that Mark Wyatt has 
done up for the Leader-Post, fewer than 3 per cent of the total 
number of appointments that we have made in the province and 
then talk about this as being rampant patronage, is ludicrous. 
 
I say to the member opposite, the member opposite who in his 
own words talked about their political patronage to the point 
where he believed it to be the downfall of their government, I 
say to you that having in this province established a process 
whereby we have aboriginal people to a large extent on all of 
our boards, where we have gender parity as a very, very big 
goal and on most boards we are achieving it, where we have 
employee representation from the Crowns on almost every 
board, and to say that this isn't an improvement I think flies in 
the face of your own comments at your recent political  

meetings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Premier, it was wrong then and it is wrong now 
— just as wrong now. But instead of arguing about it, we're 
prepared, Mr. Minister, to do something about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the opposition has introduced a private members' 
Bill that would see all appointments to government boards and 
commissions made by an all-party committee of this legislature. 
The government would still retain the majority on that 
committee. But we believe the public appointment process 
would reduce blatant political patronage and ensure that the 
most qualified persons were appointed regardless of political 
stripe. Mr. Premier, your own government's polling is showing 
that 83 per cent of people support this idea. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you support this initiative and start to restore 
some integrity into the government appointment process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite and the Leader of the Conservative Party and 
the Conservative caucus, that it would be interesting to find out 
whether he consulted with the member from Estevan before he 
raised this question about how terrible appointments of a 
political nature are. But for them to sanctimoniously stand here 
today and say, if only we were back in government we would 
do it differently, is like slamming the barn door after the horses 
are 10 miles down the road. You didn't do any of it — you 
didn't do any of it. We have. 
 
I say that the appointments to boards and commissions, if you 
want to look at it in fairness, are done on the basis of 
competence, that there are members from all political 
backgrounds and political parties. We don't, as you have readily 
admitted, make sure that they have political cards before we 
hire students to work in the Department of Highways, which the 
member from Souris-Cannington says was the policy of the 
previous administration. 
 
So for you to say that there is the same kind of political 
patronage involved in our government as there was in yours, is 
absolute nonsense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in 1991 the Premier claimed that he would put a stop 
to the practice of stacking boards with party faithful. And he 
states in today's Leader-Post, and I quote: 
 
 "This is not a matter of government sitting in the back 

room and saying, 'I'm going to appoint an NDPer or a 
token Liberal or a PC', which was done prior to 1991." 

 



March 20, 1995 

 
961 

My question to the Premier: Mr. Premier, when you took office 
in 1991, were the people on existing agencies, boards, and 
commissions evaluated on their qualifications and performance 
or on political affiliation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite who rises in her place to ask about political 
appointments, I say again that there are a number of your 
candidates who have been appointed to boards. And if that's 
who you're referring to as not being appointed, I can say to you 
that they are competent people and that's the reason we 
appointed them. 
 
And I want to say to you as well that in your quotes recently in 
the North Battleford regional Optimist, April 17, 1994, you say, 
and I quote, on the issue of patronage: that doesn't mean that 
Liberals won't get jobs, she said. They're competent, and if you 
have someone who is competent and has integrity, it doesn't 
matter what political stripe they are. That's your opinion. You're 
saying that you will hire them and you will appoint them. 
 
And so I say to you, where do you get off today saying that in 
fact if you were elected you wouldn't appoint Liberals. You say 
right here when you're at another place and at another time not 
so long ago in North Battleford, that in fact if you were elected, 
you would, and I quote again: that doesn't mean that Liberals 
won't get jobs, she said. They're competent, and if you have 
someone who is competent and has integrity, it doesn't matter 
what their political stripe is. And that in fact is what governing 
is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in spite of this minister's and obviously the Premier's 
denials, it was just 22 days after their election that the NDP 
started doing the same old thing about patronage appointments. 
 
I'd like to table a memo today from the Premier's long-time 
senior assistant, Diana Milenkovic, now a vice-president of 
SaskTel. This memo lists all 13 SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) board members at the time, and beside 
the name of each person is an X indicating that they will be 
dropped from the board. NDP replacements are indicated for 
part of this list. 
 
And what is most disturbing is that the memo does not evaluate 
people at all according to their performance on the board; 
indeed it instead evaluates them on their political affiliation, 
which appears to be the only consistent criterion. 
 
To the Premier, sir, if you will rise in your place: how could you 
promise the board appointments would not be tied to politics 
when this memo clearly proves otherwise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say very 
clearly to the member opposite that when she talks about 
political appointments, she should be clear that she has made 
statements to her own party members and to the public at large  

that she in fact would have political appointments. 
 
And to the member opposite as well, from Shaunavon, who 
clearly on many occasions came to offices of ministers when he 
represented the members of Shaunavon from the NDP, arguing 
vehemently that we weren't making enough political 
appointments; this was his argument: on health boards, on 
government boards, that there should be more political 
appointments. For him today to say that there are too many 
political appointments I think flies in the face of what he was 
saying when he was a member of this caucus. 
 
Mr. Chrétien as well had some interesting points of view on 
political appointments. And I want to quote as well from a 
recent article in The Globe and Mail, February 4, 1995, where 
he says it is an issue of their competence. Or as he puts it: Guys 
you don't know, why you don't know; guys you know, you 
know. And that's competence. 
 
Now that's Liberals. That's what it's about. And I say again, Mr. 
Speaker, that that's pretty clear, what Liberals talk about. I say 
again: Guys you don't know, you don't know; and guys you 
know, you know. And that's competence. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find 
it most interesting that they laugh and jest but this document 
clearly shows that these particular individuals, none of whom 
were appointed to the board on this list, were removed on the 
basis of their known or suspected political affiliation, and 
nothing else. 
 
Not only does this memo offer no credible evaluation — no 
credible evaluation of the skills or the abilities of these 
individuals, Mr. Speaker — it insults the former board members 
with comments such as this: calling this gentleman a farmer 
who doesn't have a good reputation, a rabid, cranky Tory. End 
of quote. 
 
My question to the Premier again: if this was the method of 
evaluation placed to all boards, agencies, and commissions 
when you took power, will you admit that you in fact have 
misled the people of Saskatchewan as recently as the interview 
in today's paper, and that politics was indeed the primary 
consideration for replacing people on government agencies, 
boards, and commissions, when you came to office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what we did when we 
made the drastic change from hiring flag people on the 
highways as the former Tory government did, demanding that 
they have a Conservative political card, is we established a 
process where competence was in fact based on what these 
people knew and did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say again to the member opposite from 
Greystone, who in her sanctimonious way says something very 
different here in the House today from what she has been saying 
at party meetings, is that the difference between your  



March 20, 1995 

 
962 

former patronage and the Prime Minister's, Mr. Chrétien, is that 
at least he has the integrity and honesty to tell the world what he 
believes about appointments. And that in fact is very different 
than what you are doing here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rail Strike Legislation 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As much as I'd 
very much like to continue with this line, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
very urgent and critical issue facing the farmers of 
Saskatchewan today, and perhaps this will bring the Premier to 
his feet. 
 
At this very hour in Ottawa the NDP is collaborating with the 
separatist Bloc Quebecois to filibuster in the House of 
Commons to prevent the federal government from expediting 
legislation to end the rail strike. 
 
Mr. Premier, knowing that we cannot afford another moment's 
delay, will you in fact immediately communicate the serious 
implications of the actions of your NDP counterparts in Ottawa 
that they are taking by obstructing this legislation, legislation 
that even you have finally conceded is necessary to avert 
disastrous consequences for Saskatchewan grain shipments to 
overseas customers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I must say that it gets 
curiouser and curiouser and curiouser. Today, Monday, March 
20, 1995, the Liberal leader in Saskatchewan is supporting the 
federal Liberal government in Ottawa, but four days ago she 
was in absolute, total opposition to everything that the Liberal 
government in Ottawa did. So now there is another major 
flip-flop of position and she is in favour of this. 
 
I am assuming that her close and fraternal relationships with the 
Liberal Party in Ottawa will have told them that this was 
something we had spotted as a problem some several weeks ago 
by way of correspondence to them and urging them to act. They 
chose not to act until this moment of crisis. 
 
This is something which I don't know whether you support or 
you don't support because your position with the Liberal Party 
federally is somewhat ambivalent. But don't think that you're 
fooling the people of Saskatchewan because we know from 
long history that a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. 
That's exactly what you are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the two 
written questions, I move they be converted to motions for  

return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — 58 and 57, motions for return debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 
amend Certain Health Statutes be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
indicated the other day that the Bill before us, Bill No. 38, An 
Act to amend Certain Health Statutes, appears to be a fairly 
straightforward Bill dealing with a number of amendments; 
amendments that are necessary because of no-fault insurance 
and the introduction of new population-based funding 
arrangements. 
 
Prior to no-fault insurance coming into place, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan Health could directly recover medical and 
hospital costs caused by automobile accidents where those costs 
were due to negligence on the part of someone else. That is no 
longer possible, and that is one of the reasons for this Bill being 
before the Assembly today. 
 
I understand that SGI, Mr. Speaker, has agreed to reimburse 
Saskatchewan Health for these costs, and costs are expected to 
be around 4.5 million annually. 
 
The Bill also, Mr. Speaker, accommodates cost recovery for 
third-party liability, medical claims, and situations where fee for 
services is not applicable . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — More specifically, for population-based funding 
to medical doctors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation will provide authority under one 
piece of legislation for medical and hospital costs to be 
recovered in all situations where the cost is of the result of 
negligence on the part of someone else. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, this Bill certainly does 
bring amendments that it appears are necessary due to some of 
the legislation that was introduced and passed in the last 
session. And I also indicated that we do have a couple of 
amendments that we want to bring forward. We have a number 
of questions that we would like to raise. 
 
However, we do not feel that it is that serious a matter that we 
can't allow the Bill to now proceed to committee and address 
these questions, and bring forward any amendments at that  



March 20, 1995 

 
963 

time. Mr. Speaker, therefore we're prepared to let this Bill go to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 39 — An Act to 
amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
raise a few concerns and bring a few thoughts forward before I 
move adjournment of this motion that this Bill be read the 
second time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset I'm pleased to see that both the 
Saskatchewan College of Physicians and Surgeons and the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association have been consulted 
previous to any changes made to The Medical Profession Act. 
And if there's anything that I'm hearing from people within the 
medical field and medical profession at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
it's the fact that many of the workers and suppliers of services 
feel that they haven't been properly consulted or involved in a 
number of the changes that we have seen take place in this 
province over the past three years under this administration re 
health care in this province. 
 
Bill 39, however, seems to have some welcome modifications. 
And it's certainly heartening to know that the very people who 
provide the service were at least asked for their involvement 
and their input in regards to this Bill. It seems, Mr. Speaker, 
that this Bill will ease the red tape involved, with some services 
being provided through community-based health providers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the College of Physicians and Surgeons will be 
able to issue special licences to psychiatrists and medical health 
officers who will be transferred to the district health boards on 
April 1. 
 
A few other amendments make some sense. I believe it is a 
good idea to extend the period of time in which a person can 
take civil action against a physician for negligence. Bill 39 
adjusts this length of time from 12 months to 14 months. And I 
believe this is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, because many times 
individuals themselves don't realize till a number of months 
after a certain procedure whether or not there may be a case 
whereby they would have the opportunity of applying an action 
for negligence against a physician. So I think that is certainly 
appropriate, especially for the well-being of the general public. 
 
Whether it's politics or children's education or where tax dollars 
go, people want more information, more accountability. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a positive trend. People are 
taking more interest in the things that affect them. They are 
demanding fair and equitable treatment from professionals and 
the elected officials alike. This is also positive, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, another amendment in Bill 39 allows a committee 
of the College of Physicians and Surgeons that investigates the 
patient's complaints the ability to apply to the court for 
subpoenas for witnesses to testify. Obviously this will help the 
committee get down to the bottom of complaints and exactly 
what happened, allowing for the truth to be told under oath. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is hoped that this initiative will allow injustices, 
however few, to be dealt with properly and efficiently. I say 
however few, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that the vast 
majority of doctors and medical professionals in our province 
are more than conscientious. They are to be commended for 
their dedication to providing quality health care for 
Saskatchewan families. They should be commended especially 
because their jobs have gotten much tougher over the past few 
years because of government cut-backs to health care. Mr. 
Speaker, in those rare cases where professionals have acted 
negligently, of course they should be held accountable for their 
actions. 
 
Allowing the college's committee to subpoena witnesses will 
allow all parties involved — patients, family, doctors, and other 
medical professionals involved — to be treated fairly and 
objectively. Removing reference to specific countries' 
qualifications in granting temporary licences will be a positive 
move, especially for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It will open some specific questions in this . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
have some specific questions in this regard when Bill 39 does 
go to committee. But I must say at the onset, I think this change 
will be helpful. 
 
Presently, Mr. Speaker, we have doctors from England, 
Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, and South Africa, as well as 
the United States, that must go through overly extensive red 
tape in order to practise medicine in Saskatchewan. And most 
everyone in this Assembly is quite well aware of the fact that, if 
it weren't for offshore — if I can use that term — medical 
professionals coming to this province, a number of our rural 
communities would not have the medical professional help that 
they do have today. 
 
And so this is an area of the Bill that I'm certainly taking an 
interest in and will be raising some questions to make sure that 
we indeed give professionals the ability that they need to come 
to this province and offer the services which are so greatly 
required. 
 
These are individuals who have received their graduate degrees 
in medicine and have been approved by the general medical 
councils in their prospective countries. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, some of these individuals take quite some time before 
being allowed to practise here. And I believe this is not a 
problem that is isolated in our province. I know of a neurologist 
in the States who moved from one state to another and waited 
14 months to receive his licence. These kinds of problems don't 
make sense. But when it comes to government rules and 
regulations, oftentimes it seems there is no sense. 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
964 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this provision will be especially helpful 
since we have lost many health care specialists and physicians 
over the past few years. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, Bill 39 makes some changes to the 
use of the College of Physicians and Surgeons use of legal 
counsel and the assessment of fees. Including fees within 
by-laws and other changes are areas I would like some more 
detail on, and I will be posing these questions during 
committee. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate for us to 
review in a little greater length this Bill before we allow it to go 
to committee, and therefore at this time I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Renaud that Bill No. 22 — An Act to 
establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation and 
to enact a Consequential Amendment be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated the other day, one has 
to question the real need for another Crown corporation in this 
province, especially a highways Crown, when indeed we have a 
Highways department already available and willing and more 
than capable of providing contracts and letting contracts and 
looking after the infrastructure, the road infrastructure in our 
province. 
 
However, driving home this past weekend, one would begin to 
wonder whether or not they do have as much ability as we give 
them credit for, in view of some of the road conditions that I 
was travelling on. However we're quite well aware that this time 
of the year we can expect to experience some deterioration of 
our roads, just because of the climate that we have in this 
province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we've seen over the past few years that there 
has been a real, real reduction, and indeed the professionals that 
are working in our Highways department today are finding it 
more difficult to just try and maintain the infrastructure we 
have, let alone adding a better road quality or roadbed, due to 
the cut-backs that we have seen administered by this 
government. 
 
While on one hand they take away from the agriculture 
producers and indirectly use those funds to balance their 
budget, on the other hand, where they're cutting back, where 
people are finding that the road structure in this province is 
being severely hampered with and in some cases deteriorating 
 that, Mr. Speaker, poses a real question: why spend more 
money forming another Crown corporation where we're going 
to have people appointed to run this Crown corporation when it 
might be more appropriate to put that money into the structure,  

the infrastructure that's already there? Put it into the Department 
of Highways and allow them to get on with the job of creating a 
better highway surface and a better road maintenance 
throughout this province for the people of Saskatchewan to 
indeed utilize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I find interesting . . . and I think the 
government has argued that they need the Crown in order to 
take advantage of cost sharing or funds from the federal 
infrastructure program that are being made available to the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I guess that's the point that I 
really wonder and really ponder, and really I'm trying to 
determine in my mind whether indeed that is necessary. 
 
Is it that vital that we set up a Crown corporation just to accept 
and handle the infrastructure program? Would it not be 
possible, Mr. Speaker, for that funding to come to the province, 
for the province to allocate it to the Department of Highways, 
and to allocate it to specific projects within the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And I can think of a couple of areas specifically, Mr. Speaker, 
where that infrastructure program might be allocated to, in view 
of the fact that we have federal-provincial agreements dealing 
with national transportation and a national highways structure 
across this province  certainly No. 1, in my area. My 
colleague, the member from Maple Creek, has had petitions 
from his area regarding the four-laning of the No. 1 from Gull 
Lake through to the Alberta border, and I would have to add 
that even on the east side of this province, Mr. Speaker, it 
would be very appropriate that we take a serious look at double- 
or four-laning the No. 1 from Indian Head east right through to 
the Manitoba border. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that a young girl on 
her way to watch her brother curl in the Saskatchewan junior 
curling championships would be alive today if we'd have had a 
four-lane highway going east into Manitoba rather than the fact 
of a two-lane and the unfortunate mishap that took place just 
outside of Moosomin. And that is just one; it just is a recent 
example that I bring to mind. 
 
And yet, on a daily basis and a weekly and monthly basis, Mr. 
Speaker, we have seen from residents within the area . . . not 
only on the east side where we just have the single two-lane 
highway and on the west side, Mr. Speaker. But there have been 
numerous occasions where there are legitimate arguments and 
real reasons as to why twinning of the No. 1 should take place. 
And it's not just the No. 1. We have noticed a significant 
movement of traffic into our province and through our province 
on the Yellowhead. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker . . . and I understand as I was noticing 
the information that the Minister of Highways made available to 
us regarding the building program for this year that there is a 
portion of highway west of Saskatoon, towards North 
Battleford, that's actually had been graded for — I believe — 
two or three years and yet still hasn't received pavement. And if 
I'm not mistaken, that is one of the areas . . . the fact that it's  



March 20, 1995 

 
965 

still two lane where some of the most significant accidents have 
taken place in the last few years. And it's very important that 
that highway be opened up and a four lane put in there, as we 
see the greater movement of traffic through the province on the 
northern side of the province along the Yellowhead. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would have to . . . as I've indicated 
before and I indicate again, it would seem to me that we have a 
very legitimate question here as to why the province would 
decide to add another Crown which will become another 
expense for the taxpayers which is another avenue whereby our 
taxpayers are then eaten up in administration versus putting the 
dollars to actual use of the taxpayers across this province . . . by 
putting that money directly into the agency that's already 
available, the Department of Highways and allowing them to 
get on with the process of upgrading these major highway 
structures across or ribbons of highway across our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I talk about No. 1 and I talk about 
Highway No. 16, the Yellowhead, we're all aware and people 
across this province are aware of the fact that there are other 
highways in this province that need some work done on them. 
While it's important that we look at the national infrastructure 
and the national highway medium, Mr. Speaker, it's also 
important for us in Saskatchewan to realize that there are other 
areas in the province that whereby people, residents of this 
province, transport or travel back and forth from point A to 
point B. And they're travelling on roads that are less than being 
totally safe. And it's fortunate that we have a group of drivers 
who have really been careful in how they drive and how they 
move their vehicles down the road and drive defensively. And 
it's because of that, Mr. Speaker, that some of the problems and 
some of the problem areas in our highway infrastructure . . . 
that we haven't had more accidents than we do have. 
 
(1430) 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that it would be more 
appropriate for this government, rather than just pushing ahead 
and forging ahead with the need for a Crown corporation, 
another Crown corporation in this province, that they take the 
time and that they speak with the federal government. And if 
they need to, Mr. Speaker, if they need to, ask the federal 
government for a bit of lead time, additional lead time to allow 
them to set up the process, the format that if there's a special 
format needed under the Department of Highways as it already 
exists . . . and place most of the money, if not all of the money, 
through the federal infrastructure program into meeting the 
needs of the drivers, not only of the province of Saskatchewan, 
but the many people who utilize our highways, as we trust that 
we will be seeing this summer. And even beginning now, 
people will come into the province and will spend some time in 
this province . . . that they will choose this province as a place 
to spend some of their tourist dollars. 
 
And if we're going to enhance people looking at spending some 
time in this province, it's important that we create that road 
structure and that highway structure whereby they will be more 
than willing to turn off some of the major highways going  

across this province in order to take a look at what 
Saskatchewan has to offer because certainly, Mr. Speaker, this 
province has a lot to offer, but most people do not see it. 
 
In fact when I talk to people, what they talk about . . . how fast 
they can get through Saskatchewan because it's nothing but 
bald, open prairie. And yet if they got off a couple of the main 
highways, specifically No. 1, travelled even down No. 33, 
they'd be amazed at the sights that they can see as they travel 
through the province of Saskatchewan. Or certainly if they just 
swung a little bit further north and just took a little bit of time, 
they'd be amazed at what they can see in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it's also interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, where individuals 
or people I've run into that have come from Manitoba and have 
never gone anywhere but the No. 1 . . . and one couple comes to 
mind. At the community of Moosomin they had asked us if 
there were any camping sites around that community. And we 
had indicated to them maybe they should look at the regional 
park, just check it out; it's only six or eight miles from the 
community. It's off the No. 1, granted, and maybe the road isn't 
quite as nice, but . . . At the end of the day we got a call back 
from this couple saying, boy, we didn't realize there was such a 
beautiful site off the No. 1 Highway. All we saw was flat, open 
prairie, and we drove six miles off the No. 1, found ourselves a 
real nice camping spot. And they said next time we come 
through, that's where we're going to stop. 
 
Another couple indicated they decided they'd swing north 
through the community of Rocanville, went into the Qu'Appelle 
Valley, and took the scenic route through the valley. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, it's a little slower traffic than the No. 1, but they found 
out that we have some beautiful scenery in this province, that 
there was more to this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be more appropriate if we sat 
down and if the government took the time to re-evaluate the 
need, whether or not we really need this transportation Act . . . 
if they took the time to re-evaluate and took those dollars that 
are coming from the infrastructure program and put them to 
work right now, Mr. Speaker, to benefit the taxpayers of this 
province rather than creating another Crown corporation. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, with that, I'm going to allow other 
members to address this issue as well. But I believe that it's 
important that those points be brought forward and that the 
public and the people of this Assembly made no . . . be brought 
up to speed as to the need and whether or not this piece of 
legislation is essential or is an essential piece of legislation to 
be brought forward at this time. And I thank you for your 
indulgence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to speak 
a little bit about the Bill before us today. What the Bill does is it 
creates a Crown corporation empowered to undertake highway 
works. 
 
What that does, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is raise a  



March 20, 1995 

 
966 

number of questions in our minds about what the responsibility 
of this Crown corporation is going to be. For example, when I 
take a look at the Department of Highways and Transportation 
and I do an assessment of it and evaluate . . . And I say, is this 
Crown corporation going to take over some part of the 
Department of Highways? Is it, for example, going to take over 
the work of cutting the grass along the highways? Is it going to 
take over the responsibility of grading the roads in 
Saskatchewan? Is it going to take over the responsibility of 
cleaning the snow off of the highways? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the questions that we have about this Act as it 
relates to this Assembly, these questions are very significant. 
We don't know from the minister's observations what this 
Crown corporation is going to have the capacity to do. Will it 
have the responsibility to take over the administration of the 
Department of Highways? Will it take over the responsibility of 
the repair of Highway's equipment across this province? We 
don't know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will this Crown corporation be responsible for the inventory 
supply of the Department of Highways? We don't know that 
either, Mr. Speaker. And the minister has not give us an 
indication of what this is supposed to do or what the mandate of 
this Crown corporation is supposed to be. 
 
Is this Crown corporation going to handle the administration of 
the Department of Highways? Is it going to handle the services 
provided by the Department of Highways to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Is this the mandate of this Crown corporation? 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways hasn't told us. Is this 
going to handle the engineering portion of the Department of 
Highways, this Crown corporation that is going to be 
empowered to undertake Highways' works in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, we don't know that. 
 
There are a whole lot of things that we don't know about this 
piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we have just a whole lot 
of questions that we have to deal with. 
 
Will they be taking over the facilities and the role of the 
province in the Highway's facilities that they have? Will they be 
taking over equipment, office accommodation, material storage 
space? Will they be taking over the Highway Traffic Board? 
And these are questions that we have, Mr. Speaker, of this 
minister on what the Crown corporation in transportation is 
supposed to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this Crown corporation take over the 
engineering component of the Department of Highways? And 
in all of this, Mr. Speaker, is the overall concept that the road 
system is not only the Department of Highways and the 
highway system; it is also the municipal roads in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Is this Crown corporation going to take over 
the assets of the municipal roads? Is it going to take over the 
responsibility of grading them? 
 
We have a lot of questions that haven't been answered by the 
Minister of Highways, Mr. Speaker, in giving this Crown  

corporation the power to undertake the work of the Department 
of Highways. 
 
Will this Crown corporation be responsible for all of the 
tendering in the construction for transportation in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Is this Crown corporation going to be involved in pulling 
together the whole area of ferries in the province of 
Saskatchewan? We have a number of them on the South 
Saskatchewan River and on the North Saskatchewan River. 
Will this Crown corporation be responsible for the ferry 
services in the province? We haven't been told any of this by 
the Minister of Highways. He has not been available for 
comment on these, and we are asking these questions. 
 
Will the responsibility for all of the stockpiling of gravel come 
under this Crown corporation in relation to all of the stockpiling 
of gravel that goes on through the winter in the province of 
Saskatchewan? It's done extensively now, Mr. Speaker, by 
private companies bidding on tenders, and we want to know 
from the Minister of Highways what this Crown corporation's 
responsibility is going to be. Will it take over the spreading of 
the gravel on highways and the moving of crush to locations 
where new construction is taking place? Will this be the 
responsibility of this Crown corporation? We don't know that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that comes to my mind is, what will this 
corporation be empowered to do when it is given the 
responsibilities of the Department of Highways? What will the 
responsibility be? Will it be to coordinate all of the activities of 
the construction in the province of Saskatchewan? We don't 
know that either, Mr. Speaker. Will it be the responsibility of 
this Crown corporation to deal with the tenders? Will they be 
required to hand them out or let them? And that's the questions 
we have, Mr. Speaker, regarding this corporation. 
 
There are a whole lot of aspects that we need to have answers 
on, and we have not been able to receive them, and that's the 
reason why we are here speaking about this corporation. These 
are questions that we're going to be asking the Minister of 
Highways to come forward with as it relates to this corporation. 
 
There's other things. For example, we need to have some 
understanding from the minister whether this will include 
anything to do with the replacement of rail beds and 
construction of rail beds in the province of Saskatchewan. Will 
this be an opportunity for the minister to expand the short-line 
railroad system in the province of Saskatchewan? That's a 
question that is concerning a lot of people today. 
 
And this Crown corporation that is to do highway work in the 
Department of Highways, would it be responsible for 
purchasing road beds in the province of Saskatchewan? Would 
it be responsible for owning these road beds in the province? 
These are questions that come to mind in a way that we should 
have had some answers from the Minister of Highways 
regarding this. 



March 20, 1995 

 
967 

Is the Minister of Highways considering moving the services 
and the employees from the railroads into this Crown 
corporation in order to expedite the movement of grain and 
other freight along the branch lines in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Is this his way of setting a corporation up, a Crown corporation, 
to do any one of the things that I have talked about to this 
point? And that's the question we have and the consideration 
that has to be made by this Legislative Assembly. To date, Mr. 
Speaker, we haven't had the answers to these questions, and we 
need to have them. 
 
Another point that needs to be raised is that this corporation is 
designed to encourage the participation of outside investment in 
highways projects. Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a 
suggestion that perhaps maybe we have a Coquihalla Highway 
in the province of Saskatchewan where the private citizens of 
this province are to be allowed to purchase highway right of 
ways and then have tolls that would reimburse the owners for 
the privilege of driving on those highways. Is this in the 
minister's mind as it relates to having outside investment in 
projects in Saskatchewan? 
 
We have . . . As I suggested earlier, is this a question of 
allowing the ferry services to become privatized? That's a 
question we could raise as a way to establish what things could 
be done and what things may be done. 
 
Are engineering firms interested in constructing highways in the 
province of Saskatchewan in order to have access to income in 
a general way on the movement of commodities along major 
corridors in Saskatchewan? Is this what the Minister of 
Highways is suggesting? Is this a way for outside investors to 
come in and purchase highway right of ways and then using 
these corridors for their own specific benefit? Would this 
include those people who use the highways extensively? Would 
this include things like having trucking companies finance 
certain portions of the highway in order to have an opportunity 
to have running rights on those highways? Is this what the 
Minister of Highways is suggesting? 
 
We don't even begin to know what all he is including in 
establishing this Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill establishes a six-person board to run the 
Crown corporation. Well, Mr. Speaker, earlier today we had a 
pretty frank discussion about who and what kind of people this 
government has used to establish Crown corporation boards. 
 
 Across this province we have seen an infiltration of NDP: 
former NDP MLAs, former NDP candidates, former NDP 
stakeholders in committee rooms, and all of the things related to 
the work of the NDP. These people have appointed them to the 
boards and commissions. And the paper suggested that there 
was over 70 of them involved. And if he included extended 
family members, they would be hundreds more. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is what we have, and that's what would run this Crown 
corporation. 

Mr. Speaker, these are questions that we have of the Minister of 
Highways, and we want to have an opportunity to ask them. 
 
(1445) 
 
With the member from Lloydminster speaking up, it also 
reminded me of some other things that could be included in this 
discussion. The heavy oil upgrading in the province of 
Saskatchewan, will it be allowed to contribute to the volume of 
business that could be achieved by having running rights on 
certain highways? Is that also an opportunity of which the 
minister is speaking about public participation from outside of 
the Department of Highways and tax dollars? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown is to be given a $20 million fund from 
the general revenue — $20 million to kick-start the Crown 
corporation. Well, Mr. Speaker, in today's tight money policy 
that the provincial government has established in this province 
as it relates to serious construction on the Department of 
Highways, I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if this is 
just there to put in place so that this Crown corporation can 
begin or it has some substance, I would say that there are 
probably hundreds and thousands of people in this province 
who would be able to say to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
this government that we have a better place to put this $20 
million than just to be the place where we do change in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Twenty million dollars is a fairly substantial fund. In fact there 
are departments in this government who operate under less than 
that, and here's a Crown corporation who's going to get $20 
million up front in order to get it up and running. 
 
These are concerns that we have, Mr. Speaker, regarding this 
Crown corporation. This Bill was originally drafted to allow the 
government to participate in proposed federal-provincial 
highways projects that was seeing its entity run as a joint 
federal-provincial Crown. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, last fall we heard a lot of stories about how 
this was going to be brought about. We heard stories that the 
minister of transport was negotiating with the federal Minister 
of Transport about how this would happen. Then along comes a 
statement made by the federal government and they say this is 
no longer going to be happening — we're not going to be 
involved in a way that we're going to fund Highways' projects 
and we're not going to be involved in the construction of 
highway projects. 
 
There's lots of highways, as I've travelled around this country, 
Mr. Speaker, where I see signs, where I see signs along the 
highway indicating X amount of dollars financed by the 
province of New Brunswick; X amount of dollars sponsored by 
the Government of Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I've travelled across this country, I have 
seen a difference in how these signs occur in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan has a minister's name on the picture: this project 
sponsored by the people of Saskatchewan . . . or the  



March 20, 1995 

 
968 

Government of Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, isn't the 
way it is in other parts of this country. We have major sections 
of transportation in this country that are solely financed by the 
federal government. 
 
We have airports being built across this country that are 
financed by the federal government, and what major benefit 
does Saskatchewan get out of that? Not a whole lot. We have a 
small airport in Saskatoon and one in Regina, but not the same 
size as you have in Ontario, in Toronto, or in Montreal or 
Quebec or Ottawa. These are major, major facilities financed by 
the federal government and we have not had an opportunity to 
get the same benefit from the federal tax dollars. And so when I 
heard this the first time, I said that's a good thing to have. 
 
I travelled last summer in the Maritimes; as I said earlier, in 
New Brunswick. I travelled in Prince Edward Island, and I saw 
signs there along the highway that said, financed by the 
Department of Highways in Prince Edward Island and funded 
by a federal government . . . and usually the federal government 
portion was higher than the provincial government portion. And 
that goes on extensively. I was in Nova Scotia as well and the 
same thing applies there. 
 
And then we could easily begin to talk about the big bridge 
that's going to link New Brunswick with Prince Edward Island. 
And there, Mr. Speaker, millions and millions and hundreds of 
millions of dollars is going to go into that infrastructure and 
that structure in order to make Prince Edward Island a part of 
Canada. And that is going to cost a lot of money -- financed by 
federal tax dollars, not by provincial tax dollars. And we in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we need some of this money to 
come in here. 
 
What have we got in addition to that? We have gotten, in 
addition to that, a cut in funding to the province of 
Saskatchewan, of about $5 billion in relation to the 
transportation of grain and the subsidies on grain that we were 
receiving. And they've taken all of these away, Mr. Speaker. 
And what have we got? We have almost nothing left. We have a 
very, very small portion of that volume of dollars that we used 
to have coming into this province are now going to be spent 
elsewhere. And that, Mr. Speaker, has raised concerns with a lot 
of people. 
 
What could a billion dollars of funding in western Canada do 
for transportation in highways, construction of bridges? It could 
do a lot of good, Mr. Speaker, because this province is 
dependent on movement of commodities and goods either by 
rail or by the highways. 
 
One of the things that comes to my mind in relation to the 
revenue received, for example the one and a half cents a litre 
that the federal government just received as a part of the taxes 
that they're going to be pulling in from all across Canada. One 
and a half cents a litre is seriously and significantly going to 
impact in Saskatchewan because we have long distances to 
move freight. We have long distances to get our products to 
market, and we have to have carbon fuels to provide energy for  

us to do that and deliver that. 
 
And what does the federal government give back to us in 
proportion to other parts of Canada? Very, very little, Mr. 
Speaker. And that's what we're concerned about. And that's 
where I think the federal government needs to have some clear 
understanding and needs to have this Minister of Transport deal 
fairly with us. 
 
We have seen, in December of this past year or November, 
removal of responsibility from the federal side. And because of 
that, we were considering that this was a significant benefit to 
the people of Saskatchewan. But as I see it today, and as I see it 
from the very little that the minister has provided for us in 
information, this Crown has absolutely no function or reason to 
come into existence. And that's why we have significantly 
debated this issue here today, and on other days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government claims that private sector interests 
want to invest money into building roads in the province, but 
they haven't specified who these businesses are, and the entire 
premiss seems to be rather weak. I've outlined some of the 
reasons why I think that this is a very, very weak argument. 
 
Mr. Speaker, traditionally in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
taxpayer has funded the construction of all of the transportation 
roadbeds in the province. And I will even include the railroads. 
The taxpayers of this province and the taxpayers from across 
Canada have invested, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of millions of 
dollars into infrastructure on transportation in this province as it 
relates to rail beds. 
 
And if you go anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan, you 
will ultimately cross a railroad track, and on that railroad track 
you will notice, if it's been a raised one, you'll have to slow 
down. Well all of those, Mr. Speaker, have all been included in 
upgrading and all at the cost and expense of the taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we believe that the federal government here has a 
responsibility. But as we saw earlier last year, the federal 
government said no, we don't want to become involved in 
building a highway framework for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The question we have is why would a taxpaying business want 
to donate money to the government to build roads? Mr. 
Speaker, these are very important questions when it comes to 
the point of who has contributed in this province and 
throughout the province in a very substantial way, an increase 
in taxes. The business community and the province of 
Saskatchewan have not only donated, contributed — they have 
been taxed, Mr. Speaker, almost beyond being able to compete 
with the neighbouring provinces, whether it's Manitoba or 
Alberta. 
 
I was speaking to some implement dealers in Swift Current on 
the weekend, and my discussion with them, it was very serious 
concern of theirs in relation to the tax problems. And the people  



March 20, 1995 

 
969 

who have donated and contributed the majority of increase in 
volume of taxes, Mr. Speaker, have been almost innumerable. 
But the taxes on gasoline in this province have raised the cost 
of doing business for these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would they want to donate to this Crown 
corporation in order to have more taxes go to that? I doubt that, 
Mr. Speaker. The energy costs in delivering commodities to any 
one of those people is increased to the place where they can 
hardly afford to do business. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker, that was pointed out to me, why 
would these people want to donate money to this Crown 
corporation when they've been . . . had serious changes in 
labour laws that they have to contend with? Labour laws that 
will say, you can't do this and can't do that and can't do the 
other thing, until they can't even go to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of options that this government has 
given the business community in Saskatchewan. Would they be 
prepared to donate to this Crown corporation? I doubt it, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact the more I talk to them, the more they want to 
vote against this government and move them out of this 
province. That's the thing that I think people really, really are 
encountering. 
 
Would the businesses in the province of Saskatchewan want to 
pay more taxes, Mr. Speaker, or donate to this Crown 
corporation? Would they want to do it when they've had 
increase in corporate taxes? Total corporate taxes run in the 
neighbourhood of $130 million annually as an increased cost of 
doing business in this province. Would these people be willing 
to donate to this Crown corporation in order to get it done? And 
the answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. 
 
And that's very, very significant because these businesses have 
been taxed to the last dollar and they want to know when some 
reprieve is going to be here and not when can we donate more 
money to the infrastructure on highways in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Those are some of the significant reasons why we have raised 
questions about this Bill. Even assuming that there were 
reasons for the above, people willing to donate to the 
construction of roads, why does the government need a Crown 
corporation to accept or enter into such deals? Mr. Speaker, the 
Department of Highways have traditionally operated on the 
basis that they would issue a tender and people would respond 
to it, and traditionally the Department of Highways has 
provided a response to the individual who had the lowest 
tender. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are raising the question in this Assembly and 
across this province: is this Crown corporation another one of 
those union-preference-only opportunities for the construction 
association or the construction in highways across this 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the construction people in housing and building  

projects have raised this question very, very often on the Crown 
corporation preference for union-only contracting. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, is this the reason why this Crown corporation is being 
established? Is this the reason why they want to have this Bill 
brought forward and do it in a speedy way? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Crown corporation the minister said was 
going to be there so that you could make investments with the 
private sector. Well, Mr. Speaker, the government, in its own 
right, signs business deals all of the time with private business 
through the government agencies, through departments. It does 
it all the time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1500) 
 
When schools are being built, when hospitals are being 
constructed, formerly when roads were being built, all of this 
was done, Mr. Speaker, as a way to distribute equitably the 
volume of dollars collected by taxpayers and put it into a fund 
so that people could be paid. 
 
The Department of Highways contracts out work as a Crown 
corporation today. And, Mr. Speaker, as a chairman of the audit 
committee in Public Accounts, we have dealt extensively . . . in 
fact the auditor went through the Department of Highways to 
find out whether value for money was being done well in the 
Department of Highways, and in his estimation, it was being 
done well. And he raised a number of criteria for that study that 
he did into the Department of Highways. 
 
Now why would you want to put a Crown corporation into the 
Department of Highways in order to have it do the business of 
the Crown? So that's why we have raised the question, Mr. 
Speaker. Is this a way for a Crown corporation to monopolize 
the contractors in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction in heavy construction in this province 
have had to deal with a lot of reductions in opportunities for 
business. Across this province people have required them to 
reduce their volume of being able to do business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What has happened to the construction people? They have 
slowly and slowly become smaller and smaller and smaller. 
And so what we have today is we have very, very few major 
large-sized construction companies in Saskatchewan; but we 
have a whole lot of people who are small-businessmen who 
deal with construction for small sections of highway, small 
sections of building highways, small sections of resurfacing, 
small sections of oiling, putting together the sides of the roads 
to re-establish the pavement on these highways. 
 
We have small-businessmen doing this, and what will this do if 
they put the Crown tendering policy in that they have where 
union preference is given to the contractors? That, Mr. Speaker, 
is going to be devastating for these contractors in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Will they be able to compete? And the answer 
seriously is no. 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
970 

Where do the major construction companies come from? Well I 
know that there's a number of them that operate out of 
Winnipeg, for example. They've come to build major highways 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and I've seen this over and 
over and over again. As I've driven back and forth from my 
constituency into Regina, I see this. And I see these major 
contractors from Winnipeg with major awards for bids. Are 
these the only people that are going to get it? And is this Crown 
corporation going to be the agency that this government uses to 
deliver union preference in its tendering? That's the question we 
have as it relates to this Crown corporation. 
 
They operate today on the basis of giving to the lowest bidder. 
What will happen when the Crown corporation is established 
and it has to deal with the union preference policy that the 
Provincial Secretary, the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) has given to this 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
Union preference tendering in these contracts is going to make 
it significantly more costly to the people and the taxpayers of 
the province. The thing that has been stated over and over again 
by the people who have already done this in British Columbia, 
it's indicated that the costs of construction in areas has raised 
the cost by 25 to 30 per cent. That's very, very serious as it 
relates to putting efficiencies into government when the 
contracts are going to have to be . . . the price of these contracts 
is going to have to be raised in order to offset the union 
preference tendering only. 
 
The other thing that raises a serious problem with us is why put 
the taxpayers into more risk by having them pay the 21 cents an 
hour for every hour that these people are allowed to contract? 
 
And so we have raised a lot of these questions in relation to 
this. And, Mr. Speaker, that's why the people of Saskatchewan 
have said to me over and over, as they did this past weekend, 
they said to me, why do we have to pay for all of these 
additional things? 
 
And we say over and over again, that perhaps it's to pay for the 
next election for the NDP. Or perhaps it's to pay for a number 
of the partisan things that the NDP want to do. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is the reason why we have asked these questions and 
why we are talking about this Crown corporation specifically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been involved in establishing Crown 
corporations and I understand some of the process. I was there 
and worked together with the minister responsible for Sask 
Water when Sask Water Corporation began. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a single purpose for the establishment of 
the Water Corporation, and that was to pull together all the 
facets of government that dealt with water and its related uses 
across this province. And we did it from Urban Affairs, 
Municipal Affairs. We pulled in people from the Environment. 
We did it from Agriculture. As I recall, there were eight 
departments and 57 different Bills that were somewhat related 
to the involvement of Sask Water Corporation in being  

established as a Crown corporation. 
 
We haven't seen where this kind of an urgency is required under 
this Bill where we have the availability of pulling all of these 
different areas of government together so that the Department 
of Highways can have a Crown corporation. We haven't seen 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet when I recall having done this in the previous time, I 
recall having seen where agencies of government were 
sometimes running against each other and not providing an 
overall positive benefit to the taxpayers. And we don't see that 
in this kind of a Bill, Mr. Speaker. We don't see the need for it 
in the same context. 
 
I have seen Crown corporations established. For example, when 
Expo or the fair was in Vancouver, we set up a specific Crown 
corporation to do a specific job. And when the job was done, it 
was done away with. We haven't seen that kind of reference in 
this Crown corporation either, Mr. Speaker. So what do we 
have here? We haven't been told the things that this Crown 
corporation should do or could do. 
 
Just before I forget, I want to point out one other thing about 
the Crown corporation, that this points to us as a serious flaw in 
setting it up. Its union-preference labour component in Crown 
corporations has us seriously worried about whether this Crown 
corporation is going to react positively to give benefits to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We saw in a construction project that Sask Water did at Melfort 
how the Sask Water Corporation . . . when they initiated the 
construction of the pipeline into Melfort, half of it was done by 
the private sector, and half was done by union preference and 
the Water Corporation handling all the details of that 
construction. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker, is the private sector came in 
on budget, on time, and very, very few leaks in the system. 
What have we got on the other side where the union started to 
build? We have . . . well it's called the sprinkler system up at 
Melfort, Mr. Speaker. It's the longest pipeline, sprinkler system 
pipeline, and probably golf courses could be set up all the way 
along and water the greens all the way from Melfort to the river. 
 
And that's the kind of thing that we are concerned about in this. 
And it costs more, Mr. Speaker, to provide that sprinkler 
system. I'm not sure whether they have a special engineering 
firm to handle that sort of thing over there, but that's the kind of 
thing that we're concerned about. And we don't want to have the 
private sector contractors being required to come back in and 
fix the roads that somebody else has virtually destroyed. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is a concern of ours; and probably 
increasing the cost, as I said earlier, between 25 and 30 per 
cent. It's very, very problematic to the taxpayer, I believe. 
 
The largest concern we've heard from construction companies is  



March 20, 1995 

 
971 

that this is another ploy to bring in union preference. And this 
comes from the contractors. That's what they're concerned 
about. And we don't want to have that happen in this province 
where, as I've said earlier, the small contractors will just 
literally be pushed right out of the province, and we'll have 
these major out-of-province companies coming in and doing the 
building. 
 
The Department of Highways has traditionally handled bids on 
contracts, bids on tenders, on the basis of the lowest bidder. 
And a Crown corporation would not be restricted to that, Mr. 
Speaker. And the union-preference tendering in the Crown 
corporations, the minister responsible for CIC has stated that 
the individuals who apply would also have to pay the union 
level of costs in relation to the wage component — very, very 
counter-productive to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing that concerns us, as I've pointed out earlier, in 
dealing with the establishment of the board of a Crown 
corporation, this new Crown corporation's going to have six 
new board members and what it's also going to have to have is 
staff. Now we want to have . . . we want to just measure this 
out. They're going to have six board of directors. You're going 
to have to have a president of this Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. This president will be responsible for most of the 
executive decisions made in that Crown corporation. And if I 
take a look at other Crown corporations, I will say, would the 
equivalent of Jack Messer be the head of this Crown 
corporation; would the president of . . . David Dombowsky be 
the president of this corporation — all long-time supporters of 
the NDP party? And there are a lot of others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Would this be a part of establishing a long line of patronage for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan? Would this be an 
extensive benefit for a person like Dennis Banda who was a 
former MLA in the province of Saskatchewan? Could he be a 
chief executive officer of this Crown corporation? And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is the question we're asking. 
 
Now Mr. Allan Blakeney, he probably is too busy doing other 
things across this province, and probably his pension is too big, 
so he'd hardly have time for this. But he could even be . . . he 
maybe even could donate some of his time to be the president 
of this Crown corporation. Wouldn't that be unique in the 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we have a former member from Estevan by 
the name of Jack Chapman. Would he be a part . . . or could he 
be the president of this Crown corporation? Well no, he might 
have to give up some of the other things that he's been doing. 
Would Don Cody perhaps be a good candidate? Well he's too 
busy. He's too busy in SGI and SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
and Management Corporation). He's too busy. But maybe, Mr. 
Speaker, we'd have some way to encourage these people to 
donate their time to this Crown corporation. Wouldn't it be in 
the province's best interests, maybe, just to donate some of their 
time? 
 
I just noticed, you know, where major league athletes, like the  

CFL (Canadian Football League) or the NHL (National Hockey 
League), where these major people have done a lot of different 
things, and they contribute to the charitable organizations in a 
way that is rather unique. Because they do things like 
Telemiracle. They come in at no cost to the Kinsmen. These 
people are said to contribute their time. Now maybe Don Cody 
would be interested in it, or maybe Mike Feschuk would have to 
give up some work in the Crop Insurance in order to become 
the president and chief executive officer of this Crown 
corporation, or maybe Terry Hanson. 
 
Now here's a good one — Bob Long. He's already working in 
the Highway Traffic office. He's on the board of directors of the 
Highway Traffic Board, a long-time minister of Highways in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Now he would be a good . . . he 
would be a good NDP. He would be a good NDP maybe for this 
job to donate his time. Of course he's had a long, extensive 
career in this Assembly and he has a pretty good pension, so 
then he should be able to do this pretty well for nothing, being a 
chief executive officer in this Crown corporation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Didn't the public fire him in 1982? 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well the public did lay him off, and then 
other people from . . . 
 
(1515) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I'd like to get the 
member back on the principle of Bill No. 22, if he — order — 
if he wouldn't mind, principle of Bill No. 22. 
 
Mr. Martens: — The principle, Mr. Speaker, to the discussion 
here today is that we believe that this Crown corporation is 
seriously flawed in its mandate. Its mandate is to provide, as we 
heard from the Minister of Highways, is to provide an 
opportunity to deal with the federal government. And that was 
gone out the window in 1994 — November and December 
1994, it was gone. The federal Minister of Transport said no, 
we're not going to become involved. 
 
Political patronage has been significant in this government and 
in other NDP governments through time, where they have said 
to the people of Saskatchewan: NDP people can probably run 
these Crown corporations better than anybody else. And this is 
no exception, Mr. Speaker. And these six board members that 
this Crown corporation have is an opportunity for any one of 
. . . even the members of the government today, who are not 
running in this next election, is an opportunity for them to 
become candidates for this position in . . . as a Crown 
corporation of the Department of Highways. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we're talking about, 
we're giving examples to this Assembly of, the conduct and 
conditions that exist in relation to this government. 
 
Today's headlines were: “NDP Patronage Appointments”, and 
they dealt with various aspects of appointments to Crown 
corporations. 



March 20, 1995 

 
972 

And this is a brand-new one we're starting here today, and so 
we're saying to the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan: take heed, listen. There is going to be some 
serious implications if you establish another Crown corporation 
because it's tradition in the NDP that patronage is as abused as 
it has ever been and probably even more extensively. And this 
Crown corporation is not going to do any less. I predict that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact people have probably been contacted by the NDP 
executives across this province already to establish what their 
involvement will be. And that is the reason why we're raising 
this with the people here today and across this province. 
 
Patronage is the way this government goes. And this Crown 
corporation is the way that these people will put the 
responsibilities in place. They'll do it with the board of directors 
of six; they'll do it with the chief executive officer; they'll do it 
with the president; they'll do it with staff in the president's 
office; they'll do it all the way through the system. And that will 
be the reason that these people are putting this into place. 
 
There are people in this Assembly who, when they retire from 
politics, would have an opportunity to be a part of that. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we are asking the people of 
Saskatchewan to review this Bill and see what it really does. 
Does it only put jobs into place for the people who voted NDP, 
who have worked for the NDP? Or does it give an opportunity 
for a broad cross-section of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan who have the ability to do it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's not true. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) 
just said, well that's not really true. But I will say that the truth 
of the matter is that I have 73 names on a list that was put 
together by the Leader-Post, and they believe it's true enough. 
And if they took the whole list, there would be even more; if 
they took it to the extended families of these related NDP. 
 
We even have considered talking about the extensive 
involvement that the Koskie family had in this government over 
the years — nine brothers and sisters . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member is a veteran 
member of this House and he knows that on second reading he 
must dwell on the principle of the Bill. And he's so far from the 
principle of the Bill that I find it very difficult to relate it to Bill 
No. 22. And I ask the member for Morse to please get back to 
Bill No. 22, the principle of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for 
the time. This Bill provides an opportunity for patronage. This 
Bill provides an opportunity for patronage in the Crown 
corporations, its board of directors. It provides an opportunity 
for patronage in its chief executive officer. It provides an 
opportunity for patronage in the office of the chief executive 
officer. And it will do that, Mr. Speaker. I am predicting that. 
 

And that is one of the reasons why we're not in favour of doing 
this Crown corporation, because the mandate hasn't been 
described to us in any detail at all. And so we have a whole lot 
of problems in allowing this Bill to go forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that need to be 
pointed out that I want to just close off my remarks by saying 
these. This Bill is obsolete because the federal government said 
they were no longer interested in putting money into building 
highways in Saskatchewan. The federal government said that in 
November and December. They said they were no longer 
interested in becoming involved in the province of 
Saskatchewan, in its highway construction; they said that. 
 
This Crown corporation was supposed to be the Crown 
corporation that would involve them, and so that, Mr. Speaker, 
is the reason why we are objecting because this is obsolete. It 
doesn't have a purpose today. And if it's only purpose is to 
provide patronage benefits to people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, then just add it on to the ones that you've got 
there already, and we don't have to pay so much for them, and 
the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan will benefit that 
way. Just add a few more to your ministers' offices and then we 
don't have to pay the exorbitant salaries of chief executive 
officers or their staffs or the presidents or the board of directors. 
Just allow that to happen, and we, as taxpayers, won't have to 
pay so much. 
 
The federal government pulled out of the deal, so why do you 
want to have it in? I outlined at the beginning of my remarks 
some of the questions that we have in relation to this Bill — 
very, very serious and important questions to answer because 
we don't know what the mandate of this Bill will be. We don't 
understand its total implication, and we need to have some of 
that in order to understand that. And the Minister of Highways 
hasn't provided that. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, for all of these reasons and the 
need to discuss this further, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, perhaps the 
minister could reintroduce us to the officials who have joined 
us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Be happy to do 
that. With us today is Mr. Duane Adams, deputy minister of 
Health; Kathy Langlois, executive director, finance and 
management services branch; Mr. Rus Duncombe, director, 
district support branch; Lawrence Krahn, executive director, 
medical care insurance branch; Jahzi Van Iderstine, assistant to 
the deputy minister; and when he finds a suit jacket, Al Walker,  



March 20, 1995 

 
973 

director of program development. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
and staff, I want to welcome you here today. We want to start 
off with a few questions regarding some of the long-term care 
problems that we have in the province. And I want to find out 
firstly, how it is that the ratio of long-term care beds . . . I guess 
it used to be something like 16 or 18 per thousand over 75. And 
now what people find confusing is that the ratio is being 
lowered to, I guess 14 or 16, in some cases I hear as low as 12 
per thousand for those people over the age of 75. Can you tell 
me firstly what the rules are today, what they were in the past 
few years, and why the change in the policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I will try and answer the 
member's question very specifically. Prior to establishing 
guidelines and targets for our overall supply of long-term care 
beds — and here we're talking about beds for levels 3 and 4 as 
the heaviest of care — prior to any change we had quite a 
variety of figures around the province, and in this regard we 
defined these numbers in terms of beds per thousand of people 
75 and older, beds per thousand of people 75 and older. 
 
And so we've had within the province quite a wide variety in 
terms of availability of long-term care beds. In some areas of 
our province the number would have been about 120 beds per 
thousand, 75 and over; in other areas of our province up to, I 
think the highest was 280 beds per thousand, 75 and over. 
 
What we have done is established a province-wide target — and 
I underline the word target — as the target to which we move 
towards over a period of years, of somewhere between 120 and 
140 long-term care beds per thousand, over the age of 75. And 
this is accepted as a national standard across Canada. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well can you 
tell us . . . give me a few examples of how it would get up to 
whatever it was — 280 per thousand — versus, you know, 
perhaps in the area of the province where I'm from where it was 
a much lower number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To the member's question, Mr. Chair, 
where we have had the examples of the high numbers, these 
will likely be in communities where there have been what have 
been described as the regional care centres. 
 
If you take, for example, the community of Weyburn where the 
old Souris Valley hospital or centre used to serve as primarily 
for the care of those mentally handicapped, those regional care 
centres drew individuals and people from a wide catchment 
area into one large centre. And so there were many beds put in 
one large centre and drew people from a large area. 
 
Our goal is to provide that care closer to home — so the 
concept not of moving to one large centre, but providing the  

care as close to home as possible. So in essence, where the 
numbers were very large is where there have been the large 
regional centres. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, are you then mixing this up 
with people with special needs or are you still talking about just 
long term? You're now telling us that around the province 
you're allowing all those people with special needs into the 
equation of 120 to 140 per thousand for 75 and over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, no; no, that's not the case. 
Those facilities have maintained many of those beds even 
though, for instance, in Souris Valley the population now is 
much smaller, of those who are there because of some mental 
handicap. Some of those individuals have been there from their 
very youth. But that is not the definition we're using for 
long-term care. 
 
Now some of our long-term care clients within health care 
today will have dementia and Alzheimer's disease and that sort 
of thing, but we're not in these numbers mixing the two. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Mr. Minister, but in your 
numbers of 120 to 140 per thousand, now it's been lowered to 
that amount from something higher in the last few years. Now 
in that amount there's always been some lengthy waiting-lists 
for people to get into the heavier level of care facilities, level 3, 
level 4 facilities. Now I'm just wondering what's happened to 
those waiting-lists now that in fact the numbers or the ratio has 
come down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on the subject of 
waiting-lists, this is a rather complex subject, as the member 
will know. In many of our communities even prior to initiation 
of broader health renewal and reform across the province, in 
many of our communities, communities had evolved a system 
of a single point of contact for placement in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
What had happened in some communities was there would be a 
waiting-list for each and every institution, and when the 
waiting-lists of all the institutions were reviewed, one would 
find the same name on many waiting-lists. Many communities 
have gone, even prior to health restructuring, to a single point 
of contact which then can present a more accurate description. 
 
But even so, even today we will find on waiting-lists, 
duplicated names in various communities and various 
institutions. In fact we very recently did a very careful review of 
a certain waiting-list in a community and found that still being 
accounted on that list were two people who in fact had died and 
some people who have left the province. 
 
What are we doing about the waiting-list? From my point of 
view, what is absolutely key is that we do have accurate lists of 
who in fact is needing the service. This is going on I think now 
in each of our districts where this kind of single-point 
assessment is happening. 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
974 

Number two, when we look at the waiting-lists, we want to be 
sure that any services that we can provide to those individuals 
in their homes or in their communities and their current 
accommodation, that we can provide and perhaps prevent the 
need for institutionalization. 
 
And to share with the member a bit of very good news on this 
front, the Saskatoon district, both the city of Saskatoon and the 
rural district around Saskatoon, have now developed a 
comprehensive network of home-based and community-based 
services. And so in speaking to the Chair of the district board 
on Saturday evening, he tells me on Saturday evening now there 
is no one — zero — on the waiting-list. 
 
That's not to say we haven't got some ways to go in other 
communities to build some of these services. But this is 
illustrative of the fact that when the services are available, we 
can bring those waiting-lists down to a very low number. In 
Saskatoon's case, as late as Saturday there is nobody on the 
waiting-list. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Mr. Minister. Can you explain 
. . . Now you had mentioned that there is a single point of 
contact. Tell me just how that would work say in a community 
of Shaunavon and surrounding area. Explain exactly how that 
would come about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if the member wishes, we can 
check very precisely into Shaunavon and the circumstance 
there, or within the larger district. 
 
But in essence, it is a single point of contact for individuals and 
their families, and individuals then can be assessed on a 
common assessment. And this single point of contact will then 
have available and knowledge of all of the resources that can be 
offered to that individual. So it's that sort of system. Rather than 
a family or an individual having to run around to institution 
after institution, or service after service, to develop that single 
point where someone can approach, where all of the answers 
are available, it seems to us to be a much more client-friendly 
and consumer-friendly sort of way. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So I understand that what happens in 
Shaunavon may be different than other parts of the province, by 
your answer? You're going to have to check into that? 
 
What I want to know then, Mr. Minister, you sent a letter to me 
yourself some . . . dated on November 10, 1994. And I'll quote 
right from the letter that you sent to myself: 
 
 At the current time it is my understanding that there is 

no waiting-list for long-term care in Shaunavon, 
Climax, or Eastend area, and there are very few 
long-term care pressures in the district as a whole. 

 
And yet, from the people that I talk to down there, they say 
there is; in fact many people I talk to say well yes, my mother or 
my father or someone, one of the relatives, is on a waiting-list. 

And when this was raised at a meeting in the community of 
Shaunavon not too many months ago, the director of care, I 
guess it was, answered the question that came up by saying 
there are no waiting-lists today; in fact they don't use that 
system. 
 
So now I'm trying to find out, what system do they use? If what 
they're saying is there are no waiting-lists, and in fact you refer 
to the fact that there isn't, I'm just wondering how it's done. I 
mean you must know or you couldn't have sent the letter to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when I wrote to the 
member, in preparation of that letter, I would have had my 
officials be in touch with the district and people in Shaunavon, 
and my letter will have been based on information that will 
have been provided. 
 
Now my assumption is . . . and again I say to the member, if we 
need to get more specific information about offices and who 
occupies the offices and who actually does the work, we can do 
that. But it will be a process where a family or an individual 
will approach the district at a central point, requesting 
appropriate care. The district will know all of the resources that 
will be available that can be provided to that individual or to 
that family, and recommend those resources and be sure that 
those resources are put in place. 
 
At the time of my writing, I am more than confident that we 
made contact with the Shaunavon district and will have been 
provided that information. If you want us to make that contact 
again, we certainly can. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Actually if 
you would make that contact again just so that we can have it 
very clear whether there are waiting-lists or there aren't waiting-
lists, because the people say there are, or at least they believe 
there are. They have family members that believe they're on 
waiting-lists. And yet people in the health district board say, 
well they're not, and you say the same. 
 
In fact in your letter it talks about some of the proposed 
closures of the facilities in the Southwest Health District, and 
you also mention that current residents — now this would be at 
the level 1, level 2 facility that you're closing — would be given 
priority for placement in other facilities throughout the district. 
And that to me tells me, well if you're not funding level 1 and 
level 2, you don't intend on having these levels of care provided 
by institutions. So you then are admitting that the people in 
these level 1, level 2 care facilities aren't level 1, level 2 and 
they're in fact level 3, level 4, and are going to have to be taken 
care of some . . . well by some community somewhere. 
 
So can you give us some idea how many people we're talking 
about moving out of the community of Shaunavon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if I understand the 
member's question correctly, and perhaps he can . . . if I don't, 
he can correct me. I think the question is how many people do 
we anticipate moving from out of their communities to other  



March 20, 1995 

 
975 

communities. Mr. Chair, I don't have that number, if there is 
such a number. 
 
What we have assured people across the province is if they are 
receiving level 1 and 2 care and having moved into level 1 or 2 
facilities, they will, for the most part, have given up their 
former homes, their apartments, and so it's inappropriate to 
suggest that they should return back to a more home-like 
situation where they could be supported through home care and 
community care. We have assured everyone in the province that 
they would not be left without accommodation. 
 
Now many of our level 1 and 2 facilities, to continue to provide 
service, continue to house and to care for people  while new 
admissions may not be happening — what is happening in 
many of our level 1 and 2 facilities is an alternate use of some 
of the space and some of the beds within that facility, 
particularly in the area of respite. We know over the course of 
this year we'll see even more of that service being offered in 
some of our level 1 and level 2 facilities. 
 
Now I would also agree with the member or point out to the 
member that in fact there may well be some who now have 
occupied a bed or a place in a level 1 and 2 facility who, over 
the course of the years, may now require heavier care than when 
they first went in. We may in fact have some who might be 
better described as level 3's and 4's. 
 
What I want to assure the member and to assure the people of 
our province is that anyone who today is receiving level 1 and 2 
care will be accommodated through our health care system. No 
one, to put it bluntly, will be put on the street. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thanks, Mr. Minister, but now can you 
give me some idea what perhaps the ratio was of level 3 and 
level 4 clients in the lighter care homes? Because in a lot of 
communities, and I've been to some of those communities in the 
very . . . not too distant past, and in fact we've got people who 
are well up in their 90's that are still in light care homes and 
they're afraid that in fact the policies of your government are 
going to move them out onto the street. And they've got to have 
some strong assurance that that isn't going to happen. 
 
And yet the facilities are getting closed down around the 
province. The funding is ending in a matter of a couple of 
weeks. So what can you tell these people to alleviate their 
fears? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member asks, Mr. Chair, about the 
numbers of those who may be in level 1 and 2 facilities who 
may now in fact through the course of time require heavier care, 
maybe level 3 and 4. We don't know that, Mr. Chair, we don't 
know that. That kind of assessment was done when they were 
placed, and assessments are not regularly done, so we don't 
have a firm understanding of what that number would be. 
 
Then the member says that there are people in the level 1 and 2  

facilities who are afraid that they're going to be put on the 
street. Well they'll only be afraid that they're going to be put on 
the street if somebody is suggesting that to them, and I hope 
he's not going around suggesting that to people, because that is 
simply not the case. We have said that from day one. That is not 
the case. That those who are now being housed and 
accommodated in level 1 and 2 facilities will continue to be 
cared for and accommodated. No one is being put on the street, 
and I hope the member wouldn't be going around the 
community suggesting the same. 
 
In fact very few, in fact very few of the level 1 and 2 facilities 
are actually closing their doors. There are some, but at this point 
very few are, because we are in a transition period. And within 
this budget, as I have announced publicly, we have included 
funding to assist in this transition over a course . . . a period of 
time. 
 
Now as the member also well knows, we no longer fund 
specific institutions. We now fund to the district based on need 
and population, and each district will have some different level 
of need in this regard and will tailor their funding and their 
programing to meet that specific need. And so in this year there 
is a very specific $1.5 million within the budget to assist in this 
transition period. So no one should be concerned or frightened 
that as of April 1 anyone is going to lose their place or their 
accommodation in a level 1 and 2 facility. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, so you're saying that $1.5 
million for the province as a whole is going to alleviate some of 
these fears when in fact . . . I'll just look at my own community. 
I'm going to use it as the example here today. 
 
The heavy-level care facility, the nursing home, according to 
the past chairman of the board, he told me that there was always 
about a 10 per cent waiting period, or waiting-list I should say, 
to get in and have a bed. Since then you've actually closed down 
a level l, level 2 facility, or proposed to, and you've got a 
number of people there that need that heavier care for 
themselves. 
 
So now there's a waiting-list already on the nursing home side 
of this, so I'm not sure what you intend to do with all the 
people. Now at some meetings that were held by the seniors in 
the last few months, there were health district people saying, 
well we're going to be moving people out into the community. 
Now does this mean level 3, level 4 people are going to be 
moved into the community? How many people in each 
community, or what percentage do you actually think can be 
moved out into people's basements or wherever you intend to 
house them in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member knows that the 
facility to which he refers did not shut down, and continues to 
accommodate individuals — not shut down. In fact rare is the 
circumstance that the member could point to where facilities 
have actually shut down. Rare is that circumstance. 
 
Now we are in, Mr. Speaker, a transition period. Mr. Speaker, if  



March 20, 1995 

 
976 

you visit with seniors as I do on a regular basis, if you visit with 
seniors they will tell you and in fact have been telling 
governments, not for 5 years, not for 10 years, but for 20 and 25 
years, that it is their desire, as I'm sure it's understood by all of 
us in this House, that it is their desire to live independently, to 
live in their own homes and apartments as long as is possible in 
life. I don't think there's anyone who wants to be in a 
heavy-level care facility. I don't think anybody wants that. 
 
Now it is recognized that many of us will reach a point in our 
lives when we need that heavy level of care. Although I might 
say, Mr. Chair, it's not simply those who reach the senior age. I 
mean it could happen to any one of us any day of our lives that 
we will require heavy-level care. But none of us desire that; 
none of us want that. 
 
In fact seniors have been saying to governments for years, and I 
could quote to the member a variety of articles recently written 
by seniors commenting on this very issue, how they have been 
lobbying governments for years to provide more services in the 
community, in their homes, that they might maintain their 
independence for a longer period of time. 
 
That's the direction we're going, Mr. Chair. That's the direction 
we're going. And it is a direction not welcomed by the Liberal 
member, but welcomed by seniors across the province. 
 
Now we are in a period of transition. We have those who have 
been described as level 1's and level 2's. Many of them have 
gone into a more institutional setting. Having done so they will 
have given up usually their homes or their farms or their 
apartments. We assure each and every one of those residents of 
our province they will not be left without accommodation. 
 
However, those today who approach the system and are 
assessed as level 1 or level 2, in the vast, vast majority of those 
cases, their needs can very adequately, and happily I might say, 
be met in the context of their own home. When we reach the 
stage of requiring heavier care, then this government, and I 
hope every future government, will be there to provide that 
care. 
 
So the member knows that in this year's budget we are spending 
$250 million to provide long-term care for those heaviest care 
needs of our seniors and our population — $250 million, a 
quarter of a billion dollars. This is no small commitment and it 
is no . . . because it reflects the need and the concern. But where 
we can make lives happier, and in some ways healthier for 
individuals and their families, that's our goal. 
 
And so in this budget, again I repeat, Mr. Chair, we are putting 
in new and substantial resources to build community- and 
home-based services; $7 million to expand home care services 
— $7 million, which will add significantly the number of home 
care services available in every community in Saskatchewan. 
That will also mean, Mr. Chair, that with that $7 million we 
will have at our disposal the ability to provide 24-hour, in 
emergency circumstance, home care services That's not been 
true in many of our communities up until now. 

Part of this money, part of this $20 million, will go to in fact 
lower the cost of home care services to make them again more 
accessible and so that seniors across the province will see on 
average across the province a 17 per cent decrease in their home 
care services. Our goal is to make the services accessible, both 
financially and accessible in those services that can be available 
in every one of our communities. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You see, Mr. Minister, my questions aren't 
concerning so much whether people are level 2 and level 1, but 
in fact a heavier level of care that was in the level 1, level 2 
facilities that you're closing down. And in fact in some of the 52 
communities where you closed hospitals . . . and at the time, the 
reason for closing the hospitals was that they weren't providing 
acute care services. I mean you yourself were going around the 
province saying that. In fact many of the people in these smaller 
hospitals were actually long-term care people and they should 
be in the appropriate facilities. 
 
So that also, if you look at those 52 communities, that also adds 
pressure to the long-term care needs of the province, as far as 
level 3 and level 4 care goes. And now of course with this 
change in the single point of contact, it gives you a lot of 
control as far as determining what the waiting-lists are; who's 
on the waiting-lists. 
 
And what I keep hearing from the people is that in fact there 
aren't enough of those beds. You say there are. So I don't know, 
unless you can provide me with the amount . . . or with the 
waiting-lists for each area of the province for heavy care, I 
guess I'm forced to take your word for it. But that's not what the 
people believe out there. 
 
And the fact that you're budgeting $1.5 million for some 
transitional care while you're closing facilities, that's about the 
same amount of money as you're spending on Saskatchewan's 
90th birthday party. I mean that in itself, your government 
should be ashamed of yourselves. 
 
But the question still remains, just what the waiting-lists are 
like in some of these communities for the heavy level of care. 
And in fact I don't think that you've alleviated anyone's 
concerns in this area. You're going to have to soon. 
 
But it will lead us into another area, and that's one of the 
amount of level 1 and level 2 facilities that are now being 
turned into private hands. And, Mr. Minister, would you be able 
to provide me with a full list of which communities and which 
facilities that have been, and in fact are in the process of being, 
turned into private care homes and what the bed numbers of 
them are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, to our knowledge, in 
specific answer to the member's question: how many current 
level 1 and 2 facilities are being considered for conversion into 
private care homes — that's his question?  to our knowledge, 
Mr. Chair, there are two. And I believe Ponteix has been 
looking at this prospect, and Ina Grafton Gage Home in Moose 
Jaw have been looking at this prospect. 



March 20, 1995 

 
977 

Now there may be others that we're not aware of, but I'm only 
aware of those two. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Do you have what the bed numbers that 
they're being allowed or allotted are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member I think will 
have been listening to some of the discussion and debate in 
earlier estimates, and we've been talking about the whole 
concept of personal care homes, privately operated facilities, 
that offer some level of care to individuals. And as I've assured 
members of the official opposition, that we expect a policy 
statement in this regard very soon. 
 
Currently in the structure of care in Saskatchewan, we have 
quite a large number of small personal care homes. These will 
be homes that have less than 10 occupants, and we've continued 
to license and approve. Given that those homes meet the very 
stringent regulations that exist, we've continued to license and 
they continue to provide service and care, and in many ways an 
important level of care in our system. 
 
We have said in this period of transition that existing facilities 
who may want to convert to a personal care home, that they 
would be grandfathered or grandmothered into the 
circumstance. Later this week it's my hope to make some further 
policy announcement regarding a personal care home and 
private involvement in providing care across our province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well this announcement that you're going 
to be making, and I guess when I take a look at this letter that 
you sent to me November 10, '94 — it states, Saskatchewan 
Health is currently reviewing long-term care in the province and 
will be presenting a strategy shortly — is that the strategy you're 
talking about? And is it fairly comprehensive, or is this going to 
dribble out? 
 
You're talking about some strategy to deal with private care 
homes. Or is this strategy that you're going to lay on us very 
soon which is already, it appears to me, months overdue, and in 
fact only a couple weeks before the funding ceases for these 
very people that we're talking about, can you tell us if this 
strategy you're going to be announcing is going to cover all 
aspects of long-term care? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I'm going to have to correct 
the member and help him to understand, because apparently he 
can't understand. He says that the funding is going to cease at 
the end of this month. I tell you what happens at the end of this 
month — the budget year ends, that's true; and we move into a 
new budget period. 
 
But as I've already explained to the member once this afternoon 
in the House — and I guess I'll do it again and again and again 
and again until he understands it — funding now is not based 
on . . . it is not institutionally based; we do not fund institutions. 
We fund the population and their need within a district. 

I have said again in this House this afternoon, Mr. Chair — and 
the member can't seem to understand — that as of the end of 
this month, facilities are not closing. We are involved in a 
transition period, Mr. Chair. Now further to that, we will be 
describing, in a comprehensive way, where we believe the role 
for the personal care home and for long-term care facilities will 
be in our system. 
 
I hope the member has received . . . if he has not received it, I'll 
certainly provide a copy to him of an important paper that was 
released in February around this whole issue, a paper that we 
worked on and people within the department and people within 
communities across the province have worked on for many 
months, described as supporting wellness  Supportive 
Services in Saskatchewan. And here we're talking about the full 
range of services to meet the needs of those who will have some 
need for support in their daily lives. For some of us that will be 
a small amount of support; for others it will be a large amount 
of support. 
 
I'd be happy to provide this paper with the member, if he hasn't 
seen it, and invite him to read it and consider it. And we could 
certainly have, I'm sure, a good discussion about it. 
 
But again, to repeat to the member, at the end of this month 
what changes is it's a new budget year. And financing and 
funding will go to the district based upon the district's needs 
and the district's population. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know you'd like to 
take credit that you're actually not closing facilities, but in fact 
in my own community of Shaunavon, there was going to be a 
closure. In fact if it wasn't for the seniors holding several 
meetings and embarrassing you and your government and the 
district board into leaving that facility open for the time being, 
it would have been closed. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us the current care-giver to patient 
ratio of level 3 and level 4 facilities? And I ask it for this 
reason, is that the level of heavy care, I think, is probably 
getting more acute, more heavy, I guess as time goes on. Is that 
right or wrong? And I'm just wondering if the care-giver to 
patient ratio has increased or has it stayed the same, or is it less 
than before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there are established 
standards of care that apply for level 3 and level 4 care. There 
are established standards of care for acute care and so on, and 
these will establish the staff/client or the staff/patient ratio. 
We're trying to find those standards and we'll provide them to 
you. I'm not sure if we have them here this afternoon, but if we 
don't, we'll get them to you. 
 
Now I agree with the member that when we reach level 3 and 4, 
the need for care will grow, and the level of acuity will grow. 
And in fact as late as last week the department officials have 
been in conversation and in discussion with the SRNA 
(Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association) I believe, the 
registered nurses' association, around this very issue in seeking  



March 20, 1995 

 
978 

to describe what is appropriate standards of care in all of our 
institutions — level 3, 4, and acute. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, whatever ratios you have or 
whatever criteria that you're placing on the facilities that you're 
in control of, is the same criteria going to apply for the private 
care homes that you have or are going to license? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, two points here. Number one, 
our private care homes, personal care homes, will generally be 
caring for people of a less level of care with lighter care needs. 
Our private care homes, our personal care homes across the 
province are not generally equipped to care for the heavier level 
of care, level 3 and 4. I'm not sure if . . . there may be some 
example where that's happening but it would certainly be the 
exception and not the rule. Most of our personal care homes are 
meeting the needs of those who have a lower level of care. 
 
Now there has been some discussion, indeed some lobby, 
saying that government or the Department of Health should not 
concern itself with the level of care in a personal care home. I 
don't share that view. I believe there is a role for the public 
through its government, through its Department of Health, to 
provide regulation of the personal care home circumstance. 
 
But just to go back to the member's first point, most of those, 
the vast majority of those who will be accommodated in the 
personal care home, will not be of a level 3 or a level 4 need 
level. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, but you're saying most of, 
won't be at that level but some will. Am I right there, before I 
go on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think it's fair to say that some will. 
Simply my experience is, Mr. Chair, and I've seen this and 
known people in this circumstance, at some point in their life 
they may, and their families may wish with them, to receive 
care outside of their own home. They may move to a personal 
care home. 
 
Now if they are a resident of that personal care home over the 
course of a number of years, with the onslaught of age or other 
issues, the level of care may increase. Now it very often will 
reach a point where the operator of the personal care home, in 
conjunction with family and the individual, will decide their 
care cannot be accommodated there and then they will seek a 
placement in a special care home where the more appropriate 
care can be given. 
 
And so there may be a time and there may be some in our 
personal care homes who are reaching the stage of needing 
heavier level care who are yet there and have not made the 
transition into a heavier level care circumstance. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, that then . . . we'll 
focus in real quick here. For those special care homes or private 
care homes that you're licensing with heavy levels of care, do 
they have to abide by the same criteria and regulations as the  

levels 3 and 4 care homes had to before you were going to 
privatize them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the personal care homes are 
very closely regulated but under The Personal Care Homes Act, 
and not under the same set of legislation and Act which governs 
special care homes, because the concept of personal care is in 
essence a residential option as much as it is a care option or a 
heavy level care option. And again I say that most of those in 
personal care are a much lighter level of care than exists in 
special care. 
 
Now I'm not sure if the member is arguing that the same 
standards which apply to a heavy level care home should be 
applied to the personal care home. That is not the current 
circumstance, but I can assure the member that there is a 
significant body of regulation which does govern the personal 
care homes, particularly in regard to building and fire codes and 
so on. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I'm not really asking if the 
criteria is going to be the same for those people that are being 
taken care of in the residence. I'm referring perhaps more to, 
like the community of Ponteix, where they have an 18- or 
20-bed . . . I'm not sure what you've agreed to at that point or if 
you've come up with an agreement on that care home. But I 
want to know, are the regulations and criteria for 
care-giver/patient ratios from the Shaunavon nursing home 
going to be the same as what applies to the care home, the 
privatized care home in Ponteix, where you have level 3 and 
level 4 clients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, currently, I think the specific 
answer to the member's question would be no. If in fact there is 
in a personal care home someone who now through assessment 
process is described as needing, requiring, much heavier level 
care, then it would be our view that the recommended 
procedure would be to have that person then move into a 
special care circumstance where the heavier level of care exists. 
 
But in very specific answer to the member's question, if 
someone today is in a personal care home but who has in fact 
reached level 3, we do not impose the same standards on the 
personal care home as are imposed on special care homes. 
 
I just want to also share with the member, Mr. Chair, since we 
began our discussion this afternoon . . . earlier this afternoon we 
had a discussion about waiting-lists in Shaunavon. And we've 
made a contact in Shaunavon, and the report that I have is that 
there is one level 3 patient currently waiting to get into the 
nursing home. That's the report that's provided to us from 
Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, so then what you're saying is 
that there aren't any level 3, level 4 clients in the former level 1, 
level 2 facility in Ponteix that is now I think owned and 
operated by Carol Krieger? And you're saying they're all level 1, 
level 2? 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
979 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to say to the member, 
I'm not sure. I know that Carol Krieger has been working with 
the community of Ponteix. I know that there have been 
discussions but I am not precisely sure of where that 
arrangement stands today. So I'm not sure if in fact Ms. Krieger 
is, as the member suggests, operating that home. 
 
And we don't have here, we don't bring that kind of detail into 
the House for every institution in the province, so I can't give 
him a clear definition of the residents of that particular facility. 
We can be in touch with them and get that very specific 
information for him. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well then, Mr. Minister, let me put the 
question to you this way then. If and when this level 1, this 
former level 1 and level 2 facility, becomes . . . well is being 
operated by a private . . . under the private home care 
legislation, or whatever you said it was, are you telling us that 
they will not be allowed to have level 3's and level 4's? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think, Mr. Chair, whenever we're 
talking about personal care homes — and to broaden the 
discussion, maybe a little from Ponteix — but whenever we're 
talking about personal care homes, I think one of the crucial 
issues is the concern about fire safety. And I'm sure the member 
shares that concern, as would, I think, all members and all 
citizens, the concern about fire safety. And one of the real 
concerns about having people who occupy personal care homes, 
who may require heavy levels of care, is that will there be the 
staffing and the ability to move people in case of a fire. 
 
Now what will apply in the context of every personal care home 
or in any conversion circumstance will be the building and fire 
codes. So it's my understanding in Ponteix that the facility must 
have some renovation and be in fact brought up to some 
National Building Code standards before we're able to license 
that facility. 
 
(1615) 
 
But again I repeat, if in fact there is a circumstance where we 
have an individual or individuals in personal care who may 
have reached a level 3 — and the Ponteix facility, remember, is 
a light care facility; I can't report exactly on the status of every 
resident, as I said earlier — but if in fact there are those who 
have approached heavier levels of care, then it is our 
recommendation that their needs should be met in the most 
appropriate circumstances, which is a special care home 
designed and staffed to meet the needs of level 3. 
 
So again the Act — to the member's specific question — the 
current set of regulations and Act do not apply to personal care 
homes as they do to the special care homes. Now perhaps the 
member would want to advance a position suggesting it should 
or it shouldn't, but in the current circumstance that's the way it 
is. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just wanted to make 
sure that . . . because earlier and on different occasions, you've  

accused myself of fearmongering. So I want to know exactly 
what it is that we're supposed to be telling the people out there. 
And I know that the people in the community of Ponteix are of 
the understanding that once this level 1, level 2 care facility is 
turned over to a private individual that they will then have a 
home within their own community. 
 
And you're telling us now that no, that's not the case. For 
definite level 1, level 2 care patients, that can be the case, but 
for people requiring heavier care, I hear you telling me that 
they're going to be moved out of their community, Lord knows 
where, throughout the district. Now is that fair to say, or are you 
going to change your answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, no, the member is not 
accurate in what he says. Well he waves his hands around . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well make it accurate then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I will make it accurate if you listen and 
commit that you would repeat this accurately in the public — 
which you're not prone to do, I notice. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I said it is my view that when we reach the 
stage in life where we require level 3 or level 4 care, a heavier 
level of care, that the most appropriate place to receive that care 
is in a special care home which is designed and which is staffed 
to meet that care. 
 
Now in the community of Ponteix, as the member should know, 
there is that kind of care available. There is level 3 and 4 care 
available. 
 
Now if there is today, in the lighter care facility, someone who 
has reached that level of care, it may not be possible for that 
person to move tomorrow or immediately. But I think working 
with the district, working with the family, working with the 
individual, the appropriate thing would be to seek that heavier 
level of care in the most appropriate circumstance. 
 
I have not said this afternoon, or have I ever said, that anyone 
would be taken from their accommodation and moved out. 
 
Now does the member understand that? Is it clear to the 
member? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, your games are not doing 
well for you here today, because now you're on both sides of the 
issue. The fact of the matter is the level 3, level 4 care home 
which you're referring to in the community of Ponteix, which 
was a lighter care home itself, I believe there's a waiting-list; or 
at least there used to be a waiting-list until you changed the 
rules on waiting-lists. 
 
But the fact of the matter is it's always full. And it has to be, 
because I get so many people that are calling me up, seeing 
what they can do. It just seems like they can never get in. 
 
And not only that, but that care home was initially built to take  



March 20, 1995 

 
980 

care of people of that religious denomination. Now they would 
have first chance at any beds coming available, I understand. 
 
So what the people of Ponteix have to know, Mr. Minister, is 
exactly what I hope I hear you saying, is that they won't be 
moved out of the level 1 and level 2 care facility when they 
become level 3 and level 4 care. Now I've also heard you say 
that no one of that heavier care will be moved into this 
privatized facility. 
 
And where all this leads us is people moving out of the 
community. I don't know what other options you have. Because 
you're cutting back on beds. I don't think there's as many beds 
available in that level 1 and level 2 facility as there were before. 
And now if you're not allowing a little bit heavier care into that 
facility and the heavier care facility is full, what do you intend 
to do with them? And that's where you've been on both sides of 
this issue. 
 
So now make it really clear to the people. I'll allow you time to 
stand up and make it real clear what you're going to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I think the first thing we will do, 
Mr. Chair, is we'll make a contact with Ponteix and see what the 
waiting-list is on the level 3 and 4 facility. 
 
Earlier this afternoon the member suggested there was a huge 
waiting-list in Shaunavon — huge waiting-list, that's what he 
suggested to the House, implied. When we make the contact, 
we find there is one person waiting, one level 3 person waiting. 
 
Now we'll check, we'll check, we'll check the situation at 
Ponteix. Now maybe I can go through it again and see if the 
member can understand, and not wilfully confuse. 
 
As we go through life, at any point in our life but more typically 
as we grow older, we will need a level of support for daily 
living. Now in some circumstances that day may come as we 
are quite young; in many circumstances it will come as we grow 
older. The key is to provide for individuals the . . . as we assess 
our needs for care, it should be done individually. 
 
Now I think most of us will want to go through this life to our 
death if possible with as much independence and as close to our 
homes as we can do it. However for some that will not be 
possible, and we will need some level of institutional care. 
 
Now in looking at the options for institutional care, there is 
quite a range. We have had, and publicly subsidized, what we 
describe as level 1 and 2 facilities. Now we know if we follow 
the definition of level 1 and 2 that the vast majority people who 
will be assessed as level 1 and 2 can have those care needs, 
those supportive care needs, met in their home or in their 
community. 
 
Into this mix has grown a network across our province of 
personal care homes. These are privately owned, they do not 
receive government subsidy, and they've offered a basic level of  

care — not heavy care in most cases, but a basic level of 
residential care. 
 
Now in the community of Ponteix there has been a level 1 and 2 
facility, and there is and remains a level 3, 4 facility. There is 
some discussion in the community of Ponteix of a conversion 
of the former level 1 and 2 facility, the existing level 1 and 2 
facility, to a personal care home. That home will accept, if 
licensed and operational, people with a lighter care need — 
again, more residential support. The heavy level care home will 
accept and care for those with heavier-level care needs. 
 
Now there may be someone who is occupant of the current level 
1 and 2, or the proposed personal care home, whose needs will 
change over the years. What I'm saying, from my point of view 
that person's needs will probably best be met in the level 3 and 
4 facility where the staffing is appropriate and the design of the 
facility is appropriate and so on. 
 
No one is going to be lifted out of their personal care home or 
their current level 1 and 2 facilities unless there is appropriate 
care, and they desire it. Now I'm saying and just simply 
recommending — and I hope the member would share the view 
— that we would want people to be accommodated where the 
care is most appropriate to the need. 
 
Now some people — I know — their needs will never exceed 
what is available to them in the personal care home situation, 
and they will spend their final days there. And when that can 
happen, we're happy about that. But if the need grows beyond 
what the facility or the institution or the personal care home can 
provide, then it seems to be most appropriate if that individual 
and that family would consider looking to other care options. 
And in Ponteix, there is the other care option. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess we will 
leave the long-term care questions until you get some of your 
facts that you had said you would have to bring forward, or 
you'll perhaps forward them on to my office. But regardless, 
we'll raise them at another session of Health estimates. 
 
In the area of home care, you had talked about home care 
replacing the needs of people in, I guess, especially rural 
Saskatchewan. I hear that isn't always the case. But I guess we'll 
start with asking the question of funding. Can you tell me what 
the total funding and how much additional funding there has 
been added to the budget — say — in the last three years and 
where you see this going in the upcoming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, since 1991-92, budget year 
1991-92 until . . . if you compare that year against this year, 
spending on home-based services has increased by 91 per cent. 
It's a 91 per cent increase, almost a doubling now over that 
period of time. 
 
In this current budget year — last year the budgeted figure was 
50.083 million — this year the budgeted amount for 
home-based services is 60.794 million representing a 21.4 per 
cent increase over last year. 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
981 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well then in that 
$60 million amount, can you tell me what the breakdown of that 
is? Is it salaries, or can you tell me how much of this money 
went to buy some specialized equipment for these people to 
carry out their duties, or vehicles, or . . . give us a complete 
breakdown of how that amount is arrived at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we don't have it broken 
down precisely. In the former circumstance, when the grants 
were given to home care district boards, and in the current 
circumstance where the monies are provided to the district 
boards, they will do their local specific accounting. But our best 
estimate is that about 85 per cent of the money will be paid to 
staff costs and 15 per cent to other costs; so it's about 85/15 
 
Mr. McPherson: — What would be the percentage that would 
go into administering home care? And in fact, in this amount, is 
that where all of the administration would show up or may it 
show up in other areas of the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again we don't . . . that 
breakdown is not available to us, would not have been available 
to us when we were funding the home care boards individually; 
now we fund globally to the health district boards. This 
becomes a matter of local budgeting and local decision making. 
 
However I can say this, province-wide, by moving to the global 
delivery of services under the district umbrella, we are seeing 
administrative savings across the province. 
 
Now the member will disagree and shakes his head and I'm sure 
we could have a good discussion about that, but I know that we 
can provide solid documentation that I know will convince the 
member that there are now administrative savings being 
achieved throughout the system, both in terms of board 
operations and in terms of actual administration of programing. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you can't give me a 
better answer as far as how much goes into administration or 
what is actually the breakdown of these monies, then how are 
you able to, say, evaluate the home care program as a whole? 
How can you sit back and say this is working or it isn't working 
or there's people falling through the cracks? Of course you don't 
know, do you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, now I take objection 
to the member's last comment. In fact we do evaluate, and I 
think we have some very good indications of the value of 
home-based services. 
 
Now to first of all share this with the member, we've asked the 
Health Utilization Research Commission to look very carefully 
at the effectiveness of home-based and home care services  
the Utilization Commission, being of course separate and apart 
from the Department of Health, separate and apart from 
government, to have an independent and professional review of 
these issues. 

But I mean all I have to do is meet with individuals and people 
who speak with deep appreciation of the home care services 
that are available there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'm sure you do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the member rolls around and says, 
I'm sure I do. Well I can tell you, I do. And if you want to get 
some indication here, if you'd care to note these numbers down, 
if you want to write these numbers down: in 1991-92, 
1,391,747 volumes of service were offered through home care 
across our province. By '92-93, that had risen to 1.5. By '93-94, 
that had risen to 1.7 — in fact, 1,756,524 — a 15 per cent 
increase over the year before that; a 9 per cent increase year 
before that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, that tells me that services are 
being made available. They are being utilized. And I can tell 
you, having moved from a client list in '91-92 of 19,000 people 
to a client list in '93-94 of 22,000 people, these services are 
being utilized and they are appreciated. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right then, Mr. Minister. You're telling 
us that the services provided are increasing, I think you said 15 
per cent and 6 per cent, or whatever the figures were, but that 
falls far short of what you said your funding is over that same 
period of having risen 91 per cent. 
 
So what I'm trying to find out from you is: how do you correctly 
assess whether you're getting a bang for the buck or in fact 
perhaps you've raced into yet another program without fully 
exploring, you know, all the alternatives? Or maybe you 
shouldn't have left these communities in the lurch to begin with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member says we've 
raced into something here. We've raced into something. I 
believe it was our government in 1974 and 1975 that pioneered 
home care in this province. This is not exactly, Mr. Chair, a new 
concept. It's a concept that has been widely received and is 
widely appreciated across our province. 
 
Throughout the course of the 1980s there was not a lot of 
movement in this field, but we have in fact put new and 
significant emphasis into home-based services. And so I 
disagree entirely with the member that this is some kind of a 
new and novel idea. What it is, it's a good idea and we're 
building on it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, obviously you 
didn't hear the question because you avoided it entirely. You 
had said that services you were providing, or the clients that you 
were serving, raised some 15 per cent one year; I think 6 or 9 
per cent another year. And only minutes ago, you said that the 
funding in home care over these same years had risen 91 per 
cent. 
 
Now you can give all the accolades you want to the government 
of what you did in 1975. I'm telling you, your government is 
going to pay for what you did in 1992-3 and 4 and 5. Can you  



March 20, 1995 

 
982 

answer that question: how do you evaluate then if your funding 
is almost doubled and yet you're serving only 9 per cent or 6 per 
cent or 15 per cent more over that same time frame? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will explain it to the 
member in, I hope, a way that he can understand. The services 
being offered today, Mr. Chair, are significantly different and 
improved services than have been offered in past. Primarily 
home care in past represented meals-on-wheels, perhaps some 
basic housekeeping, and in some cases some nursing care. All 
of those services continue and all of those services are being 
enhanced. 
 
But we are also now talking, Mr. Chair, about programs like 
home-based intravenous therapy — intravenous therapy at 
home. We're talking about home-based palliative care. For those 
individuals and families who would want to spend their very 
last days at home, we're prepared and willing now to provide 
the resources to make that possible for people. We're talking 
about in some cases in some districts of our province now, 
home-based renal dialysis, Mr. Chair. We're talking about 
programs that can offer care to mothers and their new babies, at 
home. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, yes, there's a cost increase to do that. 
There's a cost increase to provide that higher level of service at 
home. But I think it's an entirely appropriate expenditure of our 
limited health dollars, Mr. Speaker, because not only does it 
improve the quality of life, it provides that quality of care we 
desire outside of the institutional setting and therefore at a 
lesser cost to the taxpayer and to the system. A higher level of 
care, a higher quality of care, at lower cost. That's how come it 
costs a little more money in home care. Yes, we've doubled, 
almost doubled the spending, but the range of services have 
broadened. 
 
I also want to remind the member that we've now adopted 
policies in terms of, for instance, palliative care. So that if you 
require drug therapies to do with your home-based care in a 
palliative situation, we're not charging people for that. We're 
providing those drugs and supplies just as if you were in a 
hospital bed for palliative care. If you're palliative, if you're 
defined and assessed as palliative and are receiving that care at 
home, it will not cost you any more for your drugs or supplies at 
home as it does in a hospital. 
 
And I know, I know for a fact, having visited with families, this 
is much appreciated by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you for the speech, Mr. 
Minister. However now that you've got into the area of the 
added services that are providing, can you tell me then how 
much extra money your government has provided for skills 
upgrading and training to provide these enhanced services that 
home care is providing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I'm appreciative of the  

member when he describes what I'm providing him by way of 
answers as speeches. Will he admit though, will he now stand 
on his feet and admit he was . . . He had a line of reasoning 
going here in the House. He says, well there now you see 
they've doubled the budget — they've doubled the budget, he 
noted that — but the number of clients, or the units being 
served, are only up 15 per cent. So he was going to make a case 
in the House here that the rest of it must be going into some 
administration service. 
 
Will he stand up now and say he's wrong? Will he stand up and 
say he's wrong? Or will be proceed to go out with the public 
and say, well look at that, look at that, they've raised the home 
care budget by almost double, almost a hundred per cent 
increase, but they've only increased service, so it must all be in 
administration. 
 
I hope you will go out and explain that these new monies are 
providing a whole broad range of services that people request. 
Now I'm glad he's going to stand up and agree on that point. 
 
Now he asks about retraining for health care workers to provide 
these services. Number one, in some circumstances our former 
home care districts and now the broader regional districts, had 
in their employ well-trained and qualified people who have 
been through courses of preparation. In terms of some of the 
nursing care, they have been RNs (registered nurse) that work 
in home care. 
 
Because there has been shifting from institutional-based 
services to home-based services and because we were fully 
aware that that would have impact on employment in 
institutional-based services, we have put in place over the 
course of the past two years — and I have recently extended it 
for another year — a pool and a source of funding for 
individuals who may want to access some retraining to equip 
themselves to serve in new capacities within health care. 
 
To that fund we have committed $5.4 million. The monies are 
being administered, not by the department or not by 
government, but by a joint union-management committee who 
make the decision on the applications to that fund and have 
awarded, to date, about $800,000 in support to workers who 
may be using that money for retraining possibilities. Or in some 
cases to move into some other field of endeavour, or in some 
cases to enhance their severance if they were towards the end of 
their working life. It's something that I think our province can 
be proud of in this transition time in health. It's not an easy time 
for health workers through the process of restructuring. 
 
We know, in our province, there have been, in the acute sector, 
some job loss. We know that through in fact the monies in this 
budget year that are being directed into community- and 
home-based services, we predict approximately 450 new 
positions will be created throughout the province. And we do 
want people to have access to those positions, to utilize some of 
their experience, and if it takes some retraining then there is 
funding available. 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
983 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, actually, thinking back to 
some of your comments here of what you can do with limited 
dollars, and you are wondering what I tell people when I travel 
around rural Saskatchewan, I make it quite clear to them that 
you're spending millions of dollars more in your health care 
budget today than before health care reform, and that's before 
you devastated rural Saskatchewan. That's what they're very 
aware of. 
 
And I think you probably can provide more services in the rural 
areas through home care, because Lord knows, there has got to 
be a lot of nurses out there that you have fired through the 
process that your government has put them through. 
 
But can you tell me, Mr. Minister, as far as the palliative care 
that home care is providing, now are the people that you're 
upgrading the skills of, or should be, are they able to . . . or are 
they trained to administer morphine and other kinds of 
medication such as that, that would be perhaps used in 
palliative care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I'm very pleased that the member, 
Mr. Chair, has stood in the House and admitted today, admitted 
to the Legislative Assembly, to anybody that cares to listen, that 
in fact he does go around the province not telling the truth. 
 
He says, a few moments ago, that he is going all over rural 
Saskatchewan telling people — and I believe I'm quoting here 
— that they are spending millions more than they did before 
health reform started. 
 
Well has he read, Mr. Chair, the budgets of the Department of 
Health over the past . . . I wonder if he's bothered to read the 
budget or the Public Accounts, the accounting of every dollar 
that we spend. 
 
Now I will share with the House the exact numbers, Mr. Chair. 
And I will do it for the member on the assurance that he will 
quit going around the province saying that because he admits he 
says it. 
 
(1645) 
 
In 1991-92, Mr. Chair, the budget for the Department of Health 
was $1.594 billion. Write it down, member from Shaunavon: 
$1.594 billion, $1.594 billion. I ask him to compare that with 
this year's budget. What is this year's budget? It is $1.561 
billion — 33 million less, $33 million less than was being spent 
in 1991-92. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I want to explain to the member, because 
perhaps he doesn't understand this either, that if we had left the 
funding on the same projected track that had been leading up to 
'91-92, if all of the programs had remained intact, if no change 
had been made in health care delivery across our province, the 
budget today would not be $1.561 billion. It would in fact be 
$1.9 billion — 1.9 — or $400 million more than we were 
spending in '91-92, $400 million more. 
 

Now I, Mr. Chair, in fact regret in some ways that we do not 
have more resources to dedicate to health programing. I regret 
that our province got itself into such a deficit and debt 
circumstance that we had to take these kinds of measures. But I 
tell you, had we let this thing go, Mr. Chair, there is absolutely 
no doubt in my mind that we were putting at certain risk the 
very fundamental principles of medicare that many of us in this 
province fought so hard to achieve, and many of us have 
continued to believe in. Had we not made the change, Mr. 
Chair, we would be spending $1.9 billion a year, 400 million 
more than we're spending currently. That's $400 for every man, 
woman, and child in the province or $1,600 for a family of 
four. Mr. Chair, that is simply not sustainable in our province. 
 
So I hope the member will now stand on his feet and say, I was 
wrong; you are not spending millions more than you were 
spending before the reform process started. In fact you are 
spending considerably less. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, you see the 
problem is that I know you feel that you are perhaps correcting 
me, but it was only a few days ago that you were in hot water 
with the people of Saskatchewan because it's become known 
that you've run up or actually deferred so much of your debt 
into the district boards. 
 
Well of course that's what you've done. We have only received I 
think it's 18 out of 30 statements from district boards, and of 16 
of those you have $27 million of debt rung up. And for that, 
Mr. Minister, you should be ashamed of yourself even thinking 
that you were going to make a good point there. But in fact it's 
one that you should stay away from because you haven't done 
well in that area. 
 
Mr. Minister, just to change a bit of the flavour here today, I 
want to ask a few questions on some of your past record 
regarding the court cases that people throughout the province 
have had you involved in, you and the former Health minister 
who . . . well I won't get into that. 
 
There are a few. I would like to know what the costs to date 
were for the court cases that you were involved in, say, in the 
community of Climax, for one, where that union hospital 
district had to threaten legal action. In the end, I guess you've 
negotiated a way out but there had to have been some legal 
costs there involved and cost, just general costs involved. 
 
But then again in the community of Ponteix where in fact there 
was some court proceedings at the Swift Current court-house. 
So can you tell us what the costs were that your department had 
to incur in fighting the good people of rural Saskatchewan who 
are only trying to defend their communities and their right for 
health care as the people in these larger centres enjoy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in reference to the member's 
question about legal costs that may arise by lawsuits launched 
against the department or against the government, the 
Department of Health has not engaged any legal assistance. We 
receive our legal resources from the Department of Justice, and  



March 20, 1995 

 
984 

they're budgeted and paid for through Justice. This is not new to 
the function of operation of government. 
 
We can endeavour to find out some time sheets and so on from 
Justice, but it's not something that we . . . we don't go out and 
hire lawyers in the Department of Health. I don't believe that's 
ever been the case. Now it may have been the case under the 
former government; I don't know that. But I don't believe that's 
ever been the case where the Department of Health ever goes 
out and hires its own lawyers. We rely on the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Now I want to go back because the member was . . . 
Interestingly he raises the issue of his news release, his 
communication to the people of Saskatchewan on deficit . . . 
And now he laughs and shakes his head. Well we'll laugh when 
the member communicates publicly . . . Mr. Chair, I sincerely 
wish that this member would communicate accurately, 
communicate fact, because if he would only know the 
disruption that his mischief and his antics are causing to people 
across our province, I don't think I'd want to go out of this 
building. Now it is a shame what this member and some of his 
antics is doing across our province. 
 
Now I'm going to illustrate, Mr. Chair, I'm going to illustrate 
here for the record. This member sends out a news release, or 
his leader . . . I'm not sure under whose name it went; I guess it 
doesn't matter; both. For instance, he sends out a news release 
which says that the operating deficit in 1993-94 for the Moose 
Mountain Health District, he said was $305,575. That's what he 
said, and he said it publicly. Mailed it all over the province. 
 
Do you know what it was, Mr. Chair? Do you know what the 
actual figure is when you take a look at the audited financial 
statements? Sixteen thousand, three hundred and ninety-five. 
He sends out material saying they've got a $305,000 debt, 
operational, when the audited statement says 16,395. 
 
Mr. Chair, he sends out a sheet of paper, a news release across 
the province, or his leader — I'm not sure which — which says 
that the North Valley Health District has an operating deficit, 
and I'm quoting right from his news release, the North Valley 
District has an operating deficit of 373,985. That's what he told 
the people of Saskatchewan and he told the people of that 
district. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now give us the truth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — A member asks for the truth. In 1993-94 
the North Valley Health District had a surplus of $1,538. 
 
Now I could go through this whole list. I've had the officials of 
the Department of Health spend hours reviewing all of the 
audited statements of the district health boards for '93-94, and 
of his list of 16 which he mailed all over the province, we found 
seven that were accurate — seven. 
 
Now I think if the member wants to gain a little credibility in 
the public eye or garner a modicum of credibility for his leader  

and for his party, then he should correct this information that 
he's mailing all over the province because it causes absolute 
undue concern, because he wants to try and make politics out of 
health care. He wants to try and politicize health care for his 
and his party's advantage. 
 
Look at this headline, Mr. Chair: Health district puzzled by 
Liberal Party claim. Well you bet they were puzzled when they 
get misinformation mailed all over the province, then they have 
to acquaint all of their staff with what is the fact. 
 
Now I'm going to share with the member the facts of the matter. 
And I hope then he would cease and desist this spreading of 
misinformation and half-truths for his own political benefit. 
 
We have reviewed the audited financial statements from 
1993-94; the total deficit picture is for '93-94 a total of $15 
million — $15 million. That represents about 2 per cent, Mr. 
Chair, that represents about 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Chair, the member hoots and hollers from his seat. The 
other day, Mr. Chair, and members who are present, that 
member was in the House here quoting John Diefenbaker. You 
remember what he said about John Diefenbaker? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, thank you. Sit down. The 
member comes into the House and he quotes John Diefenbaker. 
He quoted John Diefenbaker when John Diefenbaker said if you 
throw a stone and the dog starts to yelp, you know you hit the 
dog. 
 
Well the member, I must say, Mr. Chair, is just yelping from his 
seat now. He hollers and he hoots from his seat. I'm going to 
give him the exact . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If the member can 
just keep his seat — I know it's nearly supper time, he seems to 
want to be anxious to get out of the House, he keeps jumping 
up and down. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, the member continues to 
holler from his seat. 
 
In the current year, our best estimate for the deficits that will be 
held by the district health boards this year, Mr. Chair, is $7 
million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Chair, the 
member is hollering . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order, order. Order, order. I just 
want to remind the member for Shaunavon that he'll have the 
opportunity to ask questions when I recognize him. When the 
minister is speaking, he should not interrupt. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 



March 20, 1995 

 
985 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 951 of Hansard No. 30A, March 17, 1995, 10 a.m., 
left-hand column, 12th paragraph, “Hon. Ms. Carson” should 
read “Hon. Ms. Crofford.” 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
[Note: The online version has been corrected.] 


