






















































March 27, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 27, 1995 

 

 
1155 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Asking leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This evening it's my 
great honour and pleasure to introduce a group of the 80th 
Walsh Acres Scouts seated in the Speaker's gallery. There's 19 
Scouts, and they're accompanied by Robert Lindsey, Tim 
Desrouchers, and Dave Duel. Those are the leaders. I'm looking 
forward to meeting with them later. They're going to be 
observing ongoings here, proceedings here for a while, then 
having a tour of the legislature. And then I get a chance to meet 
with them and share a glass of Beep, I believe. 
 
While I'm on my feet, I also recognize two friends of mine in 
the same gallery, Mr. and Mrs. Tom Simmonds, former 
constituents of mine. I'd like to think that they moved out not 
because of any disagreement with their MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) but for other reasons. But it's really good 
to see them here. 
 
I ask all colleagues to join me in welcoming the Scouts and the 
Simmonds. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to establish The Agri-Food Innovation 
Fund 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, seeing 
as how you've got all this great help here tonight and they look 
like they're up to the challenge of answering some questions, I 
would like to take this opportunity to research this Bill with you 
a little bit further. 
 
Could you tell us if this is in fact an ordinary kind of a Crown 
corporation that you are developing in this Bill, or just exactly 
what's going on here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No, this is not a Crown 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, what is it then . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Sorry, Minister, I missed your answer. Would 
you mind repeating that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This is a fund under a Treasury  

Board Crown Act. It won't be . . . It won't have any employees; 
it won't be a functional Crown corporation. It's strictly a fund 
where we put money in for research and development and it 
gets spent out of that fund over a period of years. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, that seems rather strange and 
odd because the first thing I read here is fund establishment, 
and it says the agri-food innovation fund is established as a 
corporation. 
 
So if it's a corporation by the government, what other 
corporations do you have besides Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well this is formed under those 
titles. As I said earlier, it won't have employees; it won't be 
functioning as an organization or as a corporate entity. It will be 
functioning as a place to hold a fund that will be used for 
research and development in the province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well it seems rather strange, Minister, that 
you are going to form a new corporation that won't have any 
employees and it isn't probably then going to be able to do 
much. Have you found a new, innovative way of getting things 
done without having people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well there are many examples of 
boards and funds that exist without being employees. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well I guess my point is this, Minister — and 
it may look a little silly the way I brought this on to you but this 
whole Bill is strangely more than silly; it's absolutely a waste of 
time. As I see it you don't have any employees that are going to 
do anything. You're only going to have a bank account. Who do 
you plan on bleeding the money out of to have this big bank 
account and what's the object of it having it sitting there like a 
slush fund if you don't have anybody that's going to 
administrate it or take care of it, and no employees? It looks to 
me like we're just wasting the taxpayers' time and the taxpayers' 
money. Why don't you just do this whole thing under your 
Department of Agriculture like anybody else would? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The object of this exercise is to 
have a fund of money that is set aside, that's committed for a 
specific purpose, in this case for the research and development 
and the improvement of value added and diversification on 
farms and off the farms. This allows us to set the money up, to 
have it there ready to be used for people, to have a board of 
industry and government that will administer this fund and 
disburse it as is needed rather than to do it in a yearly budget 
and have . . . You need some mechanism of disbursing money 
for a specific purpose, whether that's the department and putting 
it in each budget annually or whether it's . . . The advantage of 
this is we're able to take money from us and from the federal 
government — remember there are two governments involved 
in this — set the money aside, put it in a fund, and then it's 
there for a specific purpose. Everybody knows that the money is 
there. We're able to give some committed funding over a period 
of time because the money's set aside and it's in the fund. 



March 27, 1995 

 
1156 

Mr. Goohsen: — Well now we're getting a thousand questions, 
Minister, because now we find we've not only got your money 
being tied up in a fund that nobody can access because you 
have no people to administrate it and nobody to decide on how 
to work this whole process. you've got some federal money that 
maybe will come as pie out of the sky. So where is this federal 
money? Is that elusive kind of money like we saw that might 
possibly be coming for highway projects, that was cancelled 
last fall, or is this some more GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) money that might have come if you'd have donated 
but you forgot to and it was lost, or how are you going to get 
this money and what guarantee have you got that it's going to 
come? And how much is there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This money is committed by the 
federal government, was part of the negotiations we had with 
the federal government. This is the reason to set up a fund. We 
have an agreement that . . . the money is not a promise. This is 
not money that may come in the future; this is money that we 
have a commitment that will be set aside for this specific 
purpose. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well I'm glad to hear that it's set aside for a 
specific purpose and all that but I asked you how much is it and 
what guarantee we've got that it's going to be there. Show us 
some of this contract that you've got. And if you've got one, let's 
have it tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The money from the federal 
government, as I've said to several of your colleagues in the last 
go-around of questioning, is $64 million; 27 million on behalf 
of the provincial government which gives a total of $91 million. 
This is part of an agreement that we had with the federal 
government, involving all of the safety nets for the province for 
the number of years. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well that's getting somewhere, Minister. 
Now, do we have a copy of that agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — What we have at this point is a 
memorandum of understanding with the federal government. 
An agreement . . . when we pass this Act here and our money 
then is paid into the fund, and then we sign the final agreement 
with the federal government, and their money is paid into the 
fund. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. Now we've got a 
memorandum of agreement. Is this memorandum by any chance 
on paper, or is this another pie in the sky notion that you got? 
And if it's on paper, do you think you could table that 
memorandum for us so we could see what's going on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The agreement that we have with 
the federal government has been in place for some time. The 
member's seen the news releases, the commitment from the 
federal minister. If we get this Bill passed here, the money is 
paid into the fund, and the agreement will be finalized. 
Certainly we can't finalize our side of the agreement to commit 
to paying money into the fund until this Act is passed in the  

legislature. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well that's the biggest cop-out I've heard in 
my entire day here this afternoon, and even from this morning. 
Minister, there's only one person I trust less in this whole 
scheme of things here right now, only one person that I would 
trust less than you, and that would be the federal minister that 
you're dealing with. And the Saskatchewan farmers, I think, 
might even put them in that order but they may even switch 
that. 
 
The truth of the matter is, you're telling us that we ought to trust 
you and take your word for it because somebody printed it in a 
newspaper. Well thank you very much, sir, but I don't believe 
everything that I read in a newspaper. And I sure as the dickens 
don't take it as a binding contract, and neither do the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, and neither do the people in Regina. 
 
So, Minister, if you've got all of these informations and all of 
these memorandums of agreement, you must have something in 
writing, something that is concrete. You wouldn't go to the 
trouble of spending a million dollars worth of taxpayers' money 
setting up slush funds and new, legislated corporations. Even 
that's got to cost money just to write the paper. You didn't do all 
that without having something on paper signed as an agreement 
from the federal government, saying that you're actually going 
to get something. Or are you that foolish that you would do 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, we ask the 
members opposite to pass this Act. The money will be paid into 
the fund. This, whether the member chooses to trust the federal 
minister or not, that's his choice. We certainly have an 
agreement and we certainly fully expect the federal government 
to live up to their agreement in this case. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, once again you go back to 
saying, we've got an agreement — we've got an agreement. 
Well if you've got an agreement, table it. Let's see it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — If we pass this Bill and have the 
money paid into the fund, we can table the final agreement with 
all the i's crossed . . . i's dotted and the t's crossed. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, if, if, if. That might be the biggest word 
in the English language. Now if we're foolish enough to pass a 
Bill because you say that you've got a promise from somebody 
that you might have on paper and maybe you don't and maybe 
you do, and if we dot the i's and cross the t's and let you get 
away with anything, I suppose you might also then take the 
money from the federal government and gravel our highways. 
That might make about as much sense to taking your word that 
you're going to get an agreement out of the federal government 
and get money from them. 
 
You've thrown more money back to the federal government 
than you've ever gotten out of them. You lost all the GRIP 
money. That's just plain gone. Then you get it back in another 
agreement. You think maybe that you're going to negotiate  



March 27, 1995 

 
1157 

some other time and it might be on paper or it might not. 
 
So, Minister, I think you better come clean on this one. You're 
not a used-car salesman and you're not selling us a bag of 
goods. We want to see what kind of an agreement you got on 
paper with the federal government. Where is the money that you 
say you're going to get and how much are you going to get for 
sure? Show it to us in writing today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I've told the 
member over and over, we have a commitment from the federal 
government for $64 million. We are paying $27 million. The 
first step of that is this Act that they now are debating here 
today. That's what the commitment is; that's where the money is 
coming from and this is the first step of proceeding to pay that 
money into the fund. I urge you members to pass the Bill and 
let the money be paid. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well not quite so quick as that, Minister. 
Let's talk a little bit about where this slush fund is going to go if 
we ever do in fact get it. 
 
Now you're talking about research again and diversification. 
And who's going to decide what kind of research you're going 
to do with this money? Who is going to decide who will in fact 
get this money? Do I have to have a party card with the NDP 
(New Democratic Party), or do you have to then hire somebody 
to make a decision? You already said you're not going to have 
any employees; nobody's going to be working for this company, 
so who is going to be in control of deciding what kind of 
research is it going to be? If I decide I want to grow hemp, can I 
get a research fund for that? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I think had the member read 
Hansard or been in attendance at the last time this Bill went 
through . . . 
 
The Chair: — The minister should not make note of the 
presence of members. I encourage him to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We should make reference to 
attention rather than attendance. What I'm saying is that we 
have gone through these same questions at least three or four 
times. But I'm certainly prepared to go through it one more 
time. 
 
There will be a board of 12 members; if you read the Act, you 
will see that there is a board of 12 members. This will be 
partially industry and partially government. This will be a board 
that will rule on this. We will have sectors. Each of the industry 
sectors will get together and form a strategy which they will 
recommend to the board. So there will be input from industry 
and from both levels of government as to what the criteria are, 
and the board will make their independent selection of 
individual projects. 
 
It seems rather strange to me that the members opposite refer to  

money that's designed for diversification and value added in 
Saskatchewan as a slush fund. Certainly it's no such thing. This 
is going to have a very valuable impact on rural Saskatchewan 
and on the whole economy of Saskatchewan, and this will be 
one of the tools that we use to lead agriculture into the next 
century. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
you pose a lot of interesting possibilities here. But first of all, 
let me tell you that I have only missed one day in this entire 
session, and I'll put that against your record or anybody else's. 
 
Now what we need to know, Minister, is some answers that are 
straight for a change. The reason that we're cross-examining 
you on this Bill, and questioning you, is because you come out 
with different answers at different times with different people. 
So quite honestly, we just don't believe your answers any more, 
and that's why we're asking you to say them over. 
 
The truth of the matter is that what you're creating here is a job 
creation program that you're going to tout as being a rural 
development project — good for rural people, good for farmers 
— when in reality all you're doing is creating jobs for your NDP 
pals and friends. And there's going to be precious little of any of 
this benefit of money actually going to rural people. 
 
Not one thin dime is probably ever going to end up in a farmer's 
pocket. It'll all be job creation at some university laboratory 
where you'll have people checking in, collecting wages, and 
creating schemes on paper where they can shuffle them from 
one desk to another and pass them on to some other university 
where they can pile them up on a desk there so that somebody 
else can have a job transporting them back to Regina to pile on 
the desk — on the Economic Development minister's desk — 
and he'll shuffle them into his waste-paper basket and quickly 
tell somebody to burn the whole mess. And what we're really 
doing is creating a paper-pusher's job project for the province of 
Saskatchewan under the guise of helping rural Saskatchewan to 
diversify. And there's not one commitment any place in all of 
this that actually says there's going to be any money get into the 
hands of rural Saskatchewan people. 
 
The truth of the matter is it's a job-creation program that you 
have devised in order to convince the taxpayers of this province 
that it would be good to spend their money hiring your buddies 
and your friends. Now a few minutes ago, you told me you're 
not going to have anybody working for this corporation — 
nobody at all. But now you've told me you've got a 12-person 
board — 12 persons. Well we don't know exactly where they're 
coming from yet. I'll bet you that I can make a pretty safe wager 
though, that if they don't have a party card with the NDP they're 
not going to be on this board. But who's going to pay this 
board? Are you going to pay them any money or are they going 
to work for free? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well they're not going to work for 
the board; they're going to be the board. Obviously they will 
probably have expenses and per diems. It's interesting the 
member opposite doesn't think this fund is a good idea and that  



March 27, 1995 

 
1158 

it's a waste of money and it's not going to create help in rural 
Saskatchewan. That's not what we're being told. 
 
We've had the industry, we've had farmers, we've had 
communities who come to us and say there are a whole lot of 
good ideas out in rural Saskatchewan. There are a lot of 
communities who want to do things, who are trying to get 
projects done. They don't want grants and they don't want 
government to implement subsidies. What they need is some 
help with research and development and things like how to 
build mechanical harvesters or help training workers, help 
doing business plans — all those sorts of things that is needed 
to get that good idea that's out in rural Saskatchewan into 
production of value added products, or in fact diversification on 
the farm. 
 
That's what people are telling us, and that's what this fund is 
aimed to do. It's going to be controlled by industry. Industry has 
had a huge amount of input into this fund, and that is the 
direction that it's going. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, now we have a 12-person 
board that is going to collect some wages, and they are going to 
be paid by somebody. You didn't really commit whether the 
government's going to pay them yet or not, or if you're going to 
do that out of the Department of Agriculture, or if this slush 
fund you're setting up here is actually going to be bled a little 
bit to pay for them. 
 
Maybe you'd like to straighten this out as to just exactly where 
this money is going to come from for these people that now 
suddenly surface that are going to paid. We had, a few minutes 
ago, that nobody was working for this corporation. We didn't 
have any employees but now we do, of course. Now we have a 
board. They're not employees now, they're a board. So we're 
playing on words, I guess, today, to try to confuse the taxpayers 
of the province so that they'll think that they're getting 
something for nothing, when in fact they're going to pay very, 
very dearly for not only this corporation but for this fund to be 
set up, and precious little guarantee if any good can ever come 
out of this whole process. 
 
Reality, I think, will prove in the long run that what you are 
attempting to do here is to set up another Crown corporation 
entity-like process in order to find a job-creation program for 
your friends who are stamping at your doorstep on a regular 
basis now, demanding that they be recognized in order to 
support you in the next election. 
 
So tell us now, Minister, two things we need now. Where did 
this money that you're going to pay to these people now that do 
work for you — as a board, of course, so they're not real 
employees but they are going to get real money, I'm sure . . . are 
you going to pay them with Monopoly money, or how much are 
you going to pay them, and where is that money coming out of? 
Is it coming out of this fund or is it coming out of your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, we're not trying to  

confuse anybody and we're certainly, I don't think, confusing 
the producers or the industry in rural Saskatchewan; we have 
somehow confused the member opposite. Let me try to make 
this as simple as I can. 
 
This is a board. They will be paid from the fund, per diems, 
they will be paid at provincial rates rather than federal rates. I 
don't know the exact dollar figure  we have criteria for 
boards. In most cases it's much less than these people would 
make in other endeavours. It's certainly not employees; they are 
a board that will meet on a regular basis to decide criteria, and 
to decide strategies, and to approve projects. And the Act 
specifically says that they will not have employees; they will 
not employ people to work for them. 
 
If you want, as I did to your colleague the last time this was 
through here . . . they have the power to hire consultants and so 
on. They may need to have some engineering done or 
something on a from a time-to-time basis and they have the 
power to do that. And they have the power to work with other 
groups, could be commodity groups and so on that have check-
off funds that they want to work with this board, so they will 
have those powers. But certainly it will be administered and 
function very much like ADF (Agriculture Development Fund) 
functions on. I'm sure the member opposite is very familiar with 
that operation. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Yes, Minister, we have had some background 
with ADF. 
 
I want to ask you though, you've gone into this Bill here and 
you say you're going to support research and development in 
Saskatchewan agriculture and food industry but then you go on 
to say that you're going to encourage Saskatchewan farmers and 
rural residents to create economic opportunities and jobs. 
 
Now how are you going to encourage the farmers in this 
province and rural residents to create economic opportunities 
and jobs by researching things in Regina or Saskatoon? What 
encouragement is there going to be for them to pick up on these 
programs unless you offer cash incentives? Or is this another 
one of your used-car deals where you're going to promise them 
that they'll get benefits because they need to trust you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, again we're having 
the members opposite having a hard time to get out of the '80s 
and into the '90s. They pay lip service to diversification and 
value added in Saskatchewan but when it comes to actually 
doing it what they're . . . they're tending to go back to the old 
program where you pay people to grow a bushel of wheat. What 
we hope to do is to help the new industries that are emerging in 
Saskatchewan. We have things like horticulture, things like 
specialized livestock, many other opportunities, food 
processing. 
 
We're not talking about subsidizing an industry. All we're 
talking about here is $91 million to help with the research and 
the development and to get these industries off the ground. This 
is what farmers and industry and communities are telling us is  



March 27, 1995 

 
1159 

needed. We're responding to that need. And certainly $91 
million paid out on a subsidy on a bushel of wheat won't go 
very far; $91 million paid out to develop new industries in this 
province will create jobs and economic opportunity in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, give me an example of what 
kind of a new industry you might develop that's going to help 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly there are many 
examples that I could give that have come from the past. One 
that you can think of is the lentil crop. Because of the research 
that was done by Dr. Slinkard at the university, we had a 
significant advantage in the world markets because we had 
better varieties, and that resulted in a huge return to farmers. 
 
There are, as I said, the food processing industry which we view 
as one that has a huge potential. Specialized livestock has 
potential. Horticulture has potential. There are potentials for 
many, many other industries in this province. Some of them are 
slowly beginning to get off the ground. 
 
Again as I said earlier, there are many ideas out there, and all 
they need is a little help. And we're going to see . . . and we are 
seeing examples. A greenhouse opened in Biggar recently. In 
my riding there's the plant that's making fibre from flax straw 
that's a test plant that's going up there. Drake Meats is 
processing meats, 60 employees, 65 employees I think last time 
I talked to them; Thomson Meats with 60 employees. There are 
many examples of industries that are emerging; the success of 
elk farming and many, many others that are emerging and that 
certainly can do further processing and need to do further 
processing and need to have help finding international markets 
and so on. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. I guess the key 
word there is that they are working, not will be working — are 
working. Already working without this piece of legislation, 
without this new entity that you're creating to create jobs for 
your friends. 
 
These things have already been happening. They've been 
happening quite nicely and they can happen just as well under 
the present structure as under a new structure. So the old adage 
— why are you fixing something that isn't broken? — has to 
come to mind. Why are you creating a new fund to carry $91 
million, when you could carry it in the Department of 
Agriculture and work it through the existing programs that you 
already have? 
 
It's a total waste of time and money. That's what this is. Because 
you can accomplish everything you've talked about simply with 
the mechanisms you already have in place. 
 
If ADF was such a great thing, why didn't you just keep on 
doing it? I mean let's face it. All you're doing is making change 
for change sake so you can stamp your name on the bottom of it 
instead of having somebody else's there. You're playing politics  

with people's money. That's what you're doing. You're not 
creating anything. You're only rubber-stamping an old idea that 
had a lot of good sense to it many years ago, still has and 
probably will in the future. We don't need any new entities with 
your name written on it in order to accomplish what we're 
doing. 
 
So, Minister, out of all the things that you've talked about . . . 
and I like lentils. I like lentil soup, too. But you know, I think 
maybe there's some people in Manitoba that might want to talk 
to you a little bit about who encouraged the development of this 
crop and who actually kicked it off. 
 
I think there's a few other people around the world that might 
say the credit maybe doesn't all go to Saskatchewan. Maybe it 
was already there. All we had to do was find a market and 
encourage people to do it, and that was done. 
 
So, Minister, if you have no specific direction for a fund, no 
specific ideas where you're going to spend the money, just a pot 
full of money that you're going to collect together, couldn't you 
just as easily have stored that money in the Department of 
Agriculture or even in — as you guys like to put it . . . the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), the mother 
of all Crown corporations, has a great big bank account. 
Couldn't you have just held that money in one of those bank 
accounts and done the very same things that you're trying to do 
here? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Number one, the federal 
government would be unlikely to pay money into the provincial 
Department of Agriculture. Number two, this is for a specific 
purpose. 
 
And the member opposite can say that we don't need research 
and development, we don't need this fund, there isn't a need 
there. Producers and industry have told us that there is a need. 
Producers and industry want to see that money committed into 
the fund so that they know what's there. We get this from the 
research community over and over and over again — don't 
appropriate money to us each year because we can't plan ahead 
unless we know where we're going. We need some money that's 
committed to funding so that we can plan and do research over 
a period of five years or whatever period it takes. And that's the 
reason for setting this fund up. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister. Now you pose 
another interesting question for me. You say that you are doing 
this as a result of requests from people already working in the 
areas of diversification, different special interest groups. And 
you alluded earlier to people in the check-off areas. And true 
enough, these people do spend money and they do handle 
money to go into research projects and to study marketing 
programs and find out how to make the world work better for 
them. 
 
These organizations are all sort of there already, aren't they?  



March 27, 1995 

 
1160 

Now I happen to know that the canola growers have an 
association. I think the flax growers have got an association. 
The barley growers have got an association. The Aberdeen 
Angus people have got an association. The Hereford people 
have got an association. We've got all kinds of people out there 
who are doing marketing and developing and processing kinds 
of research, and building funds, and working at it. 
 
And my question is simply this, Minister. If you aren't trusted 
enough by the federal government to have them give you money 
— and I don't really blame them for not trusting you — then 
does the argument not hold some validity that you would be 
better off to orchestrate having that money go to these 
independent groups and have them allocate the monies to 
research and let them handle the program? Why are you in the 
middle of it at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There are a couple of reasons for 
that. One is this is targeted at emerging sectors and they don't 
necessarily have the organization and the structures that some 
of the more established commodity groups and so on do. But 
secondly, this has been supported by producers. We haven't had 
any complaints from any producer groups. 
 
This will be coordinated by the industry. It will be a strategy 
developed by an industry. Certainly I think it makes more sense 
to develop the strategy in conjunction with all the industry 
working together than it is to piecemeal money into the Angus 
breeders and the Hereford breeders and the Simmental breeders 
and hope that they don't do overlap and so on. 
 
So this is much as the ADF fund works  a central 
organization where strategies will be developed by each of the 
industry sectors, and this again is going to be targeted to new 
and emerging industries and they will have input into it. They 
will have recommendations for strategies to the board, and the 
board will be able to make their individual allocations to fit in 
with the overall strategies for development in the province. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to pose a few considerations for the minister as well this 
evening. 
 
And pursuant to my colleague's questions, I think one thing 
should be pointed out very, very clearly to everyone that may be 
listening and to the minister himself, that I think it would go 
without comment that we, in spite of what your interpretation 
has been, Mr. Minister, do support the intent of this Bill — and 
I repeat that we do support the intent of this Bill — but we have 
a lot of serious reservations about how this Bill is ostensibly 
going to be administered, how it's going to be set up, and a lot 
of questions like that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now the one thing that I would take particular exception to at 
the outset is your dismissal offhand at the request of my 
colleague to table what you call your memorandum of 
understanding that you have with the federal government. That 
boggles my mind how you can be talking about an $18 million 
injection of provincial taxpayers' money into this project, and  

then you add all the federal money into it, and you come up 
with a grand total, according to your words, of 91 millions of 
dollars of taxpayers' money. 
 
And what you're asking us to do now, as an opposition, and you 
said this essentially — trust us. Trust us and once we have 
passed . . . once we have given speedy passage to this 
legislation, then in your wisdom you may show us the 
memorandum of understanding. Now I think you're getting the 
cart before the horse, Mr. Minister. First of all, illustrate to us 
that this is indeed a worthy cause for us to spend 91 millions of 
dollars of taxpayers' money. Now I think that is only a fair 
request on my part, Mr. Minister. We're not talking here about 
great trade secrets. We're not talking here about business that 
might be jeopardized if some of this information is given out to 
the public. 
 
So quite seriously I would just ask you . . . you say you have a 
memorandum of understanding, that it's been signed, so it's 
documented. Everything is there for us to see. And that's exactly 
what we would like, Mr. Minister. Give us a peek at that, will 
you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly we may well be able to 
table that. I would have to clear that with the federal 
counterparts as to whether or not they would be prepared to 
have that released as a public document. Certainly it does exist. 
We do have the memorandum, and the understanding is there. 
The NISA (net income stabilization account) parts of the 
program are already kicked in. The sector program is kicked in. 
So part of that memorandum is this research and development 
money. And we will have the final, formal agreement signed 
after we have this Bill passed and passed through their 
processes. And certainly that will be public. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Minister, you're saying that some of 
this is public knowledge already, and now you're asking us to 
agree to something that we don't know what we're agreeing to. 
Are you suggesting that I'm being unreasonable by pursuing this 
request, that you give us an idea of that memorandum of 
understanding? And if we like what we see, then it's a done 
deal, because as I've already indicated to you, we do agree with 
the intent of the Bill. We just don't agree on how you're trying 
to get this through and how it's going to be administered. Those 
are the areas where we have concerns. 
 
So what portion of this memorandum of understanding would 
you be prepared to table at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I obviously don't have that 
here. And it's well without the scope . . . outside the scope of 
what we're working with here tonight. What you're approving 
here tonight is the Bill which sets out the administration of the 
fund, sets out the $18 million that's going to be paid into it. 
That's the scope of what we're dealing with here tonight. 
 
If there are papers and memorandums of understanding with the 
federal government dealing with the whole safety net, that also 
deal with this, I don't obviously have those with me tonight, 



March 27, 1995 

 
1161 

and I don't want to commit to table something that I'm only half 
a part of and have to deal with federal counterparts. But 
certainly we don't have any secrets. This agreement has been 
negotiated and is public knowledge. And so if we can table the 
portion of that and all of . . . If we can table that agreement with 
the consent of the federal government, I would be prepared to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — What time frame, Mr. Minister, are we 
looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — If I can find those documents 
tonight and check with our people that . . . we obviously can't 
check with the federal government probably at this hour of 
night, but if it's possible we could table those as soon as I can 
locate them. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think we're getting 
somewhere here, and I certainly . . . if you feel that you have to 
have a commendation from the federal government before you 
take that step, I can appreciate why you would not be able to do 
that tonight. But I would encourage you very strongly, Mr. 
Minister, that you, as the Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture, 
together with Ralph Goodale, who comes from the Regina area, 
as the federal Minister of Agriculture, surely would see fit to 
give us the information that is necessary so that we can have a 
degree of comfort as to where these taxpayers' dollars are going 
to be spent and the potential. 
 
Now my colleagues have already been asking a lot of questions 
about that, and although some of our concerns are being 
answered, there are more concerns being raised as you answer. 
 
And you know, the fact that you're putting in $18 million and 
some extra funding and the federal government is topping it off 
to $91 million, Mr. Minister, I got the impression that from 
some of your comments during the course of the evening that 
you were chastizing my colleagues for having the audacity of 
questioning you about your intent, questioning your motives. 
And you were on the verge of accusing us of holding up R&D, 
research and development, in this province because we were not 
giving speedy passage to this legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you and your government are in no position 
to chastize anyone in this province when it comes to agriculture. 
This $18 million that you're talking about is almost a drop in the 
bucket, a drop in the bucket compared to what you have cost 
the Saskatchewan farmer. When you start talking about the 
$189 million lost in the GRIP program that you gave to the 
feds, that, Mr. Minister, is much, in my opinion, more serious 
for the moment than any $18 million that you're prepared to put 
into R&D. 
 
And again we support that. We support that idea of R&D. I 
think it's an integral part of the process of diversification in this 
province and putting the province back on a sound footing, on a 
competitive footing with the rest of the world. If we don't keep 
up with our innovative processes, obviously we're going to start 
falling behind. It's a very competitive world out there, Mr.  

Minister, and we recognize that fact. 
 
So I'm glad with the progress that we've made here over the last 
few moments, and I will certainly hold you to the commitments 
that you have made. 
 
Now going on to something specific and something that people 
have been asking me about — because they know I'm in the hog 
industry so they come up and say, well what do you think of 
this and what do you think of that — how do you perceive . . . 
And I know what your stock answer is probably going to be. 
Well there's a 12-member board and they're going to be making 
decisions like this. But certainly you had a vision; you had a 
vision as to how this will work in reality and practicality in its 
implementation. How do you envisage this $18 million being 
spent? 
 
Who do you envisage getting it? Who do you envisage as being 
eligible for it? What kind of projects in particular? And 
specifically, let's put this into the context of the hog industry. 
Now I know that your government has been very fond, in the 
last number of years, and in fact, I believe, so were we, of 
investing money, let's say, into the NPD (National Pig 
Development (Canada) Co. Ltd.), northern pig development, 
and that was high tech. The member from Swift Current at the 
time was the gentleman that gave me the answer to my 
questions then. 
 
What kind of barns, for example, would be eligible to receive 
some of this money? How do you see that in that particular 
industry? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again, the focus of this will be on 
projects that benefit whole industries. Again, the priority will be 
the new and emerging sectors, so hogs may or may not fit in 
that category again. It would depend on board decisions. 
 
But I would see certainly something that would . . . somebody 
who was trying to develop a new product from processed pork 
that would fit into an Asian market — that sort of thing would 
be eligible. If there's new technology on hog barns, aeration 
systems or whatever that would be beneficial to the industry — 
I would see something like that being a possibility. 
 
I would see, and again, as you've asked for my opinion, this is 
not a commitment because the board will make those decisions, 
but the sorts of . . . maybe some research into locations for 
barns around the province to help with some of the problems 
that we're having with the locations and acreages and that sort 
of thing, some help with finding sites in areas that are suitable 
for hogs and all of those areas, rather than being . . . I don't see 
it as grants to individual hog farmers, so much a hog to grow 
hogs. This is a development fund and it would be targeted to 
those sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Let's not forget, Mr. Minister, that without 
hogs there's no need for a development fund. So a strong,  



March 27, 1995 

 
1162 

vibrant industry certainly depends upon that. 
 
How do you envisage some of the packing companies fitting 
into this? Like in Moose Jaw, for example, or Intercon in 
Saskatoon, or some of the businesses in Yorkton and Melfort or 
in Battleford, for example. How do you envisage these 
companies? You said that individual producers are more or less 
out, is the impression that I'm getting from you. 
 
So what are we looking at? Are we looking at companies? Are 
we looking at corporations? What do you see there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I don't want to give the 
impression that individuals are out. Individuals that want to do 
a particular sort of research for a new operation, or a business 
plan for some sort of new operation or that sort of thing, would 
be in. 
 
I expect to see a lot of small and community-based companies 
being involved in this fund. Somebody like a Drake Meats that 
wants to develop a new pork sausage and needs some help with 
labelling and that sort of thing, that would certainly fit the bill, 
would certainly be what this fund is intended for. 
 
So I don't . . . again it's not going to be going to grants to big 
packing plants. It will be something that benefits the industry 
overall and creates a market for both the processed product and 
in turn the farmer's product. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Minister, how do you see the PSC 
working into this strategy of yours — the Prairie Swine Centre? 
You know how that operates, you know who funds it. What 
potential is there with this fund working in conjunction with 
PSC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It certainly has a large potential, 
that would be the sort of area that would certainly apply. Again 
I caution that this is targeted at emerging sectors and we've sort 
of listed five or six sectors that we think are priorities. But it 
doesn't exclude more established sectors like the hogs or cattle. 
And the Prairie Swine Centre doing research on feeding of hogs 
or diseases in hogs or that sort of thing would certainly be 
eligible for the fund. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I see 
that we could be talking some money here going into research 
in developing products probably, or research into some of the 
developments that take place in research stations. Will they be 
eligible for these kind of funds in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well we have a commitment from 
the federal government that they won't use this fund to replace 
existing research. If some research station was prepared to do a 
project to research varieties of saskatoon berries that would be 
suitable for Saskatchewan, and it's in addition to funding that 
they're already doing and projects they're already doing, it could 
quite well be eligible for this sort of fund. 
 
Mr. Martens: — What I hear happening in the research  

stations that I'm familiar with and the personnel who I'm very 
familiar with, there's a reduction in volume of funding for the 
regular kinds of things in research in these research stations. 
And you could think about now, the time when we probably 
need more research into grasses and different kinds of high 
volume production in things like a combination of peas and oats 
and forages and silage and all that kind of stuff, we should have 
more of that today than we had yesterday, and the federal 
government is cutting back on those programs, and particular 
on the research side of the grazing and the grass and the things 
that are available to livestock to use in a regular way. 
 
And are you going to make certain that they're not going to put 
this money into there, because I know that they've been cutting 
back in those areas, and they're frustrated with the fact that the 
federal government is doing it. And from your observation you 
said that they weren't going to do that; you weren't going to put 
that in there. What kind of a plan do you have to avoid putting 
it in there if that's what they're going to be asking for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly the member makes 
excellent points that the federal government in their ag strategy, 
and in all their communication to us, was that there were going 
to be cuts in agriculture and that there had to be some cuts they 
felt but that research and development was not the place to cut, 
and that would be protected and looked after. And that 
obviously is not the case. They're cutting research and 
development across the country. 
 
You certainly make a good point in the cattle industry. It's one 
of my personal beliefs that the cattle industry is in for some 
significant change, particularly up in my area where we haven't 
had a lot of experience with grazing and foraging and some new 
and exciting things happening that increase the productivity of 
the land. It's going to be, with the Crow gone, even more 
important in the future. 
 
And I guess if the federal government cuts their research 
funding across the country and they cut us sort of equally with 
everybody else, we'll fight that, and we'll be put under some 
pressure to back-fill. I guess the question then will come up to 
the board as to whether or not those are priority areas. 
 
What we have from them is a commitment that they're not going 
to use the fact that they've got this fund in Saskatchewan as a 
means to take back research funding from us. And since we had 
assumed that research was going to be protected across the 
country, we felt quite safe. Obviously research is not safe across 
the country. They're cutting it right across. I mean we're going 
to fight that. If, and as the member says, it seems to be 
happening, then I think we will have some tough decisions. 
 
And $91 million isn't going to be enough to do all the research 
and development and the projects that we'd like to see done to 
begin with, and we are wanting to target the emerging sectors. 
But if there's dramatic withdrawal of federal funding, we will 
have to make tough decisions, or the board I guess will have to 
make those decisions at the time. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1163 

Mr. Martens: — There are, in my view, some very significant 
changes being made federally in research, and that really 
bothers me because there have been fundamental changes made 
by the things that the research stations have done in this 
province, and the value that they have been to agriculture is 
phenomenal. 
 
I just use one example, is Rescue wheat. It was developed in 
Swift Current and in Saskatchewan and you have a whole lot of 
these that are just some of the . . . they were some of the 
fundamental changes. And if I go to your part of the world, the 
canola is just as significant as that is. And if I take a look at the 
research station in Swift Current and look at the grasses that 
they've developed, one of the major researchers, a guy by the 
name of Mark Kilcher, a phenomenal record with a master's 
degree in science, did huge amounts of research and value to 
the whole agriculture industry. 
 
And I know they're cutting those back. And to me it looks like 
this money is there to replace it and that's what I see a part of it. 
What in the agreement is there for you to get your teeth into so 
that . . . you say it's not going to happen, but then on the other 
hand, through the back door, they go and do it. Is there anything 
that you have recourse to, to say, well you are the ones that cut 
back? Is there any way that you can say without fear of having 
more cut-backs in agriculture in Saskatchewan . . . a way to stop 
that from happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again, we have the commitment 
that they won't reduce research and use this money to back-fill. 
I guess we don't have the agreement that they won't cut research 
across the country. The only advantage, I guess, that we have is 
at least in this province we will have this fund to continue with 
some research. But as I mentioned earlier in the House, studies 
will show that money spent on agricultural research returns 
anywhere from 50 to 100 times its value to the economy. So 
again, this is not a wise decision by the federal government to 
be cutting research if indeed they continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Martens: — What I'm afraid of, Mr. Minister, is that they 
will see that they put 64 million, I believe, from their side, and 
they'll say, well that's enough for Saskatchewan; that's 
sufficient; that will do. In my opinion, that's going to cause a 
serious problem. And I can see them cutting that back. In fact 
different individuals have told me that they're going to have to 
deal with the staffing component, cut back the staffing 
component rather vigorously, in order to meet the cut-backs in 
the research station in Swift Current, for example. They're 
going to have to have massive cut-backs in people working in 
order to meet the budget requirements. And my view is that you 
don't have any way of stopping them. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly we don't have any 
evidence that they're cutting back research more in 
Saskatchewan than elsewhere. They closed seven research 
stations in the last budget, only one of which was in 
Saskatchewan, which was Regina, which had essentially been 
inoperative for some time. Again that is not a wise decision by 
the federal government to cut research, although . . . and again,  

they've cut their agricultural spending dramatically, and they 
seem to be on the path of Australia and New Zealand where 
they're going to totally reduce agricultural spending. 
 
We've done the best we can with the safety net. We've protected 
our safety net for two to three years which will insulate us from 
those cuts. We have this ag innovation fund which is going to 
see some increase in development dollars here. But if they 
continue to cut research and cut the ag budget across the 
country, that is going to be difficult for farmers right across this 
country. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There's another thing that I find interesting 
here, is that it's going to encourage Saskatchewan farmers and 
rural residents to create economic opportunities and jobs. Is this 
just in the research side or is this promotional stuff or . . . Just 
tell me what you have that in there for and what you have in 
mind. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We see this resulting in jobs on the 
farm, in that some of the new areas will be fairly labour 
intensive — or even opportunities for new family farms in the 
specialized livestock industry, horticulture, greenhouses. Plus 
we see jobs in value added industry, and that, I think, is the key 
to rural Saskatchewan and we're seeing some successes now. 
The greenhouse in Biggar will employ 50 to 60 people. Drake 
Meats employs 60 people — or 65 people. Thomson Meats 
employs 60 people. The flax plant in Canora, if it goes to a full 
scale, will employ people. Dehy plants employ people. And 
those are the areas that provide markets for local farmers, helps 
keep farmers on the land, and also creates jobs in communities 
which are badly needed right now. 
 
So there will be some created in the research side. If PAMI 
(Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) in Humboldt gets a 
number of contracts to do research into some agriculture things, 
they will probably hire a few engineers. But primarily we're 
hoping that it creates jobs on the farm and primarily in some of 
the small, value added industries that will be hopefully located 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Martens: — A lot of times the development of these 
opportunities is done on a small scale. And are you going to 
make them so that you can do these research things and 
economic development things so that the ordinary farm can get 
to use them? If you want to talk about 25 acres of strawberries, 
or 75 acres of potatoes, or 25 acres of onions, that has its own 
value; but at some point in time you have to think these things 
through a little bit more. 
 
For example, potatoes in the Riverhurst area. Is there some 
opportunity to develop the things needed to make those things 
work so that they can supply these seed potatoes to the people 
in Idaho? Is that . . . I guess from two things. One is the 
implement development things, like PAMI could do; and the 
second thing would be the marketing of those. Is there going to 
be something developed so that . . . I could use other examples.  



March 27, 1995 

 
1164 

In the jam business, is there going to be opportunities made 
available to these people, when they get these blueberries, to 
put them into jars so that they have market opportunities? 
 
And it isn't only just developing the system to make them work, 
it's getting them to the corner store so that everybody reads the 
label and understands that that's from Saskatchewan or that we 
even make it in Saskatchewan. Another one is choke-cherry 
juice. I think it's made out at Eston. And most people don't 
understand — or Eatonia — and most people don't know that it 
exists. And that's a part of the problem. Is there going to be 
opportunity to develop these markets through money from this 
fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, those are excellent examples. 
 
Seed potatoes, as the member may know, research has shown 
that seed potatoes grown in Saskatchewan, and Alberta have 
what they call northern vigour and have an up to 20 to 30 per 
cent yield advantage in Idaho over locally grown seed potatoes 
— an excellent market opportunity. 
 
There will be, as you mentioned, machinery — all kinds of 
things that will be needed for that industry. A possible starch 
processing plant or something to deal with the number 2 
potatoes and the waste ones is an opportunity. And so all of 
those would take research and business plans and that sort of 
thing. 
 
The berries one is another one that's an excellent example. In 
the food processing side, one of the things that we see — 
although again leaving the decision to the board — is some sort 
of what we would call a food incubation centre. So there would 
be some place where if you wanted to process those 
choke-cherries and put them in a jar, that you had the idea, there 
might be some help with how to design the label so that . . . 
how to design the jars, maybe some test scale equipment around 
that we could use to make enough of a product to test it in some 
markets and get it out and see if it moves. 
 
And from there then, once that ground work is done, generally 
there's a lot of private interest and private capital that's around 
that's prepared to take that when they've got some proof that it 
will likely work and go ahead and develop a processing plant, 
or it could even be right on the farm where somebody's doing 
the jam. 
 
But those small-scale industries often don't have the capital to 
expend in the test marketing and the research, and those 
relatively small pieces of capital that are required but are at a 
very high risk for lenders or anybody else or even for the 
proponents to want to invest their own capital or borrow if 
they're a community group or whatever. So certainly those are 
the kind of examples that we see this fund helping. 
 
Mr. Martens: — One of the other things that has been of some 
concern to me is that some of the regulations relating to these 
industries curtail their development. 
 

Just use one as an example. There's a Schmidt family at Fox 
Valley or in through there some place, maybe it's Mendham. 
They have a milling machine to mill wheat. And they do it kind 
of as a specialty kind of a milling because they're Seventh-day 
Adventists and they have a market all over the world. But they 
can't exercise that market unless they grow their own grain 
because of restrictions on regulations from export and all of the 
things related to that. 
 
Will the board have the freedom to take a look at some of those 
things as well, in developing the markets and helping people 
through the regulations that exist in other places? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes I would think that that would 
be within the mandate of the board. And that certainly is one of 
the difficulties of many of the smaller operations — is to find 
out what those regulations are and comply with them. Certainly 
the meat industry and so on, they need inspection and quality 
controls and so on. So yes, I think that would certainly be 
within the mandate of the board. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There's a part in here that talks about having a 
cooperative measure of relationship with organizations and 
persons having objects and purposes similar to those of the 
fund. 
 
That can be a very broad statement but it can be a very narrow 
one. If the board is narrow in its focus to start with, and it has 
very limited sensitivity to all of the people in Saskatchewan 
who could belong to these organizations, you could have a very 
narrow perspective of this. And that's one of the things that has 
concerned us about how this board is to relate to everybody. 
 
Is there a way that you've set this up so that you can 
accommodate some of that diversity in these organizations, 
even in philosophy? Like you'll have . . . the horned cattle trust 
fund will operate differently than the canola people will. You 
have a variety of philosophies in these groups of people or you 
have another difference in the dairy producers and the feather 
industry versus some of the grain organizations. Is there going 
to be latitude for some of these philosophies to exist in that 
board organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly we hope so. We're 
building in as much flexibility to the board as we can. I believe 
we were having pretty good success by trying to get industry to 
work together to look at all of the industry and all of the sector 
together. 
 
We have, in six of the key areas that we see as new and 
emerging industries, we have sector committees of the 
department plus industry. And they're talking to the commodity 
groups and the processors and the further processors and all 
those sectors to try to develop strategies. And our hope is that 
the industry will come to the board with their recommendation 
of a strategy that develops the whole industry. And we're 
finding a great deal of cooperation amongst industry 
participants and even amongst farm groups. Certainly there are 
philosophical differences and operating differences, but we're  



March 27, 1995 

 
1165 

finding that people are willing to set those aside and work on 
real solutions to the problems in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A couple of 
things, Mr. Minister, before we perhaps get to the clause-by-
clause stuff. And I touched on this the other day when we were 
discussing employees and you had some . . . why do you have a 
notwithstanding The Crown Corporation Act when you refer to 
the issue of employees? Why is that notwithstanding clause in 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — My understanding is The Crown 
Corporation Act empowers Crown corporations to hire 
employees, and we're saying, notwithstanding that, this fund 
will not be able to hire employees. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — But I distinctly heard you tell the member 
from Maple Creek that this wasn't a Crown corporation; that it 
wasn't now, never would be, a Crown corporation. Why in the 
world would you be using The Crown Corporation Act to try 
and assure us that this thing won't hire employees? I mean 
couldn't you have used the general government Act or there's 
lots of different pieces of legislation when it comes to . . . or 
just said the fund will not hire employees, period. Why have 
you got The Crown Corporations Act in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well we used The Crown 
Corporation Act because that seemed to be the best method to 
set this up to make it do what we wanted, which was set aside 
that money, have it there in a fund, have a board be able to, 
empowered to, control it. We didn't want a Crown corporation 
in the sense of SaskTel or SaskPower but we thought that The 
Crown Corporation Act worked quite well and I think it does. 
 
We've put in the clause that it can't hire employees to make it 
clear that it's not going to become a SaskPower or some 
ongoing body; that this is a fund, an entity, that's set up to deal 
with the fund. And The Crown Corporation Act seemed to be a 
convenient way to set this up. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, to change that would you have 
to come back before the House or can you do that by order in 
council to amend that clause as far as the use of The Crown 
Corporation Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — No. We would have to come back 
to the legislature. It's an Act of the legislature. It's specifically 
stated in there and the only way to change it would be by 
amending this Act. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Because all the way through the Act, 
Minister, in section after section, LG in C (Lieutenant Governor 
in Council) fixes all sorts of rates of remuneration and other 
things. Well you're telling me that LG in C could not decide to 
hire employees, that The Crown Corporation Act, the way you 
have it set up, specifically prohibits the board from hiring 
employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's what the clause says. 

Mr. Swenson: — Okay. We'll leave that for a moment. 
 
You were telling the member from Rosthern that you thought 
that it would be possible to provide the outline of the MOU 
(memorandum of understanding) — at least the basic 
understanding that you have with the federal minister — and 
you were going to undertake to do that. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I think, minister, it would probably be 
prudent for then for the committee to . . . You suggest that we 
rise and report progress and that you bring that before us rather 
than us taking up the time of the House here, because I got the 
distinct feeling from my colleagues that we will not be 
comfortable with this Act until you're producing the outline of 
the agreement that you have with the federal government. 
 
Now you and I can stand here and make debating points for the 
next however long you wish, but if you're going to provide that 
particular information, we'd like to have a look at it and then 
perhaps we can get on with moving through this Bill, clause by 
clause. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again, that outline of the 
agreement is public knowledge; it's been in press releases. And 
you have that right now. My understanding is that the federal 
Minister of Agriculture is in South America somewhere, and I 
said earlier I certainly wouldn't release any joint papers without 
the consent of the federal minister. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I appreciate that, Minister, and all we've 
asked is that you consult with them. I mean if . . . I don't think it 
would be any skin off your nose, either morally or politically, if 
you came back to the House and said that Ralph Goodale once 
again would not be cooperative with the province of 
Saskatchewan. Maybe I'm giving you an opportunity to beat up 
on the Grits some more. 
 
So what we're saying is why don't you ask; see what you can 
provide. If we can have a look at the agreement, maybe we'll be 
more comfortable with it, and then we can get on with things. 
We are probably going to propose some amendments to the 
legislation to make it more user-friendly, and I think if you 
would provide that MOU to us or at least some of it or at least 
ask the question, we would be more comfortable with this 
agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I committed to attempting to 
release the information because the member asked for it, and 
again, as I said, with federal compliance I have no problem with 
releasing that MOU. However it has little or no bearing on the 
matter before the House which is this particular Bill which is 
the provincial Bill that allows $18 million to be paid into the 
fund. 
 
So I don't see the relevance, although if the members ask for  



March 27, 1995 

 
1166 

information, I'm always willing to oblige wherever possible. 
But I don't see that it has any particular relevance to this 
particular Act, and if the members have amendments to the Act, 
propose them and we'll get on with it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, there is a relevance. You cut 
a deal with Ralph Goodale and the Liberals last year to dispose 
of the surplus in the GRIP account, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan's money, over $600 million. When all is said and 
done, you made a deal with him on future safety nets and a 
whole bunch of stuff to go with it. That's why we want to see 
what is going on. That's the relevance. 
 
You let them walk out of this province with $317 million. 
When you let them walk away with it, you said we're getting X, 
X, X, X. They are putting in this, this, this, and this. And one of 
the things they're putting in is a bunch of money into this 
program. At least that's what you told me the other night, $60 
million . . . $61 million that they're going to put in as part of 
this trade-off that you made on our behalf. That's why it's 
relevant. And that's why the MOU is relevant. And that's why 
every farmer in the province wants to see what it is. 
 
Are you telling me that Ralph Goodale isn't going to take this 
before the Standing Committee on Agriculture in the House of 
Commons at some point in time? We want to see what is part 
and parcel of the agreement because that was our money that 
you allowed them to walk out of this province with — plain and 
simple. That's why it's our responsibility to see it. If you don't 
think that's relevant, that's fine. And we can stand here tonight 
for the next two hours and we can talk about that issue. 
 
All I'm saying is I think if we had a look at it, we might feel 
more comfortable with the bargain that you've cut on our behalf 
 that's all we're asking for  and that farmers out there might 
feel more comfortable with the bargain that you cut. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the bargain that we cut is 
well known. As I say, the NISA is in effect, the sector program 
is in effect, and this is in effect. And we'll have . . . We are 
carrying out the first step. Our money goes in, $18 million 
immediately that the Bill is passed. Another $9 million is in our 
budget for next year. The federal government has a commitment 
to put $64 million into the fund; and this Act is dealing with 
provincial money. And if you have specific questions of the 
federal government, should ask them about what their 
budgeting process is. But tonight we're dealing with provincial 
legislation. We're dealing with a Bill that puts $18 million into 
the ag innovation fund. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, I don't have Ralph Goodale sitting 
across from me explaining, and I might like to. That might be 
just wonderful, but I don't have him. I got you. And you signed 
an agreement with him on behalf of me and every other farmer 
in the province of Saskatchewan, every taxpayer in the province 
of Saskatchewan, involving millions and millions of dollars. 
 
And you traded my money and other farmers' money in this 
province for a package that you say is better. I remember back  

in 1992 when the member from Rosetown — the Agriculture 
minister at the time — was busy breaking the contracts of 
60,000 farmers in this province and taking away the protection 
that they thought they had. When that member from Rosetown 
was on his feet, we told him that down the road, two or three 
years from now, that's exactly what was going to happen — that 
that money was gone and gone forever and the protection along 
with it. And he denied up and down. He said what we're 
replacing this with is a better system, more protection. And 
we'll go to the federal government, and we'll come up with a 
package that'll be far better than anything you ever thought of. 
 
Well the package includes this particular piece of legislation. 
The MOU includes this amount of money. Now three years 
down the road from when the member from Rosetown took 
away the contracts of the province of Saskatchewan farmers, 
we're at the end result right now. 
 
And I think it's only fair that because we can't get at Mr. 
Goodale that the other partner, who is you, sir, provide us with 
the outline of the MOU so that we can understand exactly what 
the parameters of this are, what the federal government's 
commitments are, what your commitments are, and that we 
don't have some kind of a fund set up here that isn't going to do 
what you state it's going to do. 
 
And if we are naturally suspicious, I think every farmer in this 
province would back us up because I can walk through the last 
three years about what you said you were going to do in 
agriculture, and it hasn't materialized. The only thing that's 
materialized is the market-place has got a heck of a lot better, 
no thanks to you. Farmers have changed the way that they farm, 
no thanks to you. The North American Free Trade Agreement 
and other things have changed the way that all of us have to 
operate, no thanks to you. And the reality, in spite of you, the 
reality is that agriculture is changing. But there isn't one thing 
that you or I can put our finger on that says that you have come 
through the way that the member from Riversdale promised in 
1991 when I attended those rallies. 
 
So if there's a natural suspicion there about what happened and 
where the money went and how it's coming back, excuse me, 
Minister, but it's there. And I think you have a responsibility to 
provide to us that framework so that we understand exactly 
where you're taking us, because we're going into an election 
campaign. And if the promises in agriculture are anything like 
what we heard in 1991, every farmer in this province better be 
darned suspicious of what your motives are. So that's why we 
need to see it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite can go back in history to '91 GRIP all he wants. The 
fact is that some of the credit, and certainly most of the credit, 
belongs to the farmers of this province for the adaptation that 
they made. 
 
Certainly part of it was because of what we did. The changes to 
'91 GRIP meant that the farmers got more out of the 
market-place and less out of government. And I know the  



March 27, 1995 

 
1167 

member opposite doesn't like that, but it certainly did; 1994 — 
$924 million, which is the highest net farm income in a long, 
long time, did much better in diversification than did the 
neighbouring provinces who were stuck with the outdated GRIP 
program. But the member opposite can go back to '91 GRIP and 
run your election on . . . you run your election campaign on 
taking people back to '91 GRIP, if that's the route that you want 
to take. 
 
The member says he doesn't trust the government. We are here 
with an Act of the legislature that puts $18 million into a fund 
by legislation, and the member says, well we shouldn't pass this 
because you might change your mind. I don't know what the 
reasoning there is. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, it wasn't I or any of my colleagues 
or anybody on this side of the House that had to use the 
notwithstanding clause in that Bill over and over and over 
again. What was the phrase . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Whereas. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Whereases, so that you could hide from the 
court. And after all this time, there are still farmers out there 
that want to take your backside off to the Supreme Court. You 
know that, Minister? 
 
You had to use enough whereases that you could hide in this 
Legislative Assembly from honest taxpayers of this province 
because they wanted to take you to court and you were afraid to 
face them. So what it says to me, a government that's afraid to 
face its peers in the courts of law of our province is a 
government that needs questions asked about it. Otherwise you 
would have said, fine, let's go to court; let's see who's right. But 
you're afraid, even to this day, three years later you are afraid to 
face the farmers of this province in the courtroom. So don't give 
me any speeches about what you've done for agriculture. Don't 
give me a speech at all. 
 
The market-place in Saskatchewan is the same as the 
market-place in Alberta. You had the audacity to just stand up 
here and say the farmers in Alberta and Manitoba got less out of 
the market? Give me a break. The market's the same as it is here 
and the last time I drove through Alberta I saw little more 
diversification than I did in this province. We're getting there 
because the farmers of this province have learned not to trust 
government, primarily because of what you did to them three 
years ago. Yes, they're diversifying but it's got nothing to do 
with you, sir, or your government and everything to do with the 
reality of the market-place. 
 
And any Minister of Agriculture who would stand in this House 
and say that farmers in this province did better because the 
market-place was working here and it wasn't working in 
Alberta, last time I checked the price of cows was the same in 
Alberta as it was here. The price of grain was the same. It had 
nothing to do with you or your policies. So they got more 
money out of the market and they got GRIP on top of it. You 
know, I just don't understand the thinking. 

But anyway, Minister, let's get back to the topic at hand. You 
are coming forward with a Bill to set up a fund to diversify 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. This agreement is 
an outgrowth of an agreement with the federal government to 
provide funding in a number of areas that you say will enhance 
agriculture. 
 
My colleague earlier asked you about the MOU, and from what 
I saw on television you said that that would be a distinct 
possibility but you'd have to check with the federal minister and 
his officials, and I say, fine. Now you seem to be saying, well I 
might not be able to do that, and I don't understand that. If the 
federal minister's going to have to take this agreement through 
the Standing Committee of Agriculture which is, I understand, 
the federal process, why in the world would you not want this 
Legislative Assembly to understand what you've signed in a 
broader context for agriculture? And if this is part and parcel of 
it, it'll give us a better understanding of what you're trying to 
achieve with millions of dollars of taxpayers' money. That's all 
we ask. We want to have a look at the game plan here and see 
how this fits in with the rest of it and not just read some press 
release that was printed up by some hack in the NDP 
government. 
 
So can you give it another shot about what you think you can do 
to show us the bigger picture, the MOU, and maybe we can 
move on to other things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Again I don't have anything that I 
wouldn't release. I have to talk to the federal minister. We have 
letters, agreements of understanding, and we have an 
agreement, much of which has already been implemented. As I 
say, the NISA forms are out; that has been implemented. The 
sector program has been implemented. This is being 
implemented as we speak with the Act from our part here. 
 
This is, as I said . . . the structure is there. The commitment is 
there, and what we're debating here tonight is $18 million into 
the ag innovation fund. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, I appreciate what you have to do. I 
really do. No one wants you to break confidence with the 
federal Minister of Agriculture. If it's going to benefit this 
province and that you're going to be able to get out of the 
federal Liberal government sums of money which are going to 
help agriculture, we don't want you to get in trouble by doing 
that. 
 
But we're also very concerned about the direction. I mean this is 
probably one of the first concrete things that you've actually 
done as ag minister since breaking the GRIP contracts. If it's 
used properly . . . there's been very little agricultural legislation 
that put money back into instead of taking money out of it over 
the last three years. 
 
So before we get into that we really want to understand the 
bigger picture. And whether you agreed with the former  



March 27, 1995 

 
1168 

program or not, a lot of people spent a lot of time trying to 
explain that thing to a lot of farmers and not simply bring it into 
this Legislative Assembly and taking it away. 
 
Now we've got a Bill before us that you're targeting a sum of 
money over the next four years to diversifying agricultural 
entities in this province which are in bad need of it because of 
all the changes that are taking place. 
 
So given that and our desire to show the framework, and your 
desire I think to show it to us, and the fact that you have to do 
some consulting to get that done, then I think it's only 
appropriate at this point in time, Mr. Chairman, that I move we 
report progress and wait for the minister to bring on the Bill . . . 
or bring on the MOU. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:34 p.m. until 8:44 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Devine Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen D'Autremont 
Toth Britton McPherson 

— 9 
Nays 

 
Tchorzewski Lingenfelter Shillington 
Atkinson Johnson Lautermilch 
Cunningham Penner Upshall 
Hagel Bradley Teichrob 
Cline Crofford Renaud 
Trew Draper Whitmore 
Sonntag Roy Langford 
Kujawa Stanger Jess 

— 24 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
would just like to say to the minister that it was obvious from 
the recent vote that the Liberals in this particular House have no 
problem with revealing the MOU and the things that the federal 
Liberal government are doing. So I mean . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So, Mr. Minister, now that we have got that 
business dispensed with, perhaps I can give you another 
opportunity to simply tell this Assembly or show this Assembly 
what kind of an agreement that you've cut with the federal 
Minister of Agriculture in regards to safety net measures and 
this particular legislation which you tell us is all rolled together 
in an outline of agriculture. 
 
I mean we're only asking what members of the House of 
Commons are going to be getting, what people in the Liberal 
Party are going to be getting. We simply want to understand this 
MOU that you've designed and I understand you need to consult 
the federal minister so he doesn't feel like you've  

stabbed him in the back or his officials. I understand that. 
 
So why don't you just say to the Assembly: I give you the 
commitment that as soon as possible, I'll bring that MOU to this 
House. We'll discuss it and if this Bill is part of that package, 
we'll get on with this Bill and we can amend it or whatever we 
want to do with it, but get on with implementing it so that you 
can start spending your money. And that seems to me like a 
pretty reasonable proposition so I don't know why you don't just 
agree to do that and it can all happen in a few days time and 
away we go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, I have 
no desire to keep information from the members opposite. 
Certainly there are news bulletins out. There are information 
out on what the safety net is, and I can go through that in great 
detail. 
 
Again there will be a chance in estimates for you to rail on 
about how good '91 GRIP was and what the replacement looks 
like. And certainly those pieces are in budget and we'll have a 
chance to explain them. And I  certainly as I said earlier, if 
the federal government agree  I will give you any information 
that they will let us release. 
 
The point I'm making is that it's not really relevant to the Bill 
here, which is a provincial Bill putting $18 million into the 
fund. Regardless of whether or not this Bill passes now or a 
month from now or whenever, I can't commit to table anything 
that is between the federal government, the federal minister and 
myself, without consulting with him. He is now in South 
America. I don't know how fast I'll be able to get clearance on 
what I can or can't give to you for information. 
 
Certainly there's no information here that's not public 
knowledge, that you haven't seen. But that, Mr. Chairman, is 
where we're at. I don't see that it has relevance to the particular 
Bill that's before the House. But I've made the commitment that 
I will try to check with the federal government and table 
whatever we have that they are agreeable to. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, the only way that we have of 
definitely seeing that MOU is if this Bill is not passed. That's 
the only way that we'll really know and understand the 
agreement that you have made with the federal Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
And I would venture to say that your deputy minister and Mr. 
Goodale's deputy minister are probably on such a good working 
relationship that a call tomorrow morning from your deputy to 
his deputy will probably iron this whole thing right out. I have 
no doubt in my mind at all. And as a matter of fact, their 
working relationship should be better than the one that you have 
with Mr. Goodale. 
 
So once more, would you give the commitment that you'll do 
that and then you'll bring it back to the House here and we can 
have a discussion and then we'll get on with it? 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1169 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly not true that that's 
the only way you'll see those information. When the agreement 
is finalized and we have our legislation done and they have 
whatever process they have done, there will be OCs (order in 
council) that will . . . then that will be . . . the agreement will be 
public knowledge at that time. And it is a fact the essence of the 
agreement, the substance of it, is public now. 
 
We've got an enhanced NISA, we've got a sector program, 
we've got crop insurance, and we've got an ag innovation fund 
— that is all public knowledge at this time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, Mr. Minister, 
that's not the only way which we will see that agreement. We 
are not about, in this legislature, to give you the okay to spend 
18-million-odd dollars only to find out that we bought a pig in a 
poke afterwards. We're not prepared to do that. We want to see 
that memorandum of understanding. 
 
Now if you are saying that it will take until tomorrow or 
sometime in the future for you to get in contact with Mr. 
Goodale to accomplish that objective then we say, don't jam 
that Bill at us tonight. That's what we're objecting. Don't jam 
this Bill at us now because we will not stand for that. 
 
So pull the Bill. Pull the Bill until you've got contact with Mr. 
Goodale. Give us that memorandum of understanding and if we 
agree with it, it'll go lickety-split. But in the meantime you're 
going to be wasting the time of this legislature for the rest of 
this evening, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move that the Chairman now leave the chair. 
 
The Chair: — I want to remind the members that if they want 
to participate in the vote, they must do so from their own seat. 
They cannot do it from any other seat in the Chamber. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:55 p.m. until 9:06 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Devine Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen D'Autremont 
Toth Britton  

— 8 
Nays 

 
Tchorzewski Lingenfelter Shillington 
Atkinson Johnson Lautermilch 
Cunningham Penner Upshall 
Hagel Bradley Teichrob 
Cline Crofford Renaud 
Trew Draper Whitmore 
Sonntag Roy Langford 
Stanger   

— 22 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
given the fact that the House has had a little time to deliberate 
the issue . . . and I make it very clear to you and your colleagues 
that we are not here to not do the business of the House. There's 
people here willing to talk about the NewGrade Energy Act; 
there's people here willing to talk about New Careers and the 
estimates in that particular entity; there are people here prepared 
to do the work of the House and the taxpayer. 
 
But what we're not prepared to do . . . And I've even had it 
suggested to me in the last few minutes that maybe you don't 
even have an agreement. 
 
So I mean, all you have to do, if you're just looking for some 
place to park $18 million, that all you need to do is show us 
what Mr. Goodale's going to have to show a whole bunch of 
people. Show us the memorandum of understanding that you 
have with the federal government that's going to show how this 
particular piece of legislation fits into a picture that is going to 
present to the agricultural community of this province a very 
clear understanding of where your government's going to take 
us. That's all you have to do. 
 
And because we're not able to get that tonight — and I 
understand your problem — that the best thing for us to do is 
allow your deputy minister to phone Mr. Goodale's deputy 
minister, see if it's okay, and if it's not, then for you to talk to 
Mr. Goodale, and then we'll come back and deal with this. 
There's no other way, I don't think, that we can get around it. 
And it makes sense. It just makes absolute sense to do that, Mr. 
Minister. Can you tell us if you're prepared to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again, the 
business before the House is the $18 million in ag innovation 
fund. Our agreement is very clear. We've been very public with 
it, and as I say, pieces of it are going into effect. NISA is going 
into effect. This is going into effect; this is being carried out. 
We have an agreement; we have a plan. 
 
I know the members opposite don't like it and I know who's 
wasting time here. The members opposite are wasting time, and 
as you prepare to play politics and talk about '91 GRIP, as you 
waste time here, that is that much longer before we can get the 
board in place and before we can get on with rural development 
in this province. And you're standing here saying, oh yes, we're 
very supportive of this initiative in principle, but by the way 
we're going to play a little politics and hold this up for a few 
days because, you know, we want to play some politics here. 
 
And that, Mr. Chairman, is where we're at right now. The Bill 
before the House is the ag innovation fund. This is the 
provincial commitment of it, $18 million which we're putting 
into legislation, Mr. Chairman — putting into legislation. That 
puts the money in the fund by an Act of the legislature in full 
public view. And the members opposite are saying — whoa, 
whoa! — there might be something fishy about this. We want to 
play politics. We want to hold it up awhile. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1170 

You will have to explain to the producer groups and the 
processor groups, the food process association and all the 
people . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that I've 
answered the question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
mean your own agreement . . . one whole section of this is the 
federal-provincial agreement. It says, the minister may, may 
contain provisions respecting . . . and you've got a whole raft of 
loosey-goosey stuff there that you may do. 
 
Now, Minister, you tell us that this MOU is part of a larger 
agreement of joint federal-provincial funding, that when you 
destroyed the GRIP program you then entered into a new safety 
net program which you and Mr. Goodale worked out last year. 
And you signed, on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers and 
taxpayers, a broad-ranging agreement of which this is one — 
okay  one part. 
 
And the minister may do a whole bunch of things. Is it because 
you don't have an agreement, Minister, that you don't want to 
share with us? We're not asking . . . I mean we're prepared to go 
to work. There are people here prepared to talk about 
NewGrade so that the Deputy Premier can get on with his life, 
and there's people here prepared to talk about New Careers, so 
the Education minister can get on with her life. 
 
You know we're suspicious maybe you don't even have one 
because you're being so stubborn. All we're asking is that you 
present the MOU to this House, and then we can understand 
where you're taking agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan 
— nothing more. That's all we ask. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I have here . . . this 
is the brochure. This is how public it is. This is the agreement 
published jointly by Sask Ag and Food and Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada. Members don't know what the new safety 
net is; it's right here in this publication. It's been distributed to 
farmers all across this province. 
 
To stand up and say, oh, there might not be an agreement, that 
this might be all phoney . . . Mr. Chairman, we have a safety net 
that's been negotiated, and this is part of it. And I don't know 
how much more public and how much more open and how 
much more accountable you can get than putting it in an actual 
Act. 
 
It's right here in front of the legislature saying we're spending 
$18 million, we're putting it into an Act. And you say well, we 
shouldn't vote for putting it into an Act because it might 
disappear before that. The way to keep it from disappearing is 
put it in the Act, pass the Act, the board will be up and running, 
the funds will be there, and I don't know what more you can ask 
for. 
 

(2115) 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, let's do this in a calm, rational way here. You're asking 
us to give you $18 million of taxpayers' money, not knowing for 
what it is going to be spent, not knowing for what the 
agreement is. 
 
Because, Mr. Chairman, right in this Act that we're talking 
about now it says that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may 
authorize — may authorize — the minister to enter into an 
agreement. There is no agreement. You are authorized to enter 
into an agreement. You're telling us that you have an MOU 
already done. This Act is the only thing that legitimizes that. So 
we're asking for a little bit of an explanation. 
 
You have on a prior occasion tonight committed to me that you 
were going to find out whether Mr. Goodale would be in 
collaboration with you to authorize you to share that 
memorandum of agreement with us. And as soon as that is done 
we can get on with the process of passing this Act if we think it 
is appropriate. And if we do, we will cooperate and we will 
even agree with you, but not under the conditions that you're 
proposing tonight, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you are putting 
us in an untenable position here. We cannot accept this; but we 
don't want to hold up the business of the House. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Deputy Premier is sitting in his chair there, his 
officials are here, he's in charge of NewGrade . . . Because, Mr. 
Chairman — I want to point this out to the public very well — 
the government thought that they would railroad this thing 
through tonight. And then the next issue on the agenda — the 
House agenda for today — the next issue after this Bill is item 
3, Bill 8 — an Act to repeal the NewGrade Energy. So my 
proposal . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So what? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — The Government House Leader asks, so 
what? My proposal is that since we are in a stalemate  we still 
have some time left to work today  so therefore I'm going to 
suggest that we report progress. Our critic for NewGrade is 
here, your minister is here. This next item of business is on the 
agenda, as agreed to by the House leaders this morning. We've 
got lots of work to do; let's get on with it. So, Mr. Chairman, I 
move that we report progress so we can get on with work. 
 
The division bells rang from 9:18 p.m. until 9:28 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Devine Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen D'Autremont 
Toth Britton  

— 8 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1171 

Nays 
 
Tchorzewski Lingenfelter Shillington 
Atkinson Johnson Lautermilch 
Cunningham Penner Upshall 
Hagel Bradley Teichrob 
Cline Crofford Renaud 
Trew Draper Whitmore 
Sonntag Roy Langford 
Kujawa Stanger Jess 

— 24 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Are we going to 
have officials? Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Let's try and go at this a different way, Minister. You seem to 
have some reluctance to share with the public in the province, 
the process that you and the federal minister have entered into 
to spend their money and the protection that you claim to have 
garnered on their behalf because you gave up previous 
agreements to get this agreement. So if you're not comfortable 
with talking about your responsibility to the taxpayer and to the 
farmers of this province, would you tell me if this MOU, which 
you signed or say you signed with the Minister of Agriculture, 
Mr. Goodale, is the same or similar to ones that he'll be signing 
with, for instance, the two neighbouring provinces, Manitoba 
and Alberta. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I don't know what they'll sign with 
Manitoba and Alberta. I think they will not be similar to what 
they're signing; with Manitoba and Alberta, the difference being 
that we gave notice to get out of GRIP two years ago. We began 
immediately to negotiate some replacement safety net. We got 
that safety net based on $850 million of federal safety net 
money, which they said this is the amount of money that we're 
going to spend in Canada. 
 
We said our share's about $250 million of that, and we 
negotiated a safety net based on that amount of money. And 
since then the federal government in the last budget said we 
don't have $850 million any more; we're going to $600 million. 
And so Manitoba and Alberta are going to be negotiating in that 
new atmosphere. Alberta's given notice to get out of GRIP. 
They are encouraging their farmers to get out immediately, so I 
don't know whether they will be two years before they're wound 
out of GRIP. I suspect that it may well be. 
 
Manitoba has yet to give their notice to be out of GRIP, and so I 
think the safety nets between the provinces will vary for some 
time, and I think we will have by far the superior safety net in 
the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Minister. You've got $250 million you 
tell us, and of that 60-some million is tied up in this agreement. 
Is that correct? This agreement has got 60 million and the other 
. . . that would leave 190 as directed at other things? Is that 
correct? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The member asks what we got in 
the federal safety net dollars. If you go to . . . ongoing funding 
is $92 million for full farm program, the enhanced NISA; $53 
million into the crop sector program; $25 million in cash 
advance, and $25 million into development funding, plus 
another 60 million or so in crop insurance. So that's the 
committed annual funding of the federal government in the 
safety net. In addition to that, their GRIP surplus money went 
into top-ups of the NISA account and into the sector program. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, we're going to have to get you to 
repeat those numbers. And I understand why you wanted to say 
some of those things real fast, so that somebody wouldn't 
question you on them. But would you please give us those 
numbers and what they're for again, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Okay . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — One more time around the block. 
Ongoing funding in the safety net, which is what we were 
talking about, not the GRIP surplus. We didn't view that as 
being something that they should put into ongoing funding. Our 
share of $850 million is what we thought we needed in addition 
to the GRIP surplus. So what we're saying is they're putting $92 
million into NISA, $53 million into the crop sector program, 
$25 million into cash advances, $25 million into development, 
and crop insurance in addition to that which I think is about $60 
million. So it gives you around the 255, $260 million. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I'd 
like you to put that in a proper form and table it, if you could, 
with the Assembly so that we could have those numbers please. 
 
I'm amazed that you would allow Mr. Goodale to say that $25 
million in cash advance is part of something that you 
negotiated. I mean that's absolutely bizarre. That cash advance 
has been around for ever and a day. And you think it's 
something new, that you've cut a good deal, the fact that we're 
getting 25 million in cash advance. NISA came in at the same 
time as GRIP and I certainly don't notice any windfalls on 
NISA. 
 
I'd like you to explain $53 million on crop sector, whatever that 
means. And crop insurance, Mr. Minister, has been around for 
25 years-plus. 
 
There's nothing new here, Mr. Minister, except this $60 million 
that you're asking for in this Bill here. And that's why the rest of 
that is just smoke and mirrors, Minister. The meat and potatoes 
of what you've gotten is directly tied to this Bill where the 60 
million bucks is going over the next four years. And that's why 
we want to know about the MOU that you and Mr. Goodale 
have signed on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers and taxpayers. 
That's not unreasonable, Minister. The rest of this is all old hat. 
The part that we don't know about is this 60 million bucks here. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1172 

So I say to you once again, given that the rest of this stuff has 
always been here, whether you sat in that chair or somebody 
else, the part you bring to the party is the $60 million. Once 
again, will you give us a commitment that you'll contact your 
federal officials and share that with us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, the member says 
that this stuff is old hat. He may well remember that the federal 
Conservative government did away with the interest-free cash 
advance. The current federal government reinstated it, and they 
made it very clear when they did that this was going to be part 
of the overall funding for the safety net. 
 
Yes, there isn't enough money in the safety nets; $850 million is 
a dramatic reduction in federal safety nets. What we said is that 
$250 million of that should be Saskatchewan's share. And I 
think to say that we wanted all $850 million would be 
somewhat unrealistic. That's the basis that we negotiated, and 
that's what we got. And that has all been public knowledge. 
 
As I said, the NISA is already in effect. The sector program is 
coming into effect, and cash advances are in effect. Crop 
insurance is in effect, and now we're doing our share of putting 
in effect the ag innovation fund which is what we're here 
debating tonight. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So you're saying, Mr. Minister, that we're 
now down to $600 million Canada-wide, and you've got 250 of 
it in some kind of new or ongoing programing? Mr. Minister, 
the only thing I can see here that is new is the issue before the 
House. It's the only thing that I can see that's new. The rest of 
it's been around in one form or another for a long time. The 
only new part that you bring to the party is this particular 
legislation and the federal money tied to it. 
 
And I can't understand why you would say that because you got 
this deal, that farmers in other parts of Canada have gone 
without. Because that simply isn't true and you know it's not 
true. They maybe are going to get less of this pie now, but 
they've gotten a whole lot of the pie before they ever got to this 
point. And that goes for Quebec and Ontario and Manitoba and 
Alberta. The whole caboodle of them have done very well. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, once again, given that the only new 
initiative that you've negotiated as part of this is this particular 
legislation which says that you may do a whole bunch of things, 
would you just simply give us the courtesy that I'm sure Mr. 
Goodale, at some point, will have to give to the House of 
Commons and let us see the MOU that you have signed that 
spells out the agreement with this money? And I don't know 
why you're so reluctant unless you don't have an agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well again, Mr. Chairman, the 
member says that this is all old hat and not new. No other 
province in this country has a NISA contribution where farmers 
can get 4 per cent of their gross eligible sales . . . or net eligible 
sales matched by the governments. No other . . . most other 
provinces don't have livestock covered by NISA. Manitoba 
doesn't; I think that Manitoba recently announced that they're  

bringing NISA in . . . or bringing livestock into NISA. Alberta 
doesn't have it. 
 
No other province has the crop sector program which we have 
negotiated, which is a program that's based on the sector or the 
revenue of the sector for the province. It's a program where 
farmers pay no premiums. The premiums are paid by federal 
and provincial governments. That is not available in any other 
province in this country. So obviously, we have . . . no other 
province is going to have, to my knowledge, have anything like 
this ag innovation fund which I think is going to give us a 
tremendous jump. If this fund works as well as we think it is, it 
will give us a tremendous jump in agriculture in creating new 
markets for farmers' products, creating new products for 
farmers to grow, and creating jobs and so on in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So that is . . . it is one piece of a safety net that we've negotiated 
which I think is, given the circumstances, given the huge cuts 
that the federal government has made in their ag budget, I think 
that we definitely are in a position to . . . in a better position 
than most, if not all, other provinces. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, will any farmers in 
Saskatchewan next year, 1996, have to pay back to your 
government any monies at all associated with the safety net 
program, either present or in the past? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we're 
wandering quite aways astray of The Agri-Food Innovation Act 
here. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have gone through . . . I'm assuming that he's 
referring to the winding-down of the GRIP program and we've 
gone through that. It's being wound down as was tripartites for 
beef, cattle, and hogs and so on. 
 
Had we run the program to the end, our estimate is there would 
have been a $760 million surplus in the fund; $253 million of 
that we could have cut as cheques to farmers. But because we 
could forecast that with some reasonable degree of certainty, 
what we did is not collected the '93 overpayments and not 
collected the '94 premiums. When the program now winds 
down there will be, in our estimation at this point, and I think a 
fairly accurate estimation, $26 million left in the fund that will 
be paid out to producers. 
 
So that's the situation where we're in with the old GRIP 
program and I think we've gone through this in question periods 
and other things. I don't know what the relevance of that is to 
the ag innovation fund but we can . . . if the members are 
reluctant to talk about this Act, we can talk about whatever they 
want to. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that's why I asked the 
question. And the minister refused to answer, you noticed. He 
refused to answer the question because part of the package that  



March 27, 1995 

 
1173 

he negotiated, which he says is good for rural Saskatchewan 
and good for producers, and the sums of money that he's 
identified here, will not do one thing for the producers in this 
province which his government, if re-elected, is going to 
demand that they pay back to the treasury of this province $115 
million. Because that's what's at stake here, Mr. Minister. That's 
what's at stake. 
 
You've gone out and negotiated through an MOU a program, of 
which this is part, that's still going to leave a whole bunch of 
producers, thousands of them in this province, on alert for $115 
million. That's some safety net program. Because that's what the 
overpayments were. Yes, it's your safety net not the farmers. 
And you're coming forward. You're coming forward with this 
program, this Bill, as part of a new structure, a new structure 
which isn't going to rectify that problem at all — not one bit. 
 
And that's why we're asking you. We want to understand the 
components here. We want to know what you and Mr. Goodale 
cut because there's people out there that got a whole lot of 
problems yet and because in an election year you put off them 
paying any interest or paying back any principal. The fact is that 
it's going to come home to roost in 1996. And when agricultural 
producers in this province looked and said my goodness; there's 
$600 million-plus in the GRIP surplus  and the minister has 
given back, he says tonight, 26 million  they are asking, well 
what else is there. What else is there? 
 
You gave us a list tonight of a bunch of things that have been 
around for a long, long time; there's nothing new there. There's 
no excitement there. There is one component in this Bill which 
is different, and all we're asking you is some easy questions 
about what it's going to do, what kind of people it's going to 
involve, how are you going to pay the board, how are you going 
to choose the board. Are producers going to have the majority 
on the board — really simple stuff. And we want to know the 
context that you and the federal minister signed to make this 
part of the safety net. 
 
And you tell us that we're off track, that we shouldn't be talking 
about GRIP. We shouldn't be talking about your safety nets. We 
shouldn't be talking about the overpayment. I mean for 
goodness's sakes Minister; next year, tell me I'm wrong, that 
producers in this province aren't going to get a bill for $115 
million. 
 
I asked you: are people going to have to pay on either the 
current safety net or previous safety nets, money back to your 
government? That was a real simple question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I think the member opposite is 
either tired at this time of night or is being deliberately obtuse 
and not listening to the answer. I'm a little confused. The 
member from Maple Creek stands up and says that this is a 
waste of money and it's not going to benefit any farmers in this 
province when I say that they should be supporting this Bill. 
And the member from Rosthern stands up and says, oh no, 
we're in principle; we're supporting it; we think this is the way 
to go. 

Now the member from Thunder Creek stands up and says, well 
this isn't going to benefit farmers at all. This is no good. You 
should have paid them back the cash, not only their share of the 
cash but the government's share of the cash and not used it for 
wasteful things like this. Where do you stand on this? Do you 
want us to do diversification and value added in this province 
or do you not want us to do diversification and value added in 
this province? 
 
And certainly as I pointed out, we could have collected the 
$112 million and the $115 million from the farmers and then 
paid them back $253 million. That makes no sense to us. We 
did not collect those and that leaves $26 million in the balance. 
We're not going to have $760 million in the GRIP surplus 
because we never collected the farmers' '93 overpayment nor 
the '94 premiums which was all part of what makes the pot. 
 
And instead of collecting it and then paying it back, we just 
deferred paying it back to settle up when it's done. And our 
estimate is that there will be $26 million in the fund going out 
to farmers when it's wound down. And again the members can 
continue to go back and talk about '91 GRIP and they can 
continue to espouse a lot of different policy issues. The 
question here tonight is the ag innovation fund and are you in 
support of it or are you not? 
 
If you have questions to ask, go ahead, ask the questions. I'll 
explain them. If you're for it, vote for it. If you're against it, vote 
against it. That's the way the system works. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I'm going to make this real simple, Minister, 
real simple. Is there and are there producers in the province of 
Saskatchewan who will have to pay back to your government in 
1996, funds associated with either current or past farm support 
programs? Is that a yes or a no, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I don't know what exact safety net 
he's referring to. If somebody got overpaid from Crop Insurance 
obviously they will get a bill in whatever area you're talking 
about. I've gone through the GRIP surplus six times, if that's the 
nature of the member's question. Farmers are getting $253 
million back out of GRIP. Most of it will be in deferred 
payments that we never collected from them — $26 million will 
be left in the fund at the end, which will be distributed to 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — No. Minister, just a straight question. Are 
there producers and farmers in the province of Saskatchewan 
that will have to pay in 1996 cash money to your government, if 
re-elected, because of an overpayment in the GRIP fund? Plain 
and simple. 
 
The Chair: — For the benefit of the Chair, I wonder if both the 
member for Thunder Creek and the minister might relate their 
questions and answers to the Bill before us. There are some 
aspects of agriculture that escape me but I must say that the 
current dialogue is escaping me. So I would ask both the 
member and the minister to relate this to the Bill at hand. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1174 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It's impossible to relate those 
questions to the Bill. Certainly, again, the members will have all 
kinds of opportunity to go back and espouse how they would 
like to go back to '91 GRIP when we get into estimates and 
maybe that's the place for it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I thought I did in the 
previous question relate it, because this Bill deals with a part of 
the minister's safety net program which he has negotiated with 
the Minister of Agriculture for the country of Canada, and we 
are trying to determine what component . . . and where this 
piece fits. 
 
This Bill here deals with a sum of money. At the minister's 
discretion . . . which the minister by his own admission says is 
part and parcel of a bigger package, which he just went down 
through a list of components of which this is a component. 
That's why I'm asking the minister the question. 
 
He says it is integral to the program that he negotiated with the 
federal government — a,b,c,d,e — signed by the minister. And 
we want the minister to divulge that MOU to the taxpayer and 
the farmer of this province. That is not a difficult request nor a 
difficult question to answer, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And it relates directly to Bill 23, An Act to establish The 
Agri-Food Innovation Fund, which is a major plank and 
component of the minister's agricultural delivery program for 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So rather than the minister waste the time of the House and not 
answer the questions, Mr. Chairman, I move that the chairman 
now do leave the Chair. 
 
The division bells rang from 9:55 p.m. until 10:05 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Devine Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen D'Autremont 
Toth Britton  
 

— 8 
Nays 

 
Shillington Atkinson Johnson 
Lautermilch Cunningham Penner 
Upshall Hagel Bradley 
Teichrob Cline Crofford 
Renaud Trew Draper 
Whitmore Sonntag Roy 
Stanger   

— 19 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, I have 
listened with great interest to the debate as we have discussed 
Bill 23 through the course of the evening. And having started  

this a little while ago with you and having made some points 
with you on what we are agreeing and disagreeing with, I was 
very disappointed when you took the literary licence to quote 
back to this Assembly what you interpreted that I had said 
which of course I didn't say. But we have, of course, the 
unusual circumstance in committee of being able to stand up 
once again and straighten you out. 
 
I have never said that I'm against research, and I've never been 
against marketing examinations and determinations and studies 
on how to go about that. Nor have I ever been against anything 
outside of agriculture doing those very same things. But most 
certainly we wouldn't be against it within the agricultural 
structure as an industry. 
 
However, what we are against, Minister, is the way that you and 
your government have taken money away from the farm 
community and now are trying to apply that very same money 
out of the farmers' pockets through another back-door vehicle, 
using their money to buy you a new program that you are trying 
to tell people is new, innovative, and good for them  just 
before an election. 
 
And we've caught you, quite frankly, in what you've been doing. 
You're taking from Peter to pay Paul, stealing from one pocket 
to put in the other. The old sayings, they all apply. You've taken 
the farmers' money. And then you went and you claim you cut a 
deal with the federal government. But we can't find the deal, 
because you don't have it on paper. Then you say what . . . you 
have a memorandum. But you won't give us a memorandum. 
 
Well, Minister, quite frankly, I've got ocean property over by 
Waldeck that I'm quite willing to sell cheap to anybody. If 
they'll believe you, they'll believe that, and I can make a fortune. 
 
The fact of the matter is, sir, that you don't have a memorandum 
or you'd give it to us. That's why you've been stalling all night 
and that's what this is really all about. You figure after a while 
the clock will run out, and you'll be off the hook, and everybody 
will forget it because we're all watching the Academy Awards 
tonight. Well we're not. We're watching you. That's our job. 
And we're going to keep on watching you, and no matter what 
kind of an act you put on tonight you will not win an Oscar. I 
almost said a Juno. But anyway — you won't win one of those 
either. 
 
My friend, you might as well come clean. Give us the 
memorandum that you've got or call this charade off and get on 
with the other business of the evening. Don't stand in your place 
and tell folks that we're against research and marketing when 
what we're against is the Bill that you're trying to slip in that 
was designed for no other purpose except to take money out of 
the farmers' pockets to put into a new fund with a different face 
on it so that you could try to claim that you're doing something 
innovative and something creative. 
 
We're not against research. We're against you finagling money  



March 27, 1995 

 
1175 

out of the farmers' pockets, that they should've had already in 
their pockets, in order to pay for it. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know that some 
of the members opposite are a little upset when we catch them 
doing these kind of things, so they do have to heckle, and that's 
their job. And we have nothing against them heckling because 
I've turned my hearing-aid off a long time ago. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, as a farmer, you must surely have some 
loyalty to your neighbours. Don't you feel just a little bit bad 
about the fact that you had to take their money away from them 
in order to try to create this new corporation, this new 
corporation, designed to do nothing that you couldn't have done 
through ADF, just designed to try to put your name and your 
government's stamp on a new program — a new program, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, that is absolutely doing nothing that couldn't 
be done through the Department of Agriculture and the many 
facets that are there already. 
 
You say this won't cost any money. Nobody, nobody, will ever 
believe that. You can't set up a new corporation without costing 
the taxpayers more money. I don't care what a genius you think 
you are, it can't be done. You will have to spend money, and it 
will have to come out of somebody, and it won't come out of 
your pocket, I guarantee that to the people of this province. It'll 
come out of their pockets. Because the taxpayer pays the bills, 
and you, sir, are setting up a new corporate Crown, some kind 
of an entity. And you try to tell us that you've struck a deal with 
the federal government, and all you're really doing is finding a 
home for some of your political friends. 
 
But the misrepresentation of saying that we're against research, 
that's the part that gets me really feeling bad because I didn't 
think you'd do that even to your political adversaries. After all, 
sir, we are all farmers and we all know that research is what 
keeps the bugs out of our crops. We know that we have to have 
chemicals to apply to kill the weeds. We all know that we have 
to have programs for the livestock producers to find out how to 
market things and where to market them. We all know that 
those are good and wonderful and necessary things. But I'm 
saying to you, that my neighbours don't believe you should have 
taken their money out of their pockets — cash money that was 
owed to them through these other programs — to pay for this. 
 
Society at large, the taxpayers at large, should be contributing to 
these kinds of research programs. You should not be setting up 
a new entity, taking farmers' money away from them to apply it 
to here. You are taking money and slipping it through a back 
doorway of trying to get the farmers to pay for their own 
programs that society in general should have been paid for all 
along. 
 
So don't say that we're against progress or diversification. All of 
our farms have had to diversify. Probably the biggest 
diversification we've seen is that every farm wife in our  

community has gone out and got a job. That wasn't an easy 
decision for those people to make but they did it because it was 
necessary to survive. And they did it in spite of governments of 
every kind. They survived and stayed out there. 
 
(2215) 
 
But you didn't make it any easier when you started taking away 
their money. And now they find out that you went to the federal 
government and made a bad deal. You made a bad deal because 
you're putting $25 million into a cash-advance program that was 
always paid for by the federal government. All of a sudden you 
people, the great geniuses of Saskatchewan, decide we should 
pay for it ourselves. Well what a brilliant deduction. 
 
The federal government gets off the hook for $25 million. And 
you've got the audacity to stand here and try to tell us that 
Alberta would be doing the same thing. And that does, Mr. 
Chairman, relate directly to the Bill because what we're saying 
is that the money that is covered in this Bill — the $60 million 
out of the feds — is not being given fairly and equally to the 
other provinces and to us. We're taking the short end. 
 
And this Bill, and the so-called deal that promotes it, means that 
we are going to be with less money again in Saskatchewan than 
Alberta and Manitoba will get. You got took at the table of 
bargaining because you're not a good bargainer. Stand up and 
admit that, sir. But first of all, I'd like you to have an 
opportunity to correct the wrongdoing that you did to those of 
us personally over here when you said that we were against 
research and marketing development, and I'll give you that 
opportunity right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure 
. . . the member opposite becomes more and more confused as 
he goes. I think I can see his dilemma. They're in favour of 
research and development. They think this Bill is a good thing 
but they don't want to vote for a government Bill, and so the 
tactic is to delay and delay and to . . . One stands up and says 
they're opposed to it and then they're for it and then they're 
opposed to it. That's what this is all about. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this is about helping farmers. This is about a 
new direction and either you're in favour of diversification and 
value added and you're prepared to put some money into it or 
you're not, and if the members are not then they should vote 
against it. 
 
It also puts a dilemma on what their program would be, as they 
say well, we should go back to '91 GRIP. We should do this too 
and we should also have a balanced budget legislation, which 
starts to not add up. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have a plan in agriculture. We have taken the 
bull by the horns. We are working with the farmers to adjust it. 
Let's go through, step through the plan. That's a good idea. We 
had a leaseback program which kept thousands of farmers on 
the land, a new and innovative program. We're bringing . . . 
biotech companies are coming to Saskatoon at a very rapid rate.  



March 27, 1995 

 
1176 

We've got a greenhouse in Biggar. We've got a value added 
plant. We've got a flax plant coming up in my riding. We've got 
a new canola plant — Cargill coming to Saskatoon. We are 
being very successful — another canola plant is coming to 
Watson, if you read the paper today. 
 
This is establishing markets and opportunities for rural people 
and for farmers, and the markets are there. Canamino, with an 
oat product that's going to be made for cosmetics which is 
another market for farmers. We are having a lot of success, and 
no doubt there's been a lot of pain and adjustment in farmers. 
 
But we can go back to the old style of your government of 
pouring money into people to continue to grow wheat and to 
ignore the world around them. We've taken to helping farmers 
adapt and this is one more fund. And I know, where you can 
stand up and say one minute that you're for it and the next 
minute it's a waste of money and that it won't benefit farmers, 
you can't keep doing that. You have to vote yes or no. 
 
And so I think, you know, you can stick around here for six 
weeks debating this, but sooner or later it's going to come to a 
vote, and you're going to have to vote yes you're in favour of 
this, or no you're not. And that's, unfortunately or fortunately, 
that's what voters in this province expect. You have to take a 
position. 
 
And the Bill is before the House. If you have questions, ask 
questions. And if you don't have questions, then stand up and 
bring it to a vote and, you know, don't keep standing up telling 
me yes, we're in favour of this; no we're not in favour of it. The 
answer that voters will look at is how you vote when the Bill 
comes to question, and you can't avoid that. Sooner or later one 
of these days this Bill is going to come to a vote, and you're 
going to have to vote for it or against it. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, I urge the members opposite to consider 
the Bill, consider the opportunity that there is in Saskatchewan, 
consider how this will help us to adjust. Adjustment is going to 
be even more painful given the federal budget and the reduction 
in their spending, the elimination of the Crow benefit. But all 
the more it becomes important that we take the direction of 
diversification and value added. 
 
Members opposite espoused that when they were in 
government, but they brought in a GRIP program that paid you 
a guaranteed return to . . . gross return to grow wheat. That 
didn't work. Farmers went broke by the hundreds. 
Diversification didn't happen. Value added didn't happen. 
We've taken a different plan, and we're doing it, and we haven't 
been able to take out all the pain of adjustment that's happening 
out there, but at least we've shown producers in this province 
and the processing industry in this province that there is a way 
and that we're prepared to help them. And $91 million in an ag 
innovation fund is a very helpful step. 
 
Now the member opposite says well, it's a waste of money; it's 
not going to help any farmers. I would dispute that. But if that's 
what he feels, then I think he should vote against the Bill, and  

let's get on with it. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's obvious, it's 
obvious to this committee that the minister does not want to 
deal with the question in hand. We want to know what the 
memorandum of understanding is and the MOU that you signed 
with Ralph Goodale; we want to know what that memorandum 
is. And because there is no progress, Mr. Chairman, I move we 
report progress. 
 
The division bells rang from 10:22 p.m. until 10:32 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Devine Swenson Neudorf 
Martens Goohsen D'Autremont 
Toth Britton  

— 8 
Nays 

 
Shillington Johnson Lautermilch 
Cunningham Penner Upshall 
Hagel Bradley Teichrob 
Cline Crofford Renaud 
Trew Whitmore Sonntag 
Roy Stanger  

— 17 
 
The Chair: — Order. In accordance with rule 3(4), the 
committee shall rise and the Chair of the committee shall report 
the committee's progress to the Assembly. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:35 p.m. 
 
 


