













































March 8, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 8, 1995 

 

 

721 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 
Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 

petition today from people of the Assiniboia-Scout Lake area. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 

legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead urge 

the federal government to deal with the criminal use of 

firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 

present a petition on behalf of the people from the town and area of 

Gull Lake. I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than allocating 

these funds towards capital construction projections in the 

province. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions to present today from the Carievale-Carnduff area of my 

constituency. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose changes 

to present legislation regarding firearm ownership, and 

instead urge the federal government to deal with the 

criminal use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on 

abusers, and urge the federal government to recognize that 

gun control and crime control are not synonymous. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. I lay 

these on the Table now. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition, some 26 pages, full pages, Mr. Speaker. The prayer is as 

follows: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to retain the Val Marie highway 

depot. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, these are residents — in fact it is every voting 

resident  of Val Marie and surrounding RMs (rural 

municipality) that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, in 

opposing the closure of the highway depot. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-

laning of Highway No. 1. 

 

 And of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

pull the agreement with the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations until such time as the exhibition 

associations of Saskatchewan and the Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan can be involved in the decision making and 

the direction of gambling in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on Friday move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 

showing: 

 

 With respect to Sears Call Centre: (1) table a copy of the 

deal struck between the province of Saskatchewan and 

Sears; details on all the discounts offered by SaskTel to 

Sears; details on total revenue forgone by SaskTel for each 

incentive offered to Sears; details on all tax discounts, 

rebates, or other incentives offered by the Department of 

Finance to Sears; details on total revenue forgone for each 

tax discount, rebate, or other incentive offered by 

Department of Finance to Sears; and details on provincial 

training package, including total cost and where the funds 

were delegated for this initiative. 

 

And I also give notice that I shall on Friday move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 

 

 With respect to the CIBC Call Centre; table a copy of the 

deal struck between the Province of Saskatchewan and 

CIBC; details on all discounts offered by SaskTel to CIBC; 

details on all discounts, taxes, rebates, or other incentives 

offered by the Department of Finance to CIBC; and details 

on provincial training package, including total cost, where 

the funds will be delegated from for this initiative. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd 

like to introduce to you, and through you to the rest of the 

Assembly today, a group of businessmen and elected officials from 

the constituency of Athabasca, sitting in the west gallery. 

 

Included in that group are Leonard Larson, a businessman from 

Buffalo Narrows; Joe Daigneault who is the mayor of Beauval; 

Michael Durocher, executive director of the north-west mayors' 



March 8, 1995 

 

722 

association; Louis Morin from Jans Bay, who is the mayor of Jans 

Bay; Edward Gardiner is from Cole Bay; Jim Daigneault is Green 

Lake councillor; George Raymond, Ile-a-la-Crosse businessman; 

Ron Bouvier is the mayor of Cole Bay; and Ernest Gardiner is the 

deputy mayor of Jans Bay. 

 

The group is in, Mr. Speaker, today meeting with government 

officials and members of cabinet, and I would just like all members 

here today to welcome all the members from the constituency of 

Athabasca. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join 

with the minister, the Associate Minister of Economic 

Development, in welcoming the visitors from the North, and 

apologize that I haven't had a chance to meet with you yet. I just 

returned from events related to International Women's Day, and I'm 

sure you can appreciate those commitments on this day also. But I 

hope to talk with you later. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 

want to introduce a guest in the west gallery. In fact this guest has 

been my room-mate for the last couple of nights, and that's my 

father, Roy Atkinson, who is a farmer from Landis, Saskatchewan. 

I think this is the first occasion I've had to officially welcome my 

dad to the legislature, and I know that he has been around the 

legislature the last couple of weeks, paying close attention to what 

we're all doing. And I want to welcome him to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm very, 

very pleased today to introduce to you and through you to my 

colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, someone seated in your 

west gallery — a very, very dear friend and someone who is very 

important to organizing my life  my constituency assistant, 

Donna From. Would you please welcome her here today. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with pleasure that I 

want to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, someone who is sitting in your gallery who is from my 

constituency. I'd like you to welcome Edward Strueby, an elevator 

agent from Ogema, that is visiting today for the first time to see the 

proceedings in the legislature. 

 

I'd like all people here to give him a warm welcome on his visit 

here today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure today to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 

Assembly, three people seated in the west gallery. One of them is 

from Regina Albert North, Shayne Cristo, and with Shayne are his 

parents from Limerick. And I want to welcome Mr. and Mrs. Cristo 

and their son Shayne to the Legislative Assembly today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome today, in your west gallery, the Cristo's. Mr. Cristo is a 

director of Federated Co-op and I wish to extend, I think . . . on a 

very successful year of Federated Co-op and their annual meeting 

that they concluded last week. 

 

Also too, to my constituent, Mr. Roy Atkinson, I would also like to 

extend a welcome to him today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the member 

from Athabasca and also the minister in charge of Indian and Metis 

Affairs to say a few words of welcome in our language from 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Please welcome them, Mr. Speaker, again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add 

my words of welcome to Ed Strueby. He was elevator agent in 

Lintlaw and used to buy my grain. He bought some of the finest 

frozen wheat in the province. So, welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

International Women's Day 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is International 

Women's Day, formally proclaimed by the United Nations in 1975. 

A day set aside for women around the world, and men, to 

commemorate our struggle and celebrate our achievements. A day 

also, Mr. Speaker, to consider what remains to be done. As we 

approach the end of this century, and this millennium, I think we 

should remind ourselves that nearly all of the advances women 

have made in the workplace, and in the law, have been made in the 

20th century. Progress in one out of twenty is not a great average. 

 

I mention this to remind us that the status of women in society, 

though greatly improved, is recent and fragile. As a reading of 

Margaret Atwood's novel The Handmaid's Tale tells us, what has 

been gained can be taken away if we become too comfortable; if we 

let those voices which say women now want too much drown out 

the obvious fact that our wishes are, in fact, quite modest. 

 

This day then is a call for attention. In Saskatchewan though, Mr. 

Speaker, we have much to be proud of. With the encouragement of 

all Saskatchewan people for instance, we have passed progressive 

legislation which improves the rights of part-time workers, too 

many of whom are women. We have brought into law and practice 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, and we have led by 

example by placing several women in positions traditionally 

reserved for men, positions such as cabinet ministers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 65 years ago in Canada, women were legally declared 

persons. I think on this day, we can celebrate quite a remarkable 



March 8, 1995 

 

723 

feat of evolution in those six decades. I predict even more 

extraordinary progress in the years to come. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Women's Agricultural Network 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On International 

Women's Day, I would like to inform the Assembly about a group 

of women, about 50 strong, who have made a significant 

contribution to the lives around them in Saskatchewan. 

 

This group, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan Women's 

Agricultural Network which is celebrating its 10th year of existence 

this year. The goals of SWAN (Saskatchewan Women's 

Agricultural Network) are as follows: to enable women to become 

knowledgeable participants in farming operations; to provide 

women a forum for the exchanging of ideas and information; to 

encourage research on problems common to women in rural 

Saskatchewan; to support and network among individuals and 

groups of women within rural Saskatchewan; to work with other 

groups with similar interests; and to use education and research to 

promote the improvement of the status of rural women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although this group may be overshadowed by larger 

and more elaborate organizations, the work they do contributes to 

and enhances the lives of rural women and their families. 

 

SWAN and its members inform and enlighten the public, 

government agencies, and other farm women about concerns facing 

farm women; issues such as women's equality, child care, training 

needs, health and safety, and community building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues in the legislature, I would 

like to congratulate SWAN on its 10th anniversary and wish it 

continued success in the future. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

YWCA Centenary 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as we contemplate the 

meaning of International Women’s' Day in our own life 

circumstance, I would like us to remember the many millions of 

women who live daily with the threat of violence. 

 

Locally I would like to recognize the many organizations that 

shelter women courageous enough to leave an abusive relationship. 

 

One such organization is known worldwide and is celebrating its 

100th anniversary. The world YWCA has grown considerably over 

the years from 23 countries in 1945 to 91 countries in 1994. It's 

now the oldest and largest women's ecumenical movement in the 

world, representing 25 million women. 

 

At a ceremony in Westminster Abbey to launch the centenary, the 

president of the world YWCA, Razia Sultan Ismail, praised the 

legacy of women who are remembered as pathfinders in so many 

countries for their work at home, in their neighbourhoods, in 

refugee camps, or prison cells. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the women who 

participate in this movement for their hard work and dedication 

around the world. The centenary of the world YWCA provides an 

opportunity to recognize the women who have made a significant 

contribution in the quality of life for women and their families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Laparoscopic Surgery 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, on International Women's Day I want 

to comment on how health reforms are helping the strength, 

courage and dedication of women. 

 

As an example, I want to mention the experience of one woman in 

particular, namely the Minister of Municipal Government. Last 

week, my colleague from Melfort underwent laparoscopic surgery 

for removal of her gall-bladder. The next afternoon she was back at 

work, and just 36 hours later she returned to the House and 

delivered five second reading speeches. 

 

This is truly a testimony to her resolve and dedication. More 

importantly, it is a testimony to the modern advances in medical 

technology that are allowing us to reform health care delivery 

under the wellness model. 

 

The surgery procedure of laparoscopic removal of gall-bladders 

was pioneered at City Hospital in Saskatoon. Laparoscopic surgery 

involves four to five small incisions and the use of a microcamera 

for organ removal or internal repair. This is a tremendous 

improvement over the former method which meant long and 

painful incisions and long and lonely hospital stays for patients. 

With this type of surgery the patient is released from hospital on 

the same or next day and back at work within the week, or quicker, 

as demonstrated by the hon. minister. 

 

Laparoscopic surgery, whether it involves gall-bladder removal, 

ovarian surgery, or tubal ligations, allows women to quickly 

resume their active and busy lives. This innovation, along with 

other programs such as early releases from maternity wards, and 

improved screening for breast cancer, is yet another example of 

how health reforms serve to improve the quality of life for women 

everywhere. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lloydminster Woman on United Nations Committee 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On International 

Women's Day I want to comment on a remarkable woman in 

Lloydminster. I know, Mr. Speaker, that you want me to say, 

another remarkable woman in Cut Knife-Lloydminster, but I'm too 

modest. 

 

This is a case, Mr. Speaker, where an individual is not just making 

a difference in her local community but is involved in changing 

attitudes and conditions worldwide. 

 

Zuhy Sayeed is the president of the Lloydminster Association for 

Community Living. She and her husband have worked for years to 

remove barriers for persons with disabilities. Now her commitment 

and knowledge is being called upon as part of a new United 

Nations panel involved in introducing international standard rules 



March 8, 1995 

 

724 

for opportunities for persons with disabilities. 

 

This panel is to be made up of six representatives of international 

non-government organizations and is charged with the 

responsibility of monitoring the implementation and effectiveness 

of these standardized rules. And Zuhy Sayeed has been asked to 

become one of these six people. 

 

This is a great honour for Zuhy and a deserved one. What she will 

be doing is simply extending her knowledge and experience gained 

on the local level and into the international. She will be promoting 

the same worthwhile goals, just on a broader stage. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, promoting standardized rules for these persons 

is ultimately a human rights act, not simply a matter of access. It 

takes a person with dedication, ability, knowledge, and energy to 

take this responsibility, and the UN (United Nations) I believe has 

chosen the right person. And I am very proud of Zuhy. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

International Women's Day 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

International Women's Day is an opportunity to celebrate the many 

achievements of women, and face with renewed energy the task of 

creating equality between the sexes. Equality for women does not 

mean special rights, it means equal rights. 

 

In our country, women continue to make progress toward that kind 

of equality but that goal is by no means complete. Only when we 

achieve full equality among men and women will we as a nation be 

able to say that we have full social and economic justice in this 

country. 

 

There are hundreds of thousands of women in this country who 

have worked publicly and privately to make this country and this 

province a better place. To all of them we owe a debt of gratitude 

for the changes they have helped bring about, so this very Chamber 

is now made up of 19 per cent of women when only 24 years ago 

there were none. 

 

Today, as we acknowledge International Women's Day, let us 

renew our pledge to one another, to the people of Saskatchewan, 

and to the women of today and the children of tomorrow to 

advance, promote, and protect the rights of all women throughout 

the world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gambling Addictions Treatment 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my questions 

this afternoon are for the Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Minister, on November 7 of last year you announced funding 

for six community agencies to set up gambling addiction programs. 

What you haven't announced is that that funding has now been 

discontinued. It runs out on March 31. And that responsibility is 

being transferred to the health districts who already have more 

responsibilities than they can possibly afford. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you establish these programs only to cancel 

them four months later? And why haven't you had the courage to 

announce these cancellations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the member, I 

think it's been very clear that community-based services, 

including addictions treatment which in this case includes the 

addiction treatment for the gaming addiction, has been moved 

to the districts; that's been a policy intention that's been widely 

known and long time announced. 

 

In the current year, before that transfer of responsibility took 

place, we knew that some of these services needed to be 

available at the community level. We made that community 

grant process therefore available and had these programs 

available. It was clear at the time of the program announcement 

that these were a one-year program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the transfer of funding to the districts will 

continue to enable this kind of treatment to happen on a 

community basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister of Gaming recently said that the churches were the 

driving force behind gambling expansion in this province. This 

is an outrageous statement, Mr. Speaker. In fact churches have 

been the driving force behind trying to straighten out the 

gambling mess in this province created by the NDP (New 

Democratic Party). 

 

I have here a letter from Rev. John Fryters of the Prince Albert 

Family Church. He recently cancelled a meeting with the Health 

department in protest of your decision to cancel the community 

addiction programs. 

 

Mr. Minister, instead of blaming the churches for gambling 

addictions, why don't you work with the churches and people 

like Rev. Fryters to address the problem of gaming addictions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have had my 

first experience as a minister of being taken totally out of 

context. 

 

In Crown Corporations Committee, your hon. representative 

there asked a question which I answered, and I emphasized that 

historically there was a role of some churches — not the United 

Church — some churches and also charities in the early 

provision of gaming activity in the province. And it was your 

government that removed it from being a charitable and church 

activity into the commercialization of the bingo halls with the 

large prize boards and what not. 



March 8, 1995 

 

725 

So if he had gone on, he would have also heard me say that I 

think that charitable and religious purposes are good uses of 

gaming dollars because they belong in public pockets, not 

private pockets. 

 

And I would hope that both the media and the opposition bother 

to go to the next sentence when they're quoting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, what 

you indeed said was this: I would say that religious and 

charitable organizations have been, in part, the driving force 

behind the expansion of the gaming industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what you said, Madam Minister. No matter what you say 

now it's a little hard to get out of that kind of comment. 

 

Madam Minister, Rev. Fryters tells us that when these programs 

end on March 31, there'll be nothing in place to replace those 

programs. He says apparently negotiations need to be started for 

the continuation of these programs with the individual health 

districts. 

 

Madam Minister, given bed closures, reductions in emergency 

care, and the financial crisis facing many health districts, I 

really doubt gaming addiction is going to be a priority item for 

them. 

 

Madam Minister, how can you establish community addiction 

programs only to cut them off a few months later with nothing 

to take their place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as is regularly the case, the 

Leader of the Opposition of course has it totally wrong and then 

brings his confusion to the House and therefore to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this year's budget we have tripled the 

expenditures on prevention and addiction treatment for problem 

gaming. Mr. Speaker, that will provide, across our province, 44 

councillors to provide services. It will continue the operation of 

the 1-800 24-hour mobile crisis access to help. It will provide 

what is unique in Saskatchewan, which is a program of 

prevention among young people; only in Saskatchewan — 

nowhere else. We have a community development program and 

we continue to work with partners, the Canadian Mental Health 

Association. Mr. Speaker, we have the most comprehensive 

program of treatment and prevention in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Rev. 

Fryters disagrees with you. He says that NGOs (non-

governmental organizations) like the Metis Addiction Council 

in North Battleford have just begun to develop a significant 

case-load. They're just starting to make progress with many 

gambling addicts in this problem. And the end of the problem is 

near and it's very, very unfair, and it's dangerous. 

Rev. Fryters says, and I quote: I am seriously concerned about 

this decision. It jeopardizes not only the health, but potentially 

the lives of quite a number of Saskatchewan residents. End 

quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to realize that your helter-

skelter approach to gambling addictions in this province is 

hurting real people all across Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me repeat. We have in 

the province of Saskatchewan the most comprehensive program 

of prevention and treatment of any jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member wants to judge the program on a per 

capita expenditure basis, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we are 

spending more per capita than in any other province in Canada 

by far, by far — about three times as much, Mr. Speaker, as his 

counterparts in the Government of Alberta are spending, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Relations with Large Corporations 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

transformation from rabid socialist to captain of industry has 

certainly been a short trip for the current NDP Premier in this 

province. 

 

In an editorial in today's Star-Phoenix Dan Zakreski wrote, and 

I quote: 

 

 Back in 1991 during the provincial election, premier-in-

waiting . . . (the hon. member from Riversdale) toured 

the boonies pilloring . . . (the member from Estevan) 

and the Tories for their joint venture with Cargill. 

 

 The NDP rhetoric painted a picture of hard-hearted 

Cargill executives rolling across the American border on 

Harley Davidsons wearing chains and black leather. 

 

And that was just a few years ago, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, Cargill is the Premier's best friend, now that he's in 

power. The M-word, megaproject, with multinational 

corporation is now okay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier: Mr. Premier, where has all the 

inflamed rhetoric gone? Which is it? Were you wrong then, or 

are you wrong now, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to say to the 

hon. member from Morse that I was correct then, and I'm 

correct now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 8, 1995 

 

726 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I was correct then because the 

arrangement that your seat-mate, the former premier, made with 

Cargill was a once-in-a-lifetime special arrangement, the 

funding and the nature of which is still on the table, and 

everybody knows the circumstances of it. 

 

The consequence of the announcement that was made outside 

of Saskatoon for Blucher on Monday morning in Saskatoon is 

part of a policy which is designed to promote manufacturing 

and processing — note those words — manufacturing and 

processing right across the piece, not only for the Cargills of the 

world, but for the Wheat Pools and in manufacturing and 

processing in other areas. 

 

We said that once we got out of the financial mess that you left 

us in, we would have sufficient funds to have targeted tax 

reductions designed to embellish and enhance jobs, jobs for 

Saskatchewan people in selected areas and industries. This is a 

uniform tax concession applicable right across the piece, fairly, 

to everybody. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Premier, 

you should talk to your seat-mate there, the Economic 

Development minister, because I don't recollect you changing 

that deal with Saferco at all. In fact your minister there says, 

and I would quote: in the fall of 1992 Economic Development 

minister Dwain Lingenfelter praised Saskferco as an exciting 

project that employs 130 people and contributed 90 million 

annually to the provincial economy. 

 

The same member who incidentally slammed the project a year 

earlier as a sweetheart deal, Mr. Premier, a sweetheart deal, one 

year later, Mr. Premier  as Mr. Zakreski said, “Ain't love 

grand.” 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, you've come a long way since executives of 

Cargill visited this very Assembly. And I remember the childish 

insults the members of your caucus threw at those Cargill 

executives that day in this House. So, Mr. Premier, is economic 

development and job creation a good thing for Saskatchewan no 

matter who does it, or only when you do it, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to that 

question is it's a good thing obviously that we all achieve, but 

not the way you and your administration did it. Definitely not. 

Because the way you and your administration did it was to drive 

us 14 to $15 billion in the hole. You gave money away to all the 

large, multinational corporations, and in the consequence the 

starvation that took place in social and other economic 

programs were obvious for everybody to see. 

 

You get up and you quote that Mr. Zakreski — I'm assuming 

that’s Mr. Dan Zakreski from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix — as 

a source. That is where the PC caucus research is all about — 

the Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post; they're the Liberal/PC 

calling card in the province of Saskatchewan; the CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) which takes one sentence 

out of line and somehow says, this is how the facts of economic 

development are. 

 

They aren't the facts. The facts are that our policy is designed 

on a Partnership for Renewal paper. It identifies our strengths; 

it identifies our weaknesses; it is designed to give tax breaks, 

those limited ones that we have  and we still are in some 

difficulty in getting out of your mess though the sky is now 

brighter and the sun is beginning to shine in Saskatchewan  

selected tax increases along a purposeful job creation strategy 

based on Saskatchewan strengths aiding Saskatchewan people. 

There's a world of difference between your way and the people's 

way, our way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Premier, 

now that you've changed your mind about the M-word, let's go 

on to the P-word — privatization. Mr. Paul Martin has a nice 

quote from the Star-Phoenix here talking about the Potash 

Corporation. 

 

Just a few years after privatization, the Potash Corporation has 

gone from losing $100 million a year to posting profits 

exceeding 125 million. It has paid off its debt, and it's 

strengthened its balance sheet, and was able to finance a 

hundred per cent of Texasgulf. It's abundantly evident that none 

of this, none of this, Mr. Speaker, would have been possible if 

PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) were still in 

government hands, in your hands, Mr. Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Now I would be very curious to hear, Mr. 

Premier, what convoluted and politically charged response you 

have to this success story. Is less government through 

privatization good for the economy of Saskatchewan? Or is it 

not in the cards for the captains of NDP industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I hear from the Premier, there's 

just too many people want to answer the question for the 

Premier. And I wish that people would please not interrupt. 

And when the Premier is answering, there's just too much 

interruption from this side. Please stop the interruptions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those who 

are seeking to help me to answer of course are from the 

opposition. But I would say, Mr. Speaker, that those in the 

opposition who asked this question are like the Bourbons — 

they learn nothing and they remember nothing. What they want 

to do is to fight the election of 1991 all over again. And I want 

to tell you that if they want to meet us in this forthcoming 

election on the same grounds and terms and conditions, we 

welcome that 100 per cent of the way. 

 

Because when the member talks about the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan, and again refers to that Liberal and PC calling 



March 8, 1995 

 

727 

card named the Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post as the 

evidence for this, what he refuses to mention is that in the 

privatization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan you 

gave away in taxpayers' money something in the order of over 

$400 million in the privatization — 400, in fact I think it goes 

between 400 and $600 million — that's what you gave the 

private shareholders of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, from which now they build. 

 

Of course we welcome that they build. There's nothing we can 

do about the fact that you gave away 400 to $600 million of 

taxpayers' bucks which we could have used for hospitals and for 

roads and for small businesses. 

 

That was the election of 1991; whether or not the ordinary 

taxpayers and farmers would support your big-business friends 

and your privatization mania, your attempt to sell off 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy — your privatization mania — and 

Cargill on those special deals. I'll be more than pleased to meet 

you and your colleagues on the election trail on that 

methodology of economic development, and the Star-Phoenix 

and the Leader-Post, any day, any day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health District Deficits 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The deficit 

problem for the province's health boards continues to grow, Mr. 

Speaker. First we heard about the Regina District projected 

deficits. Then yesterday we tabled two more health district 

financial statements in the legislature, showing two more 

deficits. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I table a further four financial statements 

from the Twin Rivers, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Prairie 

West health districts — all showing overall deficits for the last 

fiscal year. This is a very disturbing trend, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Health. Since the minister 

must now have most of the financial statements of the district 

boards for last year in his possession, will he commit to tabling 

them so that the people of Saskatchewan can see the full extent 

of the problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member, whether she 

doesn't understand or doesn't want to bring this information to 

the attention of the House, she brings to the House now figures 

based on '93-94. That's the figures she's bringing to the House 

today. And I know this because I've had phone calls to my 

office telling me that she or some member of her staff have 

been phoning around the province this morning. 

 

Now they bring in data for '93-94. I would remind the member 

that the district health boards, for the most part, only were 

formed for a very short portion of that fiscal year. And deficits 

may have been run up by institutions in that year, and they will 

show in that fiscal year. 

I want to report to the member today that the fiscal year for '94-

95 will end at the end of this month. Three months from that 

date, all of the district health boards are required by legislation 

to provide audited statements of their financial affairs to the 

department, to myself. When those audited statements are 

available, Mr. Speaker, I will make them available to the 

member and to all members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Health minister 

told us that he didn't know how many districts had deficits this 

year or last year, or what the total health care deficits are. The 

ones we now know about, Mr. Speaker, amount to more than 

$22 million, and apparently over 15 million in operating deficits 

alone. And it is the opposition who has had to uncover this 

information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Despite the minister's assurances yesterday that this information 

is public, and I quote: 

 

 . . . with each of our district boards we work very . . . 

closely. And we'll work with the Regina board in terms 

of their budget and their plans, as we do with every 

board in the province. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Health again: since you have 

been working so closely with these boards, how do you explain 

not just one, not just the three we tabled yesterday, but at least 

seven deficits for last year alone, totalling $22 million and 

probably much more? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it becomes more clear on a 

daily basis what happened a year or two ago when that caucus 

and that party voted against the formation of the district boards, 

voted against the health legislation; now they make it clear they 

are opposed to the concept of local control and local decision 

making over health care. What they are saying now, that we 

don't trust the local communities to make the best decisions. 

 

I repeat — I repeat, Mr. Speaker  that when the fiscal year 

ends, by law, the districts are required to provide to the 

department, to the minister, and through the minister to the 

legislature, their audited financial statements. At that time, Mr. 

Speaker, we can have a reasonable debate based on the real 

audited numbers and not some imaginings that may come from 

the parties opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, I tabled financial statements 

today that indicate these deficits. This government went to great 

lengths to tell people that closing 52 hospitals would save $20 

million. 

 

This was a key part of the government's health care reform plan. 

Some plan, Mr. Speaker. Only a short year later, it seems that 

the plan has not worked or that the actual plan has been to 

offload the province's deficit onto the health boards. 



March 8, 1995 

 

728 

My concern, Mr. Speaker, is that these deficits will mean more 

lay-offs, more hospital closures, and longer waiting-lists. The 

$22 million in the health deficit that we now know about is 

equivalent to over 800 more licensed practical nurses being laid 

off. 

 

My question to the minister: given that the minister says that he 

has been working closely with the boards, can he tell us what he 

intends to do about these deficits? Do people in Saskatchewan 

once again have to brace themselves for more lay-offs, more 

hospital closures, and further deterioration of patient care? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat to the member, I 

repeat to all members, that yes, the department and myself and 

the government continues to work closely with the district 

health boards, both in the terms of the formation of their 

budgets and approval of those budgets and in the reporting and 

the accountability of the district health boards. 

 

Now she talks about potential lay-offs or potential difficulties in 

health care funding. I want to ask that member, I want to ask 

her caucus, where were you when the federal government were 

planning their budget? Where have you been? Where have you 

been since your federal government has announced billions of 

dollars in reductions to health, education, and social spending 

across Canada? Where have you been? 

 

And let me ask this final question. Where are you today on the 

question of block funding? Do you support the Liberal position, 

federal, of block funding to the provinces? Do you support 

that? Please stand up and tell us where the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan stands on this crucial question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SGI Broker Convention 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance). Mr. Minister, why is SGI holding a free, I repeat 

free, George Fox concert for its brokers on March 18 in 

Regina? Why should Saskatchewan taxpayers have to fork out 

for your Crown corporation to have a party for its brokers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 

respond to the member's question because it gives me an 

opportunity to correct some of the misinformation he provides 

here. 

 

SGI has had a convention and a workshop session for its 

brokers for 40 years, every year in a row. There is an important 

reason for having that, Mr. Speaker. It provides training 

sessions and it's important for the maintenance of accreditation 

of the brokers out there who make sure that SGI's insurance 

business is well marketed by these very same people 

.

So, Mr. Speaker, the expenditure of money in order to provide 

this training and this accreditation and show these brokers that 

the taxpayers who are the shareholders of SGI appreciate the 

work that they do for them, is an important function for which I 

think neither members of this House nor members of that 

House should apologize for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I'm glad 

to see we have a new SGI minister, because I certainly wasn't 

impressed with the performance of the last one. 

 

Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan taxpayers don't even get to go to 

this concert even though they get to pay for it. I guess you think 

that's okay, Mr. Speaker, because Saskatchewan taxpayers get 

to pay for a lot of things they don't get any benefits out of; like 

$9 million pensions for the Premier and his gang of seven. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have forced Saskatchewan families to make 

sacrifice after sacrifice. Taxes are up, utilities are up, and SGI 

insurance rates are up. You have closed hospitals, cancelled 

gambling addiction programs, and taken millions of dollars 

from farm families. And now you have enough money to put on 

a free concert just for SGI. 

 

Mr. Minister, why on top of all these things should 

Saskatchewan taxpayers be forced to pay for a free concert they 

can't even attend? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

member should be reminded that the brokers who come to this 

convention which assists them in marketing the products of SGI 

and therefore, Mr. Speaker, assist the policyholders who buy 

policies from SGI because these people are then more qualified 

to advise them, I want the member opposite to know that 

brokers who come here actually contribute to the cost with their 

registration fees to the tune of $64,000. 

 

So they contribute to their training as well as SGI because 

everybody benefits. The brokers benefit, SGI benefits, and the 

policyholders benefit because the brokers are more prepared to 

provide them the services that they require when they come to 

their office to purchase the policies from SGI. 

 

There is nothing wrong, Mr. Speaker, in also saying to these 

brokers, who make SGI a successful company, thank you for 

what you do for us, thank you for what you do for the brokers, 

and thank you for what you do for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Resignation of Judge Robert Smith 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 



March 8, 1995 

 

729 

to advise the Assembly that in accordance with the 

requirements of section 17 of The Provincial Court Act, I am 

tabling a report of the committee of inquiry that was established 

by the Judicial Council to determine whether Judge Robert 

Smith of the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan should be 

removed from office. 

 

The Judicial Council, as it is empowered to do pursuant to The 

Provincial Court Act, established the committee as a result of a 

number of complaints it received respecting Judge Robert 

Smith. That committee, chaired by Mr. Justice William 

Matheson of the Court of Queen's Bench for Saskatchewan, has 

now submitted a report to the Judicial Council, a copy of which 

was provided to the Attorney General. 

 

In its report the committee recommended that Judge Robert 

Smith be removed from office. The Judicial Council, after 

receiving and considering the committee's report, also 

recommended that Judge Robert Smith be removed from office. 

 

I understand that Judge Robert Smith and his legal counsel 

received copies of the committee's report and the 

recommendation of the Judicial Council. I was advised 

yesterday afternoon by the chief judge of the Provincial Court 

of Saskatchewan that Judge Robert Smith resigned from the 

office of judge of the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan 

effective March 7, 1995. 

 

In accordance with the requirements of section 17 of The 

Provincial Court Act, I am now tabling the report of the 

committee of inquiry. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act, 1995 be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 — An Act respecting Medical Laboratory 

Technologists 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill respecting Medical Laboratory Technologists. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend Certain Health Statutes. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly and in consultation with the members of the 

opposition, I would move that we would revert to private 

members' Bills, second readings, Bill No. 03, An Act to provide 

for the incorporation of The Manitoba-Saskatchewan 

Conference of the Seventh-day Adventist Church. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to provide for the incorporation of 

The Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the Seventh-

day Adventist Church 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to speak to second reading of Bill No. 03, An Act to 

provide for the incorporation of The Manitoba-Saskatchewan 

Conference of the Seventh-day Adventist Church. 

 

The purpose of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to streamline 

accounting within the Manitoba and Saskatchewan Conference. 

They will, as a result of the passage of this Bill, if it should 

pass, they will then have one overall umbrella which will make 

for simpler and more efficient operation. It will replace three 

corporations and roll them into one, and it will include all 

current tax exemptions. 

 

I wish to speak briefly to this Bill because it seems to me that 

many people do not fully understand just exactly what the 

purposes and missions of the Seventh-day Adventists are, and I 

would like to quote from a document I've received regarding 

their mission: 

 

 Seventh-day Adventists are committed to using all their 

resources and energy, including their churches, 

educational institutions, and health facilities, to carry 

out their mission of leading people to salvation in Jesus; 

to teaching people the biblical faith and the Christian 

lifestyle, thus equipping them to serve, through their 

God-given abilities, in their church and communities, 

and preparing them to meet their soon coming Lord. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, the Seventh-day Adventists exist 

to promote Christianity as they understand it. They have several 

unique beliefs, very deeply held beliefs, including celebration 

of the Sabbath on what most of us would consider to be 

Saturday. And they also believe in the physical second coming 

of Christ, not just the spiritual second coming of Christ. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, often people think that Seventh-

day Adventists are a cult. They are not, though they are 

sometimes misunderstood perhaps because they have very 



March 8, 1995 

 

730 

clear customs such as tithing, adult baptism by immersion, and 

observing the Sabbath on a Saturday. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, they 

have often been prosecuted under old Sunday labour laws 

because of their strong, biblical, and intense belief in the fourth 

commandment. 

 

Seventh-day Adventists have been on the Prairies, Mr. Speaker, 

since the 1880s. The first church that they established in this 

province was at Waldheim, Saskatchewan. The Manitoba-

Saskatchewan Conference was formed in 1932 to meet the 

economic problems of the Depression. They now serve their 

flock, their congregation, in over 180 countries around the 

world, and they have three main purposes. In no particular 

order, their three main purposes are, first of all, medical; 

secondly, educational; and thirdly, religious. 

 

In the medical field, they have over 300 medical clinics and 162 

hospitals with 20,000 beds that they operate worldwide. 

Members of this House would perhaps be most aware of their 

amazing successes at the Loma Linda medical facility in the 

United States. Because of the unique Canadian medical system, 

they do not operate hospitals — the unique and wonderful 

Canadian medical system — they do not operate hospitals in 

Canada, but they do operate nursing homes, and the Sunnyside 

Nursing Home in Mr. Speaker's constituency is a good example 

of the long-term care facilities that they operate. 

 

Their second purpose is educational. They are the second 

largest religious-based educational system in the world, second 

only to the Roman Catholic Church in terms of the number of 

schools owned. They have over 5,000 elementary and 

secondary schools, 92 colleges and universities. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the paramount purpose of the Seventh-day 

Adventist Church is to advance their religion and their 

observances of Christianity as they understand it. Worldwide, 

they have 8.2 million members. They believe in adult baptism 

and immersion in water, and each week in this world over 

11,000 people are baptized into the Seventh-day Adventist 

Church. In Manitoba and Saskatchewan the Seventh-day 

Adventist Conference operates 35 churches, has 3,000 

members, operates five schools, and three extended-care homes. 

They have over 400 employees promoting education, health, 

and the Christian lifestyle. 

 

They provide for services for their members and also for the 

general population. Many members of this House may be aware 

of some of these services. For instance, they do an excellent 

program in stop-smoking seminars. They conduct nutrition 

classes and stress-control workshops. I've already mentioned the 

extended-care homes they operate. They also have community 

service centres which provide short-term and emergency help 

with food and clothing to indigent people. And finally, Mr. 

Speaker, they also have in this past year initiated a ministry for 

northern first nations people. All these things go a long way to 

promoting wellness in this province and in Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 03 will allow this church to carry on their 

very good purposes and missions. The purpose of this 

incorporation is to enable the Seventh-day Adventist Church to 

consolidate its operations in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 

 

And consequently I move that Bill No. 03, An Act to provide 

for the incorporation of The Manitoba-Saskatchewan 

Conference of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, be now read 

a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on 

Private Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — I assumed when we asked for leave before to 

return to this Bill, that immediately after we would return to 

government business. Is that correct? 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well I 

would ask, with the spirit of cooperation, I ask leave to move to 

private members' Bills, second reading of Bill No. 33 — An 

Act respecting the Donation of Food. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1430) 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Donation of Food 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's with 

great pleasure that I give second reading to a Bill respecting the 

Donation of Food. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recent years demand at food banks has 

continued to climb, and unfortunately donations have not kept 

pace. A story in last Friday's Star-Phoenix said that the 

Saskatoon food bank is down to one day's supply of food. And I 

understand that the Regina food bank is in a similar situation. 

 

Recently I heard about an idea to help address this problem, an 

idea that would result in more food being donated without 

costing Saskatchewan taxpayers one dime. 

 

Every day in Saskatchewan hotels, restaurants, grocery 

distributors, and others in the food industry throw out hundreds 

of pounds of good, nutritious food. They are not doing this to 

be wasteful. In fact most would prefer to donate left-over food, 

surplus food, to the food bank, but they are unable to do so 

because of the liabilities they could face in the unlikely event 

that the donated food causes illness. 

 

In recent years the provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, 

Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba have enacted what is called 

good Samaritan legislation. Legislation that exempts donors 

from any legal responsibility for the food unless the consumer 

of the food becomes sick as a result of an intentional act or the 



March 8, 1995 

 

731 

donor acted with a reckless disregard for public safety. The Bill 

also gave the same protection to food bank workers. 

 

The response, Mr. Speaker, has been tremendous. We received 

copies of letters from various food banks in Ontario which have 

noticed a significant increase in the food donation since the 

legislation was introduced last June. I understand in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, there is something in the magnitude of a 70 per cent 

increase in the donations of food to food banks in Ontario. 

 

We have also received copies of letters from grocery 

distributors and manufacturers who are more than pleased to 

donate excess food now that the legislation is in place. 

 

I am pleased to introduce a similar piece of good Samaritan 

legislation to the people of Saskatchewan. Yesterday I took the 

unusual step of providing an advance copy of the Bill to the 

Premier, the Government House Leader, the Liberal House 

Leader, and the ministers of Social Services, Health, and Justice 

for their review. 

 

The reason I did this is that we would like to see this legislation 

passed as soon as possible. It's a relatively simple piece of 

legislation  it's just one page long  and we could pass this 

legislation right away if members of the House would co-

operate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe there is a sense of urgency. As I mentioned earlier, the 

Saskatoon food bank is almost out of food; Regina is facing a 

similar situation. This is a common sense solution to a problem 

that we could implement right away. And again it doesn't cost 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan one dime. 

 

I should also mention that this Bill has received the support of 

many provincial hunger organizations, including the Regina and 

Saskatoon food banks, Chili for Children, the Infant Hunger 

Action Group, Hunger in Moose Jaw Inc., Saskatchewan child 

hunger and education, and the Regina Education and Action on 

Child Hunger, commonly known as REACH. 

 

We have also been in contact with some Regina hotels like the 

Hotel Saskatchewan and the Ramada Renaissance. They are 

supportive of this Bill and excited about the possibilities. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we have also received a letter of support from the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a good idea. It's supported by people on all 

sides of the issue. I'm hopeful that members on all sides of the 

House will see fit to support this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move second reading 

of a Bill respecting the Donation of Food. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I yesterday, you recall, had agreed to take a look at this 

Bill and to consult with other provinces, which we're 

beginning to do today, with other provinces where this 

legislation has been brought in, and also with the food banks. 

 

And that's certainly not meant as any indication that what the 

Leader of the Opposition says isn't accurate; it's just that I think 

it's also incumbent on us to make sure that we believe that the 

various groups, as quoted by the minister, support this kind of 

approach. 

 

And I say this because I spent an hour and a half last Thursday 

with the executive director of the Regina food bank and the 

board. And we looked at the issues facing the Regina food bank 

and the other kinds of services that are located there and 

potentially to be located there in terms of an integrated, holistic 

service, and this was not raised with me. However, that's not to 

say that they don't support it. 

 

I guess I would suggest that . . . In fact I'm advised by my staff 

that the incredible success that the hon. leader quotes in other 

jurisdictions may or may not be accurate. But we wouldn't . . . 

but there is some public support for this notion. 

 

We want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we deal with the 

immediate needs of food banks, and of course, as you know, 

we're directing — just this year alone, and last year and the year 

before — over a million dollars on child development and 

nutrition programs to deal with child hunger. 

 

I might add that I find it somewhat surprising in the face of this 

Bill that the opposition members chose to oppose that million 

dollars on hunger programs. And I would hope that they will 

see fit in the current budget  in the current budget  they 

will see fit to support the child development nutrition program 

this year, which directs a million dollars towards hunger 

programs and I think some 45 or 50 hunger programs that we're 

supporting around the province, many in schools. And in fact 

some of those programs are located in food banks  for 

example, in Saskatoon. 

 

So I think that we need to make sure as well that we're 

consistent on the approach around child poverty strategy. Mr. 

Speaker, the issue of family poverty is a serious challenge. I 

think we would all agree with that. 

 

And the key of course to dealing with family poverty is 

addressing the issue of strengthening the economy; providing 

long-term, meaningful job opportunities to Saskatchewan 

families; to stabilizing and enhancing our agricultural strategy, 

which we believe we've done through the Agriculture 2000 

paper and the Partnership for Renewal job strategy which is 

beginning to pay, we think, big dividends. 

 

That's the approach to take to providing the training, education, 

and skill development opportunities through enhanced 

programs like New Careers, Future Skills and the JobStart 

program, the new money directed towards the forestry and 

young people, and also directed towards some of the other 

initiatives. And of course, providing tax breaks to small-

business people, which we did in this budget. Those are the 



March 8, 1995 

 

732 

ways in which we create jobs, Mr. Speaker, to create 

meaningful salaries and benefits to working people. 

 

I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that again I find it a little bit 

inconsistent that the Leader of the Opposition who promotes 

this Bill — which I don't oppose — but that he would also 

introduce private members' Bills to try and take away potential 

benefits from part-time employees who also live in poverty, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so, without putting too fine a point on it, there are a lot of 

inconsistencies by that particular member. Having said that, I 

certainly want to mention that if this Bill is as positive as it 

appears to be on the surface, we'll ensure that it has speedy 

passage. 

 

I think there are some other good signs, Mr. Speaker. The social 

assistance case-loads are down. I know the majority of users of 

the food bank are on social assistance. And the majority, 45 per 

cent of all the recipients of the food bank services, are children. 

 

And so we certainly support the fact that young people off 

assistance and providing jobs for people to get into the labour 

market are key elements, because we also have to address the 

causes of poverty. Mr. Speaker, we have to address the causes 

of poverty. 

 

Now we know that poverty developed and grew in incredible 

ways during the 1980s, and we're trying to play catch-up now, 

but that's fine. We have to work together on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the long-term strategy . . . I want to see some commitment to 

the long-term strategy too. The long-term strategy is to improve 

the economy, to provide good supports to training, education, 

and skills development, enhanced day care, Mr. Speaker, which 

is an important part of this. Because again 45 per cent . . . 

pardon me, 29 per cent of all of the recipients on social 

assistance are single-parent women who certainly require day 

care as a way to sort of bridge that support to independence. 

 

And so I'm committing ourselves . . . we're committing 

ourselves to looking seriously at the Bill. And I would plead 

with the Leader of the Opposition to also take seriously that 

there is a longer, broader-term strategy, and to look at some of 

the areas in which they actually have voted in a way which 

would enhance the numbers of children going into food banks 

and requiring the service. 

 

All I'm asking is that they give some thought, on reflecting on 

this Bill, that they need to be giving other messages too that are 

important in supporting low income people. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I believe that, as I said, we will 

give the Bill serious consideration and make it speedy, once we 

do our own research. And I'd like to move adjournment on 

debate at this point. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — As it relates to return no. 46, I 

move that it be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: — Motion for return (debate) for no. 46. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to repeal The Economic Development 

and Tourism Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very minor 

amendment. And, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Economic 

Development has requested that this Bill be repealed effective 

April 1, 1995. 

 

The sections of this Act that are still in force exist to support the 

northern Saskatchewan economic development revolving fund 

which my department intends to dissolve. And with the 

announcement of my colleague, the Associate Minister of 

Economic Development, this all becomes obvious as it moves 

to another venue. 

 

All assets and liabilities will be transferred to the General 

Revenue Fund. And under the powers of The Department of 

Economic Development Act, 1994, my department will 

continue to administer outstanding loans that were made under 

the revolving fund. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Department of 

Economic Development Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned a few 

moments ago, the repeal of the previous Act is complemented 

and supplemented with the implementation of this amendment, 

and I'm pleased to present to the Assembly for second reading, 

the amendments to The Department of Economic Development 

Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's a simple housekeeping Bill required because 

my department intends to initiate a loans program as part of the 

northern development fund. The purpose is to amend section 

12, so that the Minister of Economic Development may, first, 

set interest rates on loans; secondly, dispose of assets realized 

when security is seized. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, although the minister currently has these 

powers under section 9(1) of The Economic Development and 

Tourism Act as you are probably aware, it is intended that the 

Act be repealed, which we are in the process of doing at the 

present time. 



March 8, 1995 

 

733 

(1445) 

 

Although this is a simple change, Mr. Speaker, I should 

however emphasize the importance of the northern 

development fund, or NDF. You may recall that the initiative 

was announced on February 8 by my colleague, the associate 

Economic Development minister, and his presentation along 

with the Associate Minister of Education in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The NDF will enable government, in partnership with 

Northerners, to pursue opportunities through a loan program up 

to $2 million annually. The fund will provide core funding of 

$315,000 annually and an advisory support for community-

based regional economic development organizations. 

 

These organizations are similar to the REDAs (regional 

economic development authority) in the southern part of the 

province, and in principle, but specifically adapted to the 

unique situation and needs of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

This year's budget provides $250,000 funding for support in 

professional assistance to complement existing federal and 

provincial programs and increase Northerners' access to 

markets, promotion, research, and development of expertise and 

resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this fiscal year, a northern advisory board will 

help improve the coordination of provincial government and 

community-based regional economic development policy and 

programing, and to participate in an advisory role in the 

administration of the NDF. The fund will also be used to 

increase the professional and technical business advice the 

government provides Northerners, and to develop a training and 

skills enhancement package. 

 

In partnership with community-minded companies that are 

creating resource opportunities in northern Saskatchewan, the 

northern development fund will support Northerners in exciting 

new business creation and expansion efforts that will benefit 

the entire Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a good example of this is Contact Lake gold-mine, 

officially opened recently, which has put millions of dollars into 

northern economy through intensive and extensive use of 

northern contractors, and by creating jobs for northern 

residents. 

 

It is with tremendous opportunities like this in mind, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am pleased to present amendments to The 

Department of Economic Development Act, 1993, for second 

reading. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of 

this amendment. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we believe 

that this Act, An Act to amend The Department of Economic 

Development Act, as the minister has indicated, is not as simple 

as the minister has brought forward. I believe that when we start 

talking about loans and readdressing how loans are made 

available and an expenditure of funds, it's important that as an 

opposition we do take a little more time to review the Bill to see 

exactly what the Bill is addressing and where it is going. 

 

And for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I believe it's appropriate 

that we would move adjournment of debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Martens: — Could I have leave to introduce some guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 

gallery is a neighbour of mine, Mr. Stewart Wells, who has 

come to discuss with the Committee on Private Members' Bills 

some of the implications of the Act respecting the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And I heard from committee 

members that this gentleman, Stewart, has conveyed his 

impressions of what should be done and what shouldn't be done 

in a very convenient and a forthright manner. And I want to 

welcome him to the Assembly here today, and thank him for 

coming to see the business of the House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Women's Secretariat 

Vote 41 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have no 

officials here today. We've agreed to use the vehicle of 

estimates to comment on some of the policy initiatives on 

Women's Day today, on International Women's Day, and I thank 

the opposition and the third party for making this possible. 

 

One of the things that women are looking at always on 

International Women's Day is to measure what we've achieved 

in the past while. It's kind of a taking stock day. And in the 

political sphere people have asked themselves the questions, are 

we progressing? And we think that the achievements of women 

in the last two decades have been significant, especially in the 

political sphere, and of course I feel that way being that I'm able 

to be here making these comments. 

 

Too often we think of the political spheres involving only 

women in traditional political party work, but the political 

sphere involves everyone who takes a role in changing what's 



March 8, 1995 

 

734 

going on in their community, in their union, and their 

workplace, and their business, and so one of the great 

achievements of the women's movement has been to redefine 

what's political, and it's made many issues that were previously 

seen as personal and put a political view on them. 

 

For example, issues like violence against women and abuse. 

These are issues that several years ago wouldn't have been on 

the public agenda and certainly wouldn't have been on the 

political agenda. But because women have worked on raising 

the awareness of these issues because of the very personal 

impacts they've had on their lives, it's moved these issues onto 

the political agenda. And because of that we now have 

networks of transition houses, crisis centres, and advocacy 

groups that are working on preventing and eliminating violence 

as part of public policy. 

 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Act was a ground-breaking 

piece of legislation in Saskatchewan, and it provides for an 

abuser to be removed from the home. And certainly women 

have been very forthcoming and saying if we're going to deliver 

services in these ways, then we have to have more outreach 

types of services so that while women are in their homes they 

can still receive the kind of services they might have received 

previously in a transition house. 

 

But more importantly, this kind of an Act sends a message that 

we're no longer prepared as a society to tolerate domestic 

violence and that we're prepared to protect people who are 

victims. And I think it's those kind of messages that are also 

very important to women who are trying to create change. 

 

The women's movement has also advocated for changes in the 

paid labour force, and we've seen changes to labour standards 

where employer-sponsored benefits must now be given to part-

time employees on a prorated basis in workplaces of more than 

10 employees, and also statutory holiday pay being prorated for 

part-time workers. 

 

Improvements to both maternity and paternity leave helps 

families because it gives them more flexibility in their family 

responsibilities. 

 

Domestic workers was an area of particular concern and now 

domestic workers are entitled to minimum wage, hours of work, 

holiday pay, and overtime pay — and this would include 

women who live in their employer's home, also who come in on 

a regular basis. 

 

And I know this is very important. A young woman who I 

spoke to last year, who was working as a domestic worker, was 

very concerned that there was no standards regulating her place 

of work. So we consider this a particularly progressive part of 

this legislation. 

 

Sexual harassment has always been a difficulty — if a person 

wants to keep their job, they often are put in a position where 

they have to put up with a number of things which are not 

necessarily conducive to a happy workplace. And we've 

recently added sexual harassment to the provisions under The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act. And one of the really good 

things about this, is it's created a proactive way to deal with 

problems before they get all out of proportion and before they 

become a major disturbance in the workplace. And I think it's 

much better, if there's problems due to people's differing views 

of what constitutes appropriate sexual behaviour in the 

workplace, this gives people a way to deal with it that's not as 

confrontive as the mechanisms of the past. 

 

As far as balancing work and family, I was mentioning to some 

women I spoke to the other day — sometimes you feel like that 

little Duracell bunny that's on TV and you just sort of keep 

going until your battery runs out, and someday women will just 

collectively all fall over when their batteries run out. 

 

But we have had a condition of women, when they entered the 

workplace, not only doing the workplace jobs, but also 

continuing to carry the responsibilities of home and family. So 

many women's groups, many employers and many unions, are 

looking at how to create more family-friendly workplaces, and 

looking for more flexible arrangements that recognize the 

realities of people's daily work lives without having to sacrifice 

productivity or accomplishments in the workplace. 

 

As far as child care goes, there's been some changing views in 

how child care is handled. At one point there was a lot of 

support for a more institutional approach and now people are 

moving a little more to wanting child care closer to home in 

their neighbourhood where the children don't have to leave the 

area that they live in and that they go to school in. So we have a 

range of approaches now to child care, but our goal is to still 

increase support as we're able to in those areas. 

 

In health care, there's been more recognition of specific 

women's disease, women's illness that affects women more than 

it does other people. And in recognition of this the women's 

health centre has been opened at the Regina General Hospital 

and it offers a range of reproductive health services including 

counselling, diagnosis, and treatment. One of the health 

services in Regina has recently added a menopause clinic, and 

just in the nick of time, I might add. 

 

There are many other areas in which women's movement has 

made gains. And many people who are watching today are 

activists and know how much has been achieved and how much 

more needs to be done. The important point though is that 

women have achieved a greater political voice and have made 

some room for these kinds of important issues on the public 

political agenda. 

 

Today 13 women sit as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) in the Saskatchewan legislature. There are four 

women in cabinet. And since the spring of 1992, 44 per cent of 

all appointments of boards, agencies, and commissions in 

Saskatchewan have been women. On health boards 49 per cent 

of those appointed are women. So these will all bring those 

additional voices and broader perspectives to the discussions 

that take place. 



March 8, 1995 

 

735 

It's become apparent to myself that there's more work to be 

done in terms of rural and agricultural women, northern 

women, people who have less access to services and exist in 

more isolated situations. Certainly disabled women and 

disabled parents experience many problems that many of us 

aren't familiar with. And there's new opportunities for women 

in business. 

 

And these are all areas that I think in the coming year, as we 

move towards another year of action in this area, we'll be 

looking more closely at these areas. But today is a day to take 

stock and to celebrate. And I thank the legislature for giving us 

the time to do this today. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I am 

pleased to stand in my place today in recognition of this very 

important day. 

 

It has been a long, hard fight for the women. Mr. Chairman, it 

goes back over 100 years. I would like to mention the name of 

Elizabeth Cady Stanton who was born in Jamestown, New York 

in 1815. She isn't too well known in our time, Mr. Chairman, 

but few women have made a greater influence on women's 

issues than Elizabeth Cady Stanton. 

 

She was one of the early feminist leaders and the author of the 

historic Declaration of Sentiments at the first women's rights 

convention in 1848, and also spearheaded the successful efforts 

to give women in the New York state joint guardianship of their 

children and the right to own property and also the right to sue 

in court. Just listing the rights that she did so much to win is an 

indication of how bad things were for women before she came 

along. 

 

She did not live long enough to see women win the right to 

vote, but on days such as International Women's Day, she 

deserves to be saluted and remembered for the way she fought 

for equality and justice for women. Several years later in 1869, 

the territory of Wyoming became the first government, virtually 

anywhere, to adopt women's suffrage and give women the right 

to vote. And it's interesting to know at that time, Mr. Chairman, 

Wyoming was considered a way out west, where men were 

men, yet they were a half a century ahead of the rest of the 

world in rights for women. 

 

That was well over a hundred years ago, Mr. Chairman, and 

although women have made great strides over the past century 

there is still much to be done. Problems such as equal work for 

equal pay have yet to be completely realized, even in Canada in 

the 1990s. There is still widespread physical abuse of women 

and children. And although people are becoming more and 

more aware of this abuse, unfortunately it is still considered 

acceptable in some countries and is ignored in others. As well, 

United Nations delegates at the world's poverty summit 

presently being held in Copenhagen state that women constitute 

up to 70 per cent of the world's 1.2 billion poor and two-thirds 

of the world's illiterate. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it's obvious that statistics like that are alarming 

and are proof that there is much to be done to deal with the 

many of the challenges facing all people today and especially 

the women. 

 

Dealing with these problems takes the effort of everyone, Mr. 

Chairman, not just the women who are affected. It is imperative 

that we all work together to strive for equality for all 

individuals. Yet today, in recognition of International Women's 

Day, I would like to congratulate all of the men and women 

who have worked diligently over many years to address the 

needs of women, starting over 100 years ago, to strive for 

equality and fairness, and in the end, make the world a better 

place for all of us to live in. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 

make a few remarks on this day, this day marking International 

Women's Day. And I do so mainly just to assist with the raising 

of the awareness of the importance of keeping vigilant, both 

politically and at home, about the need for continued change as 

affects the relationship between men and women. 

 

And also, I suppose, the first thing to do on a day like this is 

also to celebrate the accomplishments that have already 

happened in the past. And it's not difficult to just think of what 

these accomplishments are. When I think myself of four 

generations of women, starting with my grandmother's 

generation and then my aunt's and mother's generation, my 

wife's and my sister's generation, right down to my daughters’ 

generation, and how the roles of women have changed both in 

work and in family, and the corresponding change in order for 

some of these roles to change, how the changes had to take 

place also at the same time with their husbands and the men 

that were influential in those four generations as well. 

 

And when I think of the work that my grandmother did, it was 

all centred around the family and very hard work at the farm 

and very hard labour. And she managed with that as well to 

develop very high ethical standards for her family. But how the 

nature of the work has changed over the time in my aunt's and 

mother's generation; they tended to have a higher education and 

some people involved in entering the professions. My wife's 

and my sister's generation, which became professionals in many 

cases, but they were in the traditional areas which differs a lot 

from my daughters entering into their world of work and where 

they became professionals in working mainly outside of the 

family and outside of the home situation. So we've come a long 

way in terms of changing the workload and the roles that 

women are playing in society, and we're all to the better of it. 

 

We're not finished. And I suppose there's nothing better than to 

bring to one's attention in the testimony of a single person who 



March 8, 1995 

 

736 

is affected by some things that still need to be worked on within 

our society. And I heard the testimony recently of a middle-

aged woman who came from a middle-class — what is known 

as a well-established middle-class home — who had lived over 

20 years in a successful marriage, and during that time never, 

ever had the inkling that there would ever come a time when 

she would be the victim of abuse. However, due to an illness on 

her husband's part, has suffered in the last few years all four — 

mental, psychological, and physical, and sexual abuse. 

 

And the woman was left without any place to go. This 

happened quite suddenly and she realized she had to leave the 

situation. She ended up having to go to a hotel, spend the 

weekend there hiding from her husband, who had lost touch 

with reality, and really all was able to do was to get $20 from 

Social Services or a friend to eat hot dogs over the weekend 

until she was finally able to find a place to live. 

 

And we have now in some of our towns in Saskatchewan an 

increasing demand for shelters for women just like this one, 

who also had a child to take care of, I ought to mention. They 

are increasingly being organized and cared for by volunteers, 

with some community help, with some government help. They 

need a place where they can go and heal. And I think the rest of 

us who are around, who have not had to suffer that kind of fate, 

need to be sympathetic and to be aware that these things still do 

exist. 

 

We are getting to a situation where I think we are considering 

physical abuse, even though it comes from a partner, to be more 

and more regarded as a criminal act. It is pretty well any place 

in the street. We still tend to condone some of this physical 

abuse in many sporting events, particularly on TV, and those 

that are televised think the day is going to have to come when 

we're going to have to consider physical abuse in sporting 

events just as criminal as physical abuse at home or on the 

street. 

 

The role models that we have, fighting in the hockey rink, really 

are a throw-back to an old age. And I think we have to move 

away from that, and see and encourage the people that are 

working in those fields to consider changing the rules so we can 

get away from it. Because I think the role models that are set 

there as just not desirable for society and not desirable for our 

children. 

 

The old model was that you never . . . that too often in a 

marriage, wives are considered property rather than partners. 

We're moving away from that. Husbands are acting more in 

terms of thinking about consequences of a lifestyle where a 

wife is abused. 

 

These agencies that are working towards that and that are 

helping the women who are in these difficulties, have a big job 

ahead of them because really you have to rebuild people's lives. 

They have to help them recover from the state of abuse that 

they've been in. 

 

Their aim, of course, is to help the women regain self-esteem 

and self-reliance. And I want to wish those institutions such as 

in my home town, the women's aboriginal council; the YWCA, 

all their staff and volunteers, and particularly in this case, to the 

director of the YWCA in Prince Albert who I know has worked 

very hard in these situations, and I wish Mrs. Kowalsky the best 

in her work in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

is International Women's Day, a day to pay tribute to all 

women; some internationally recognized; some legendary; 

many  most  totally unknown, save by those who they 

influenced or inspired. 

 

On a day like this the lives of many women come to mind — 

Mother Teresa, Eleanor Roosevelt, Elizabeth I, Florence 

Nightingale; many whose lives are known to us and have been a 

powerful influence for good. This includes women who have 

entered public life in Canada. One of the most treasured 

documents I possess, my certificate of Canadian citizenship, 

was signed by Canada's first woman cabinet minister — Ellen 

Fairclough. And two of the women who are my colleagues in 

this Assembly each have their own remarkable story to tell. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the story of one woman, no 

heroine, no legend, but no less interesting and instructive for 

that. No heroine, I say, but she was very brave. 

 

She was born in the early years of this century in Europe into a 

lower middle-class family. She had an alcoholic father, but a 

strong mother. Life was not easy, but the family was a happy 

one and they managed. She loved school and fought to go, even 

worked to go, since she had to earn a penny every day to ride 

the ferry which crossed the river that flowed between home and 

school. 

 

She graduated and went to work in an office in a large city. This 

in itself was unusual for a young woman from her 

neighbourhood. She met a man, fell in love, and they married. 

A child was born, but by now these were the dark days of the 

Second World War and her country was soon invaded. 

 

Feeding a family was almost impossible, and she often cycled 

miles into the country for one precious egg. Imagine her terror 

one morning when her husband went to work but did not return. 

No word, no idea if he were alive or dead. The country was 

occupied and no one could help her. There was a curfew. 

People who ventured out after dark were shot and often left on 

the street for days as a reminder to others who would disobey. 

 

(1515) 

 

But she fought back. She continued to try and find her husband 

and she joined the resistance movement, distributing 

information leaflets from the false bottom of her child's baby 

carriage — an extraordinarily courageous act. 

 

Well 50 years ago her country was once again free, liberated by 



March 8, 1995 

 

737 

the Canadians. Her husband returned from two years in a labour 

camp and her love affair with Canada began. She was the 

driving force to emigrate but the waiting-list was years long, 

even then. She persevered. She learned the language, studied 

the history and geography, and read Winnie-the-Pooh to her 

children at bedtime, in English. 

 

Then one day a visitor came to her door. There had been a 

cancellation on a ship sailing to Halifax. If they could be ready 

in a week, they could go. A week — a week to say goodbye to 

the only life she and her family had ever known, one week to 

get packed, tie up all your loose ends, one week to say goodbye 

to her and her husband's family. But she did it. 

 

And two weeks later she stood with her family, two large trunks 

and 100 Canadian dollars, on a dock in Halifax. She was 40 

years old. They boarded a train in those halcyon days when the 

CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) still had passenger service 

right across Canada, and went to Vancouver, and later by CPR 

ferry to Victoria. 

 

She found a place to live virtually in the wilderness, but it was 

Canada and she loved it. And she worked. She worked 

alongside her husband and she also worked outside the home, 

amid much criticism from neighbours. But she persisted 

because she wanted her own house for her family. And build it 

they did, side by side, with her husband and children, bit by bit 

as they could afford the building supplies. It took three years. 

 

And during those years, Mr. Speaker, she still had time to work 

with her community and her church, volunteer at the nursing 

home, the library, and local park. She also painted, and had a 

marvellous garden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this woman is now in her 80’s. She lives in her 

own home, still drives, walks her dog every day, and has a 

beautiful garden. She visits people regularly and delivers books 

to those who can't get out. She hosts teas and volunteers at the 

local seniors' centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an interesting life, but no more so than many, 

many others. She represents the courage, the strength, and 

determination of women throughout the ages — the pilgrim, the 

pioneer, the immigrant, the builder, and the community activist. 

 

On International Women's Day, I'm proud to celebrate this 

woman's life because she is my mother. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 

say a few words too on International Women's Day. I was very 

pleased that a member of the opposition got up and made such 

glowing comments about women. But I also want to emphasize 

that while we can make glowing comments about women on 

one day of the year, quite frankly, real equality has to come 

about through us continuously pushing for 365 days of the year. 

We must be ever vigilant and we must be very, very careful not 

to allow the forces of darkness to turn the clock back. 

It has already been noted that most of the advances that women 

have made have occurred in this century, indeed in the last 

couple of decades. I'm pleased about that. I'm very pleased that 

women are now in the paid labour force at a rate that is almost 

equivalent to the participation rate of men. I'm very pleased that 

women can now access most medical services very easily. I'm 

very pleased that we have a fair degree of comfort and security 

in our country, and that women do not need to be overly 

concerned about random acts of violence. 

 

At the same time I have to say that while we've made some 

progress, we have not made enough progress. It is unfortunate 

that we even have to have a Victims of Domestic Violence Act. 

It is unfortunate that in order to avoid riling the forces of 

reactionism, we have to comment that this Act applies equally 

to men and women, when all of us know that underneath it all 

we really are talking about the fact that women are generally the 

victims of domestic violence. 

 

It is unfortunate that we have to continue working for the same 

kinds of wages as men have. It is unfortunate that in this 

province women only get paid, on average, 75 cents for each 

dollar that men earn. Now that's a distinct improvement over 

what you will see in other jurisdictions, and it's a distinct 

advance from the time when women were told that they had to 

leave their jobs after the Second World War because all they 

did was work for pin money, and now that the boys were home 

from overseas they wanted their jobs back. 

 

But still, we haven't made enough advances. We do have a new 

Labour Standards Act that gives some degree of comfort and 

security and benefits for part-time workers, that gives us some 

fairly major advances in terms of lay-off notices and the ability 

to be treated with dignity and respect in the workplace. We have 

an Occupational Health and Safety Act that will deal with the 

whole issue of sexual harassment. 

 

But all those things, as wonderful as they are, are still not 

enough, because quite frankly, all the legislation in the world 

cannot substitute for that most basic of things, and that is an 

attitude that says that all people in this world, regardless of their 

sex, have the right to be treated with dignity and have the right 

to be employed with dignity. So we need to keep working for 

these kinds of things. That's why this one day is important. It 

gives us an opportunity to focus particular attention on the 

issues that are as yet unresolved for women. But one day in the 

year is not enough. It has to be 365 days of the year. And the 

reason for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because we are now 

seeing the forces of right-wing extremism start to gain the 

ascendancy in many parts of this continent and indeed this 

world. 

 

I would point out to you that it is in the last few years that we 

are seeing the abortion debate, which has been framed either as 

a moral issue or an issue of choice and control of the woman's 

own body. It has moved from that kind of debate and the 

political action and the struggle on both sides, the pro-life and 

pro-choice sides, it has moved beyond that into a very ugly, 

very pernicious, active violence that we now see occurring all 



March 8, 1995 

 

738 

too frequently at abortion clinics in the United States and even 

in our own province of British Columbia. 

 

Those kinds of extreme reactions are the same kinds of 

fearmongering reactions that for too many centuries kept 

women silent about their needs and concerns. 

 

We also have the example of Marc Lepine at L'Ecole 

Polytechnique, a university, going in and gunning down 14 

innocent women who were there doing what we would assume 

most people would want to see happen. They were studying to 

advance themselves to be able to become engineers, to take 

over in a previously male-dominated field. And instead, Mr. 

Chair, what happens? Marc Lepine comes in, having decided 

that because they are feminists, they should be exterminated. 

 

These kinds of extreme reactions have the general effect of 

making women, rather than the beneficiaries of all our 

wonderful social advances, instead they start to become more 

and more frightened about taking advantage of these advances. 

 

And finally, Mr. Chair, we see in the United States the 

American exemplars of conservatism, the Newt Gingriches of 

the world, the Republicans deciding that they will capture 

America, take it by storm, and put a moral contract out on that 

country. They're moving to make sure that men can assume 

men's roles, which of course by logical extension means that 

women must therefore get out of those inappropriate places 

where they have been and go back once more to their traditional 

women's roles. 

 

Newt Gingrich says he's going to set things right. I don't know 

how he's going to free single women and their children who are 

on welfare with his so-called welfare reforms. And I don't see 

how he's going to set things right by continuing this whole 

notion of blaming the victim. 

 

We are, Mr. Chair, almost . . . well we're within five years of 

the end of the century. I would hope for all of us who are 

fortunate enough to survive through to the year 2000 that we 

will be able to hold our heads up highly, that we will be able to 

be proud and say we have achieved solid gains for women, not 

just on one day of the year, but for 365 days of the year. 

 

I would hope that we will recognize the value of the unpaid 

work that women do in the homes and that The Income Tax Act 

will be changed to reflect that. I would hope that we will be 

able to make major advances in terms of minimum wages so 

that women primarily who work for minimum wages will be 

able to achieve a greater degree of economic security for 

themselves and for their children. I would hope that we would 

continue fighting violence in all its ugly forms and that we 

would continue making those solid kinds of changes that are 

needed to make a difference in women's lives. 

 

But most importantly, I ask that all of us, men and women both, 

take a look in our own hearts and look to see what we can do 

individually and collectively to make a difference for women, 

not just on March 8, but throughout the whole of the year. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On the occasion of 

International Women's Day, I felt it was important to be able to 

rise in my place and share with colleagues an experience of 

coming together last fall of over a thousand women at an 

international conference titled, Women, Power and Politics, 

exploring the issue of a hundred years of women's voting rights 

in some parts of the world, such as South Australia and New 

Zealand, and with that knowledge, how far have women come 

in the hundred years in using their voice and their vote to 

establish internationally the issues that most affect women. 

 

It was a powerful experience and, I think, one that broadens the 

perspective that we have when we leave our homes and our 

communities to explore what is the place of women in other 

countries and other communities around the world. And being a 

far ways away from home, understanding that no matter where 

we are, women have a common spirit, a common strength and 

determination to improve the quality of life, not only for 

themselves, but for their communities, for their families, and to 

be able to pass on a legacy of furthering the rights of women to 

the next generation. 

 

As a mother of a young teen daughter, at times I need to reflect 

on how far women before me have come in their struggle and 

fight to provide me a level of comfort in seeking a position in a 

government in Saskatchewan and understanding how much we 

can do as women within the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan to continue the fight, but to also provide a level 

of comfort to the next generation that some of the issues will be 

addressed, will be important to them, will provide the equality 

that they're seeking in their time and place as well. 

 

And I want to explore four areas, the first one being women in 

education and the challenge to the women of the future to 

become involved in the computer generation. Women in 

technologies, women in science, are among small numbers, as 

women who were in the past small numbers in the area of 

medicine and law and some of the professions that we now see 

gains in the numbers of women who are represented in those 

areas of our communities. 

 

But what we see is women lagging behind in entering the 

science and technologies. And I challenge the young women of 

the future to get involved and not become ghettoized in the 

cyber space of the future. 

 

(1530) 

 

The women at the conference looked at the access to education 

in those areas, and certainly the subtle differences in which 

young women and young men are treated when they are being 

streamed into the areas of jobs of the future. 

 

And when we're looking at the advances we've made, certainly 

in information technologies, the Internet systems, the 



March 8, 1995 

 

739 

information highway, we don't want to be along the side of that 

highway in the future. We want to be participants in the 

democracy of cyber space — on the road, and moving forward 

into the future. 

 

Women and the economy was an interesting day with 900 

women exploring right-wing economies, left-wing economies, 

and which economies best suit the needs of women and 

advance women. 

 

And I think one of the messages there . . . and the challenges to 

women in the future to be ever vigilant in guarding the idea that 

women cannot be involved in and understand the economies of 

the world. And certainly our Minister of Finance is proving 

locally that we can control the finances of a province or a nation 

and do it with a prudence and justice and wisdom that in many 

years past would not have been recognized, and certainly can 

provide incentive to women in the future to become involved in 

the economics in our communities and to understand that they 

have a vital and valid role and knowledge base to bring to those 

situations. Becoming involved in . . . and I'll come to, in another 

part of my address, that: women in government and the 

involvement of women in government. 

 

I certainly want to leave the understanding that women in the 

economy . . . if you're looking at on the local scene, more 

women than ever have an entrepreneurial spirit and are 

becoming involved in small businesses in our communities, the 

areas that we're looking at providing support and some 

encouragement and nurturing of small business in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You'll find that what's being said about women in 

entrepreneurial roles and in business situations is that they do 

their homework. Very often their businesses are having success 

rates that far surpass men in the community because they are 

more cautious and tend to do the networking and webbing that 

needs to be done to understand what niche they can provide in 

the market-place. And it certainly is a challenge to the 

community to do the same kinds of diligence that's necessary to 

be entrepreneurial and to succeed in the business world. 

 

At a chamber of commerce luncheon, I was so impressed with a 

woman who is vice-president of a major corporation in Canada 

and said that there are many more women who are now serving 

on boards and commissions and serving in the upper 

management levels of organizations because women bring 

many strengths to those organizations that haven't been there 

before — certainly an echoing of the women being able to web 

in their networks, being able to go out to the communities and 

hear what's necessary for a large corporation to be able to 

address the needs of the community, but also to be involved in 

the quality of life of that community and return some of the 

benefit to the community they serve. 

 

And most recently at an announcement of the CIBC (Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce) call centre here, I was very 

impressed with the woman who was vice-president of the 

CIBC, who handled the media with skill, who spoke for her

organization, who talked to the issue of being customer-

orientated to meeting the needs of women in their organization. 

But also being able to relate to women that they are in charge of 

their own economics and in control of the economy will provide 

much benefit for the women of the future in our society. So 

there are many areas that we need to look at that we can 

strengthen and support women in the economy. 

 

Next, as my colleagues mentioned, women in government. 

When we have an address from the Minister responsible for 

Women's Secretariat and noting the numbers of women in 

cabinet, there are still not the equal numbers of men and women 

in cabinet or in many of the areas of upper management within 

government as well. And we need to be ever vigilant on saying 

what is the role that we can play to advance women in 

leadership roles in government. 

 

We're very fortunate to have a society that . . . perhaps a party 

system that can look at what are the hindrances to women being 

involved in government and women in politics. And I know 

there have been many conferences — one I attended for the 

Canadian Parliamentary Association — that addressed this 

issue. What forms of government can put forward greater 

numbers of women involved in government and in speaking 

and representing women in the leadership in their community, 

and certainly exploring how we as women can network and 

strengthen and support each other. 

 

But the men who are colleagues in our caucuses and in our 

parties can look to the areas where they can provide a role. I 

know the men in our caucus do provide the support, the 

understanding, and certainly the background and knowledge 

base of information where we'd come in partnership to address 

the issues . . . and appreciate the support from the colleagues 

that we gain in those areas. 

 

So we have come a long way. We've been galloping along. We 

need to do more and to be able to look to the time where, in 

Australia, the Prime Minister mentioned that they were going to 

work toward 35 per cent women in government by the year 

2000 and have aggressive strategies to address that target and 

goal. The challenge was that it's unfortunate that in our time and 

place we need to set the quotas and targets because, realistically 

in our history, we need to come to a point where there are 

numbers of women that represent the numbers of women in our 

communities. But for now we're going to be looking at setting 

targets and strategies that we can attain those goals of having at 

least 50 per cent women in leadership roles and in government. 

 

Another day at the international conference brought to mind 

that we are very fortunate, as not only women in this 

community but women in leadership roles and women in our 

own homes and society  that we can look to a certain degree 

of comfort and support. We today have recognized those 

women in our society that live in violent situations and that are 

fleeing violence in their homes and their communities. 

 

But when you look to the international scene, women were 



March 8, 1995 

 

740 

speaking out about issues that were very important to them, and 

they are issues that certainly were gut wrenching and need all of 

our attention and support to be able to highlight those issues 

and to be able to address them on an international basis. 

 

When we talk about the abortion issue, we also talk about, in 

some countries, fetal determinations. We talk about genital 

mutilation, talk about bride burnings . . . once a person has 

secured the dowry, the woman is no longer necessary to that 

person's life. And there are many areas where women are living 

daily under excessive abuse, not only physically but mentally. 

And the whole issue of human rights becomes certainly a 

women's issue and one that we need to broaden our scope and 

pay attention to on an international level. 

 

So with the experience of coming together with a thousand 

women from many, many countries around the globe, there is 

much that has been done. There's much more that needs to be 

done. And on International Women's Day, we also need to turn 

our attention to the many women around the world who need 

our prayers and our support as they address on a daily basis the 

life circumstance that has them facing the situations of 

violence, of undermining of their role in their communities, and 

forever leaving them in a place where they are not a person in 

their own right or an individual, but someone's property to be 

abused or praised depending on the situation. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I felt that on this day we need to really look at 

ourselves and our place in the international world, as our world 

becomes smaller, and applaud the women who face these issues 

with courage and the women that will continue with education, 

with understanding, and support to elevate the role and the goal 

of women in society  an equality situation, not only here at 

home but around the world. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd like 

to just make a few comments regarding International Women's 

Day and bring out the fact that there are many women who 

speak to me who feel that they have almost been put in a 

position of feeling inferior for a choice they made in their lives. 

 

And while I think it's important we recognize the efforts and 

endeavours of individuals who look at and choose leadership 

and look at leadership roles in establishing businesses or aiming 

for positions of directorship in major corporations, I think it's 

very fundamentally important that we also recognize the many 

women who have chosen to remain at home to become 

homemakers and mothers. 

 

And as I indicated, Mr. Chairman, many of these women 

sometimes feel like they're being left out, like they're all of a 

sudden second class citizens because they didn't chose to 

further their education, or they may have had that furthering of 

education and started a career and then chose to marry and then 

start a family and establish a very good, healthy home 

relationship. And I think, Mr. Chairman, it's important that we 

recognize the role that mothers and that homemakers and 

housewives play in our society as well. 

 

And on that basis, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to take that 

moment to bring that perspective to this debate, recognizing 

that role and acknowledging that all women in our society, 

regardless of the choices they make. Whether they choose to 

become corporate leaders, whether they choose to fill positions 

as teachers and nurses or in different jobs and different roles, 

we also must recognize the women who have chosen to make 

homemaking and motherhood part of their livelihoods. 

 

And I just wanted to raise that point and bring it into this debate 

and acknowledge the many women who have chosen that 

lifestyle and give them credit for having made that choice and 

acknowledge the fact that it's because of their leadership in the 

home, many times, even as many of us as members in this 

Assembly will indicate, we're only able to be here because we 

have supportive wives who have taken leadership of the home, 

have become the mothers, and sometimes the disciplinarians. 

 

They may not appreciate that role as much, but they have 

chosen that and given that role, and I can certainly say that in 

my case, not only a supportive wife but a wife who has been 

more than willing to accept the responsibility and give me that 

support at home as well as on the road. And so I thank you for 

your indulgence, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

The Chairperson: — I would ask the minister at this time to 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. I would like to introduce, to my right, Ray Clayton, 

deputy minister of Saskatchewan Energy and Mines; to my left, 

Trevor Dark, who is the director of Energy economics. 

Immediately behind me is George Patterson, who is the 

executive director of geology and mines; beside him is Bruce 

Wilson, executive director of petroleum and natural gas. In the 

back, I have Lynn Jacobson, who is director of personnel and 

administration, and Doug Koepke, manager of accounts. 

 

As well, from the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority, I have the president, John Mitchell, 

and his finance person, Crystal Smudy. Thank you. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

realize that this is a new portfolio for you, and you probably had 

quite bit of research to do in the last little while to get caught 

up. But I'm sure your officials will have some of the 

information. 



March 8, 1995 

 

741 

I'd like a summary of the general state of the industry, briefly, 

the oil and the gas industry and the mining industry and how 

you see it today and where you see it going, briefly, in terms of 

general profitability and returns to the province, and the nature 

of how healthy or unhealthy it is and how likely it is to be 

sustained in the present condition. 

 

Similarly I'd like you to generally comment on utilities. You're 

responsible for SaskPower and SaskEnergy, gas and oil and 

power, electricity, and maybe you could comment on how you 

see the utilities doing, the general health of the utilities. 

 

And third, perhaps you could just briefly comment on some of 

the future projects that you might see taking place in utilities, 

whether it's power projects, TransGas projects, or energy 

projects. And you might touch on co-generation. That might 

just get you warmed up to start off with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. And I guess, to the 

member from Estevan, that may get me even more than warmed 

up; that's a long list of issues certainly that you raised. 

 

I guess I'd like to begin by saying that as minister in charge of 

Energy and Mines and being new to the portfolio, I really do 

find it quite an exciting time and an exciting area of our 

economy. 

 

The general health of the department with respect to its 

administration in what I can see in the short time that I've been 

here would tell me that we're dealing with a group of 

professionals, people who are serving, I believe, our province 

very well in terms of their interaction with people in the oil and 

gas and the mining industry and with other arms of government. 

And I find in my travels, although quite limited, that people in 

the oil and gas industry find Saskatchewan a good place to do 

business and find the Department of Energy and Mines a good 

branch of government, a good arm of government. 

 

And I guess one of the comments that I get from them when I'm 

speaking with them is because of the professionalism of the 

department and the people who work there, and the advice and 

the recommendations that they have made to government, that 

the environment for their businesses in our province is a very 

healthy place in terms of which to do business. 

 

And I think that's evidenced by the fact that last year we 

experienced record land sales, over $200 million in this 

province, which certainly assisted us in putting together our 

balanced budgets. And so I say that this arm of our government 

certainly deserves, in no small way, a lot of credit for the kind 

of initiatives that they've assisted the government in moving 

toward. 

 

With respect to the mining industry, as you will know, there are 

some new initiatives that are coming on stream in northern 

Saskatchewan that will create employment opportunities in the 

uranium industry, both in construction and in operations. And I 

think that's an exciting operation. 

We just recently attended, the Premier and myself and the 

Associate Minister of Economic Development, attended the 

opening of the Contact Lake gold-mine just north of La Ronge, 

which is creating employment opportunities for aboriginal 

people and non-aboriginal people in northern Saskatchewan. So 

that too is really exciting. 

 

I think the bottom line, and as it's relayed to me by people in 

industry, is that they find this very much a business-friendly 

province, a good place to do work. They're comfortable with the 

royalty structures that we've put in place with respect to oil and 

gas. And although, as you will know, coming from the southern 

part of the province, we have a depressed price for natural gas, 

but still there's optimism even on that side of the exploration 

and development industry as it pertains to gas. 

 

With respect to the utilities, as you will know, this is the 

estimates for Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. And the Crown 

corporations, both SaskPower and SaskEnergy, are dealt with in 

the form that you and I are both familiar with in that we've 

scrutinized the expenditures and the direction of Crown 

corporations over the years as we've been in this place and as 

we've worked in this legislature together. 

 

And the Crown corporations really . . . the Crown Corporations 

Committee is the format and is the place where we do an 

analysis of how those corporations are operating. And I frankly 

look forward to the discussions that we'll have there when we 

have the officials from both SaskEnergy and SaskPower, 

because they really are times of change for them with 

deregulation and with trade barriers being removed across 

North America. The way they're doing business is changing, 

and quite certainly we'll have some interesting discussions in 

that regard. 

 

I think in terms of future initiatives and initiatives of the 

Department of Energy and Mines, one of the areas that I 

personally do have some concern with is how industry operates 

and how we tie environment and how we tie development 

together with industry and how we allow industry to still 

operate and satisfy the needs of their shareholders, but at the 

same time that we be cognizant and be well aware of 

environmental concerns that surround some of those initiatives 

simply by virtue of the kinds of activities that happen in order 

to remove oil and gas from the deposits where they are. 

 

So I think one of the future initiatives that Energy and Mines 

has in the past spent and will be continuing to spend their 

energies on, will be how we deal with environmental concerns. 

And it's certainly not an issue that's only pertinent, I guess, here 

in Saskatchewan — it's something that we, worldwide, have to 

be concerned with. 

 

We're becoming more aware of the impact on global warming 

and the greenhouse effect and how that might impact on other 

industries in terms of climate change. And so those are the 

kinds of initiatives that I think we need to be aware of. 

 

On one hand, we want to create a healthy climate where 



March 8, 1995 

 

742 

industry can satisfy the needs of their shareholders. Quite 

clearly, the people of Saskatchewan who are shareholders and 

who own the resources in our province, want a fair and a 

reasonable return for their resources. And on the other hand, we 

have to be very cognizant of the fact that our children and their 

children are going to be living in an environment that has been 

very much changed since the industrial revolution and even 

much more in the last 30, 40 years; and that we need to satisfy 

their needs and their dreams and their desires, and we have to 

maintain Saskatchewan as a positive place to live. And we have 

to be aware of the fact that our world is a fragile place. 

 

And so I think these are some of the challenges that we as a 

regulatory body and a licensing body face. The Department of 

Energy and Mines and the people who work in it are well aware 

of that, and I know they're working with other arms of 

government to ensure that we do have a good future and that we 

do have an economic and an environmental future in our 

province. 

 

There are a number of other initiatives, and I'm sure over the 

course of the discussions that we'll have here today and perhaps 

tomorrow and in future days in this session, that we'll have the 

opportunity to discuss in detail more of the initiatives that we're 

embarked upon. 

 

But I think I've given you a reasonable overview of my 

perception, firstly, of the department; secondly, of the work that 

they've been doing; and thirdly, the approach that the 

government and government policy has taken with industry; and 

fourthly, our concerns for the future viability and development 

of our province and the resources that we will be developing 

over the years. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just wanted to clear 

up something. I think that you mentioned that you could not 

talk about . . . or were reluctant to talk about utilities, 

SaskPower, for example, and SaskEnergy, during these 

estimates. I've always asked, and have had ministers respond to 

questions about SaskPower, for example, in Energy estimates, 

Energy and Mines, and they usually . . . your predecessor 

certainly did. 

 

On page 136 of the Estimates we have to deal with advances to 

SaskEnergy and advances to SaskPower. And they have to pass 

this Legislative Assembly; they can't go to a Crown corporation. 

So we've got to ask why the utility needs the money and what it 

does with it and so forth. 

 

So I think it's fair, you're the minister, and actually to get a 

complete picture you need to know something about the 

combination of money being dealt with in Energy and Mines. 

And certainly power is energy and gas is energy, and that's why 

normally the portfolios would go together. 

 

So not to be difficult, I would think that you could sustain the 

practice here in the House to generally discuss — and you may 

not have all the details with respect to Power — but sort of the 

philosophy of how Energy works together in utilities and in the 

departments, would be fair. 

 

I just make that point and maybe we can get back at it at a later 

date. 

 

What I was interested in finding out is that if you're optimistic 

about royalties and land sales in the province of Saskatchewan, 

could you or your officials summarize the amount of money 

coming into the province of Saskatchewan from oil and gas 

royalties — you could perhaps break it down, gas and light oil 

and heavy oil — the last couple years and then now; and what 

you expect to see in the immediate future, in the next year or so. 

Could you do that, so we could pursue that a bit? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — To the member from Estevan, with 

respect to the latest forecast for '94-95 in terms of royalties and 

taxation, our forecast is $259.6 million. We're estimating for 

'95-96, $278.3 million. This is inclusive in terms of oil. We 

don't have a breakdown but we can get it for you in terms of 

light, medium, and heavy. And we'll certainly . . . we'll forward 

that to you. 

 

With respect to the bonus bids of land sales, as you will know, 

last year a record year, $201.3 million last year. The most 

expansive land sale that this province has ever seen, which 

certainly does indicate some faith in our economy and faith in 

the structure that we put in place. And we're forecasting in 

terms of '95-96, $70 million. 

 

And as you will know, after a record investment that oil and gas 

people have made in the '94-95 fiscal year, it's to be expected 

that certainly that level wouldn't be maintained, especially in 

light of the wild fluctuations that we've had with respect to 

natural gas. 

 

The gas royalties, we're predicting that it will be, '95-96, about 

the same as '94-95. We did $67 million in '94-95 and we're 

projecting $68.1 million in '95-96. So that's basically what we're 

expecting to generate. 

 

So I've given you the land sales; I've given you the oil royalties; 

what we're expecting in terms of gas royalty and taxation. And 

as I said, we're certainly expecting a lot of the land that has 

been purchased in the last fiscal year will hopefully generate a 

lot of employment in our province with respect to exploration 

and drilling. So I think we can look for a good year although 

we're certainly not expecting the large amount of bonus bids 

and land sales that we had in the last fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wanted just to 

confirm the number on the land sales for '94-95. And I 

apologize, I didn't get that number for the land sale. 

 

But I would appreciate the breakdown in oil royalties — the 

259 million or the 278 million into light, medium, and crude. 

So if you can get that for another time, that would be very 

helpful. 



March 8, 1995 

 

743 

You did say that the gas royalties broke out for 67 million last 

year and forecast to be 60 million this upcoming year. And I 

think you said the land sales would be about 70 million dollars 

in '95-96 but I didn't get the number for 1994-95. Was it a 

couple hundred million, or was I wrong? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I'll give you those two figures 

again: '94-95 in our latest forecast is that they'll come in at 

201.3 million. And with respect to gas royalties estimated for 

'95-96 — I think that's what you were asking for — we're 

forecasting $68.1 million. The latest forecast — I'll just give 

this to you in case you didn't get that — for '94-95 was $67 

million. 

 

Mr. Devine: — But the land sales was 201 million? Is that 

correct for '94-95? And the estimated land sale for '95-96 was 

70 million. Is that correct? So it's dropped a significant drop. 

 

Mr. Minister, we're looking at I guess in the neighbourhood of 

heavy oil would be . . . or the oil category, 260 million plus land 

sales as 200 million. That's what?  460 million plus gas is 

another 60-some million. You're looking at $520 million in '94-

95 in gas and oil and land sales revenues. Would that be 

accurate? 

 

Could the minister give me an idea, and this is partly what I'm 

after and we might have to get it later, but in terms of the 

production of oil and gas, could the minister give me an idea of 

what kind of heavy oil production we had in 1994-95? You 

must have a ballpark figure. And production of light, if he has. I 

mean I'll take medium too, but certainly if you've got light and 

heavy, I would be most interested. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, I'm told by the officials that 

the aggregate amount is about 106 million barrels. And it 

breaks down roughly — and we don't have the exact numbers 

— but it breaks down roughly a third light, a third medium, and 

a third heavy. 

 

Mr. Devine: — All right. So we're looking at something like 30 

million barrels of each. Could the minister also then tell us or 

give some indication of where the oil goes on the light, 

medium, and crude . . . light, medium, and heavy after it's 

pumped out of the ground? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. The officials indicate 

that about 63 per cent of Saskatchewan's production is exported 

to the U.S. (United States) while the remaining is sold in 

Alberta and eastern Canada. That the NewGrade upgrader is a 

market for about 50,000 barrels a day and that's a mixture: 

Swift Current, medium; Kindersley, heavy; and Lloydminster, 

heavy. So it's a mixture that is used at NewGrade. 

 

And at Bi-Provincial, I'm told 50 per cent of the heavy oil feed 

stock for this one, and that's around 20 to 25,000 barrels a day, 

comes from Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: — So we're looking at, if I take your figures, on 

that heavy and medium side, we'd be looking at over 75,000 

barrels per day going into the upgraders — about 50,000 for 

NewGrade and about half of that, because it's split with Alberta, 

in the Husky upgrader. And so we'd be looking at maybe 25 

million barrels a year being processed. If I take 75 to 80,000 

barrels a day times 365 days, assuming they work all the time, 

I'm going to get a pretty healthy sum of that medium and heavy 

crude being processed. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think the combination of 

NewGrade and Bi-Provincial, quite clearly, and if you look at 

the blend, the mixture of light and medium and heavy and what 

is being processed as well through the Bi-Provincial, it works 

out to about 75,000 barrels a day. So over a course of a year it 

does add up and there's quite a bit processed through those two 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Devine: — I'm sure the officials have this. I can probably 

dig up the figures, but obviously taking up 75,000 barrels a day 

out of the heavy and medium oil market in processing has at 

least two advantages. And I wonder if you have any estimates 

of what that might be worth to us. 

 

In other words, if we were taking the heavy crude and selling it 

export — as you said, 63 per cent is exported and a third is kept 

here and processed — if we were exporting it versus processing 

it into synthetic crude and then moving it, is there some 

significant or reasonable advantage to the province of 

Saskatchewan and to Alberta? 

 

And secondly, what might be the benefits of the increase in 

economic activity generally associated with pumping another 

75,000 barrels a day, or — what would it be? — 25 million 

barrels a year in heavy and medium crude out of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

and I will both agree, and there will be no dispute that the 

added processing in the province with respect to NewGrade and 

Bi-Provincial quite clearly creates economic activity; and 

without those two facilities, that would not be here. And I mean 

we both will agree to that. 

 

In terms of . . . and as you referred to this, and I think this is 

what you were saying, was that because of those two facilities 

the total amount that goes and is processed through those 

facilities is incremental oil that is brought on stream that 

otherwise wouldn't have been. I'm not sure that . . . although 

you can make the argument that that is the case, there's no way 

certainly to document that incremental oil is to that tune, to the 

75,000 barrels a day, is in fact coming on stream. 

 

And I say that certainly the people who are working in those 

two facilities are appreciative of where they generate their pay 

cheques, and quite clearly that is certainly a positive issue for 

them. 

 

I think and I would want to say . . . and I think it would not . . . I 

would want to indicate that there is an economic advantage, and 

we recognize that. But on the other hand, there certainly have 

been costs associated with the financing and the provincial 



March 8, 1995 

 

744 

involvement in both Bi-Provincial and in NewGrade. 

 

So in closing, I guess I would just want to point out that if 

you're indicating you believe that there is an incremental 

exploration activity and that is drawn out in terms of the 75,000 

barrels a day, I'm not sure that you could make a very strong 

case for that argument, although an argument can be made. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well it's not an argument. It's just a consensus. 

Certainly NDP administrations and Conservative 

administrations for several years were trying to build upgraders 

because it makes some economic sense and to give you some 

market power to process your heavy and medium oil here rather 

than just be subject to coke industries or somebody else in the 

U.S. who takes it and refines it. And so we all have tried to put 

together upgraders to enhance our market power. 

 

Now what I want from you is, now that it's up and running, both 

of them are up and running and we're looking at at least 75,000 

barrels a day, 25 million barrels a year, with some market power 

behind it . . . because we can either sell it off to the United 

States as crude, heavy, or we can process it in synthetic crude 

and we can refine it. It has some advantages and I just want to 

help get some of the documentation on what it's worth because 

we both want upgraders, no question about it. 

 

(1615) 

 

And we can get into further the financing of how those are 

done, but clearly, and I think you would agree, there's a 

significant advantage of processing 75,000 barrels a day of 

Saskatchewan heavy and medium crude because it gives us 

market power, it gives us more royalties, it sucks up more oil, it 

opens up the market. And obviously it creates a lot of spin-offs 

in terms of economic activity, drilling for that oil, servicing it, 

finding it, and seismic and so forth. 

 

So if it's 33 per cent of what we've got it must be generating a 

fair amount of money. If it's 33 per cent of the, if you will, the 

oil royalties and probably a higher royalty or a higher benefit 

because we're processing it, then you're looking at a net benefit 

of 75 to $100 million a year to the province of Saskatchewan. 

Would that be a fair ballpark? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I want to say to the member 

from Estevan, if you look at the total amount that's processed 

through both Bi-Provincial and through NewGrade and if you 

look at the amount that is processed over a period of year and 

the differential between light and heavy crude, I think it's fair to 

assume — and my officials tell me that $5 a barrel would be a 

reasonable amount to look at in that regard — that you'd be 

looking at perhaps $100 million that may not have been there. 

 

But I want to say that . . . and I guess I want to go back to your 

initial comments in terms of Saskatchewan people looking at 

secondary manufacturing and value added processing in the 

province. Those have been initiatives — and I will agree — that 

have been embarked upon by all governments, whether it be 

your administration when you were the premier in the l980s or 

whether it would be in the 1970s, the era of the former premier 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Blakeney, or whether it would be this 

administration; we're certainly always looking for opportunities. 

 

But I guess I'd want to say that you can attract development and 

you can bring people in to develop new expertise or even old 

expertise. I mean you can build upgraders, you can build all of 

these facilities — any administration can do that; but I think 

what you have to gauge is, on one hand, the benefits — and I 

think this is what you're trying to get at — but on the other 

hand, what you have to gauge is at what cost these facilities 

were developed. 

 

And as I've indicated we clearly and readily admit that there is 

incremental revenue just by virtue of the fact that the two 

upgraders are operating here in our province; but on the other 

hand, financed in no small way by the provincial government 

with public funds to the point, if you include those with some 

of the other initiatives that have happened since 1982, between 

'82 and '91,— and now some that we're still investing as a result 

of some of the decisions that were made then — we're sitting on 

a provincial debt of in the neighbourhood of $15 billion. 

 

Our third biggest expenditure is $870 million that we're 

forecasting in interest payments in this fiscal year, '95-96, the 

one that we're looking at, the one that's coming on us. So quite 

clearly there are some benefits on the one side, and we admit 

that. And we have no reason to deny that because quite clearly 

we're using those to help pay down some of the province's debt. 

 

But on the other hand, the third biggest expenditure, because of 

some of the decisions that were made — and I don't say this 

with malice; I only say it because it's true — that our third 

biggest expenditure right now is interest, $870 million. 

 

Now if we had even half of the $870 million we might be able 

to look at perhaps even a richer incentive program for the oil 

and gas industry. But we don't, because that's money now that 

heads out of the province and is in the hands of bond dealers in 

New York and Zürich and wherever else money was borrowed. 

 

So I say that these developments, although we welcome them 

and we're doing whatever we can to make them run efficiently 

and effectively . . . As you will know, we're now partners with 

Husky on a 50/50 basis at Bi-Provincial. We've restructured the 

deal, the NewGrade upgrader here in Regina, to make it an 

economically viable upgrader. We're trying to put these plants 

in a position where they can generate revenue over the long 

haul and pay back the shareholders, our partners, and as well 

the people of Saskatchewan who have invested hundreds of 

millions of dollars in these particular initiatives. 

 

We understand there are some positives, but I want to make you 

aware of the fact that this government, this administration, is 

dealing with some of the effects that were created by the 

investment and by the decisions that were made in the 1980s in 

terms of the development of these upgraders. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well that's fair enough. I just want to put it on 



March 8, 1995 

 

745 

record that through no . . . I was going to say fault of your own 

or no major initiative on your part, it looks like we're picking up 

about $520 million in cash '94-95 in oil and gas and land sales. 

 

And the royalty holidays haven't reverted back to the 1970s. 

They're much more contemporary and I congratulate you on 

that. And we're picking up net $100 million from two 

upgraders, in your estimate. And that probably doesn't include 

all the spin-offs associated with economic activity. But that's 

just the net coming in here as the value of 75,000 barrels a day, 

25 million barrels a year, being processed in the province of 

Saskatchewan that gives us some market power. 

 

So I would just make the point, half a billion dollars in revenue 

coming in from the oil patch based on a structure that hasn't, to 

be fair, changed an awful lot in terms of royalty holidays and 

land sales. And a hundred million more than would have been 

there if we hadn't had the upgraders. 

 

Now in financing and putting together upgraders, I will admit it 

isn't easy. And I think the NDP administration of the past tried a 

long time to build them but were never successful. But there are 

two here now. 

 

When you look at them today, two things are quite obvious 

about the upgraders. And I think those at NewGrade will tell 

you this and Husky will tell you this. The interesting part of the 

Lloydminster upgrader is that, to a very large extent, it was 

financed by Alberta and the federal government. I think 

Saskatchewan had 15 to 17 per cent of that action. But it's 

interesting that the upgrader ended up on Saskatchewan side. 

 

So for a modest percentage, we got the upgrader on our side of 

the border, which means the financing, which was done by 

Husky, done by the federal government, and done by the 

Alberta government, which now was granted to us. I think that 

in terms of your refinancing, you said that the Alberta 

government just said, fine, you take it. We'll throw in a billion 

and the feds will throw in a large amount. So it's now 50/50 in 

Saskatchewan — with Husky in Saskatchewan and with the 

Saskatchewan government. 

 

Now I think quite conceivably, with that considerable amount 

of federal money and Alberta money, that Saskatchewan 

government and Saskatchewan taxpayers, plus Husky in our 

province, is going to do all right. 

 

Secondly, when you look at the NewGrade upgrader, one of the 

most significant advantages of building an upgrader is to tie it 

to a refinery. In other words, you save about 700 million to a 

billion dollars if you don't have to build a refinery next to the 

upgrader. 

 

And so we have here in the province of Saskatchewan, in the 

city of Regina, a very good upgrader tied to a refinery that is 

helping generate in the neighbourhood of $50 million a year net 

to the province of Saskatchewan. And the refinery is making 

lots of money, and you and the feds and the co-op, Federated, 

have restructured so that refinery and that upgrader are looking 

better all the time. 

 

So I just want to make the point that the upgraders are helpful, 

the upgraders will be profitable — and I think you will agree 

with that — and the structuring of those diversification and 

value added opportunities is also generating beyond the 

upgraders themselves, in your best guess, at least $100 million a 

year. 

 

Now that's one of the interesting arguments that I saw in 

previous research done by the NDP administration in the '70s, 

saying if we can build these, the economic spin-offs are 

encouraging for royalties and for economic activity, for 

exploration, for seismic, and for jobs. 

 

And I just have to say I agree and I'm happy that there's now 

$500 million coming in annually. At least 100 million of that is 

associated with the upgraders . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well you can correct me, that's fine, these are your numbers. 

 

And the Husky upgrader, the Lloydminster upgrader, is going to 

be profitable because the feds and Alberta sort of threw in the 

money and we never were at risk for a lot because we were at 

17 per cent, I believe was the right number. And here in Regina 

the big benefit of course is the fact that we have a refinery tied 

to an upgrader and the refinery is doing very well. 

 

And a fourth benefit, and I think one that the engineers and 

people in the oil patch and at universities will tell you — these 

two upgraders provide an excellent opportunity to learn about 

upgrading technology. There will be nobody in Canada, in fact 

very few in North America, that will have the opportunity to 

learn more about upgrading and upgrading technology than in 

the two large "educational institutions" we have here in 

upgrading in Saskatchewan because we will be on top of it. 

And if you look at the NewGrade facility they have and will 

continue, to learn and provide tremendous expertise to that 

whole area of knowledge here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And I'm sure the province and Husky will find the same with 

the Lloydminster upgrader. 

 

So I just wanted to confirm — and if you want to modify any of 

the numbers — that the upgraders have made and will continue 

to make a significant contribution to royalties and to money and 

to jobs and to education in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

I'm happy to see that . . . well we both agree that they're a 

positive contribution to the province and to western Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I guess I would just want to 

say that certainly we agree with much of what you're saying. 

And I say to the member from Estevan that we recognize that 

certainly there's an educational component that the people of 

Saskatchewan will enjoy by virtue of the fact that we've built 

them here. Many of our people are working in them to learn the 

operations and development techniques to make them more 

efficient, and I think certainly that that's expertise that will serve 

us well in future years. 



March 8, 1995 

 

746 

There are a number of things that I would want to correct the 

member on. First of all with respect to the royalty structure that 

has generated much of the activity, that was an initiative of this 

administration. That royalty structure was put in place in 

January of 1994. 

 

And I want to correct you in one other aspect of this. You're 

referring to the hundred million dollars that I spoke of, as 

incremental revenue. What we're talking is value added, and not 

revenue generated from the upgraders. And it's also important 

to know that the provincial government takes no royalties or 

taxes off of that value added product. 

 

I want to say as well that quite clearly the restructuring of Bi-

Provincial was an initiative embarked upon by this 

administration. It was an agreement reached with Husky Oil, 

and it was necessary to do simply because of the debt load of 

that particular facility and the cost overruns that occurred when 

it was being put together. 

 

And the fact is that this government was prudent enough to buy 

the assets from the Government of Canada and the Government 

of Alberta for 7 cents on the dollar. The initial investment, the 

investment that you made when you were premier, was in the 

neighbourhood of $275 million. And I believe as you're right, 

you're correct, that gave the people of Saskatchewan a 17 per 

cent share in the upgrader. 

 

Well we were able to pick up the balance to the point where we 

got 50 cents on the dollar and we now own 50 per cent of that 

particular facility. And we bought it; we invested $43 million. 

And I guess, if my figures are correct, that would give us 33 per 

cent of the upgrader for $43 million or 7 cents on the dollars, 

which I think speaks very well for the kind of business that the 

Premier and the Executive Council and the caucus members . . . 

and the kind of business that we do. 

 

(1630) 

 

It's not a matter of investing money for investment's sake. It's 

got to make some economic sense and some financial sense. 

And I think after having met with John Lau — and you will 

know Mr. Lau, the CEO (chief executive officer) of Husky Oil 

in Calgary — a week or so ago, he's really quite pleased with 

the business arrangement that we've been able to make. 

 

I think he and I will both admit that the investment has, I guess, 

less of a payback than what we would want to see in terms of 

return. But I think over the long haul, with the restructuring and 

the cost effectiveness that we're going to be able to put into the 

operations, we will over the long haul be able to get a return on 

investment for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I think really, to the member from Estevan, what this 

government has done, even more than restructuring some of the 

business deals that we were less than in favour of, I guess 

would be fair to say, and trying to make better of what we felt 

were maybe not the best deal that could have been reached, one 

of the most positive initiatives that we've done in terms of 

attracting business is  people who want to invest in this 

province  is that we've done something really quite simple. 

 

We've restructured the way this government spends its money 

and the way we generate our revenue. What we've done is we 

balanced the books, and that's something that hadn't happened 

in this province since 1982. And I think the confidence that the 

business people, not only in the oil and gas sector, but in other 

sectors have shown by the fact that they're investing over $200 

million in land sales last year, speaks well of what this 

government has done. 

 

And I want to say that the people of Saskatchewan have very 

much to be proud of, the fact that they shared and helped us in 

terms of putting a balanced budget together, like I said, for the 

first time since 1982. They went through some hardship and 

some difficult times, and they made some sacrifices. And 

they're in no small way responsible for the attitude that the 

business community take towards investment in our province. 

 

And I think that's one of the things that we will look back on, 

and certainly I will look back on, as a politician when I'm 

finished my career either at the will of the people or a decision 

made by my family . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — By your wife. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — One of my colleagues says, by my 

wife . . . is that I'll be able to sit back and say that we were part 

of an administration that took on a major responsibility, that of 

putting our fiscal house in order. 

 

And I find it really quite interesting, the comments from the 

business community and from the oil and gas industry. And 

what they say is that this is an environment that they want to do 

business in and where they want to invest. Because they know 

what the rules are. We're not moving the goalposts, in their 

words. And they have got now a stable economy in a province 

where they want to invest. And they've got stable regulations, 

and they know that this government is here to work with them 

to ensure that their shareholders, the people who invest in their 

corporations, will want them to be investing money in this 

province. 

 

And I think that's going to continue. Because I believe what 

they found is they've got a fair government, they've got a 

fiscally responsible government, and they've got a government 

that listens to them. 

 

And I guess one of the comments, and I would have to 

commend my predecessors and the Department of Energy and 

Mines as well, one of the comments that I heard and have been 

hearing over the last month is that they're very pleased with the 

fact that they can have access to the minister's office, that they 

can have access to the department and the department officials, 

and that they don't have to wait for a long, long period of time 

for these things to happen. 

 

So all in all, what we're trying to do is create an environment 



March 8, 1995 

 

747 

where people want to do business in. And I think if you look at 

the retail sales growth in this province you'll see that consumers 

have got confidence — 9.9 per cent increase last year over the 

year before. You look at the manufacturing and processing 

sector where you've got a 17 per cent increase in terms of our 

exports. 

 

And I think all of this bodes well and all of this speaks to what 

this government has been able to achieve since October 1991. 

 

And I would want to say that it's a road that we are going to 

continue on. It's, I think, a responsible approach to governing in 

the 1990s. And although you and I may disagree politically, I 

think one thing you have to agree, that the facts speak for 

themselves. And the facts say that business is investing, 

consumers are buying, our manufacturing sector is growing, 

we're creating more and more jobs in Saskatchewan. I think, all 

in all, you can sum it up by saying it's a good place to do 

business and it's a good place to live. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you can talk about 

balancing the budget, I guess I can ask some questions about 

your philosophy on balancing the budget at least. 

 

My point is going to be, as you said, you picked up about half a 

billion dollars a year in oil royalties and land sales, which had 

virtually nothing to do with your administration. You said 

you've redone the oil royalty structure. Well if you look at so-

called modifications to the oil royalty structure compared to 

what we introduced, I mean they're quite modest, to say the 

least. 

 

The big structural change was when we said to people, you can 

come into the province and have oil royalty holidays and carry 

on, and that attracted the attention. And what you've realized — 

and I give you credit for it — is that is an intelligent thing to do 

because it generates revenue and it generates jobs. And the land 

sales and the oil royalties, which are $500 million a year, are 

based on a philosophy that says, open up. 

 

Now clearly — you and I won't argue about this — your 

political record is one of, you know, not too cozy with the oil 

patch. And we've heard it, and the NDPs have heard it for years. 

And now what I want to do is congratulate you for recognizing 

that you can make $500 million a year by inviting them in to 

participate. And on top of that you can make a considerable 

amount of money through the diversification of a couple of 

upgraders, which you now say will . . . at least one will be 

breaking even or making money because of the restructuring 

and another one is getting better, certainly here. 

 

Now the second point I want to make . . . and it's interesting 

that you would comment on it in terms of you're proud of 

balancing the budget. If you take $500 million in oil royalties 

alone and land sales and you take the utilities that you're 

responsible for, I think annually now you're looking at  what? 

 6, 7, $800 million you're taking in from your portfolios? I 

don't know what the profits would be, and you can tell me if . . . 

Generally, if we want to get into it, the net profits in utilities are 

pretty high. SaskEnergy and TransGas and SaskPower — those 

three are pretty healthy. 

 

Now, a couple of points. Number one, you didn't like it when 

we opened up the oil policy to the industry and said, come into 

the province; here's an oil royalty structure that will encourage 

you. You said you didn't like that. Well, it turned out to work. 

 

Secondly, you said  and you criticized previous 

administrations — you didn’t like raising utility rates, said that's 

not good. But obviously you've raised them a lot. But those two 

policies which you've kind of flipped on have generated in the 

neighbourhood of 700 to $800 million annually. And you said, 

well it's sort of magical that we have balanced the budget. We 

got that. 

 

Well I'll tell you, in most years, if you look at the deficit during 

the l980s, with one or two exceptions, you'll look at from 250 to 

$350 million was the annual deficit — 250 to $350 million — 

and I've got the list of every one of them. 1986 was over a 

billion dollars; the rest of those, the majority of them were 350 

to around $300 million. Now you've just picked up $500 

million in oil royalties and land sales, and you haven't done 

anything. 

 

And you've also picked up enough just in public utilities to 

make a significant contribution. And again, all you've done is 

change your policy where you said during the election you 

wouldn't raise taxes or utilities, and now obviously you're 

picking up . . . I think the number, Mr. Minister, is 400 million 

in utilities. 

 

So oil royalties and land sales, plus utilities, are getting you 

close to a billion dollars a year in new-found money  one, 

because you adopted the Conservative policy in oil royalties 

and gas; and number two, because you changed your mind and 

decided to tax the people in utilities, which you're responsible 

for because you're the Minister of Power and the Minister of 

Energy and Minister of TransGas. 

 

So it's interesting. If the oil patch is coming back and say they 

really like the environment, I'm sure they're doing so to keep 

you in line, Mr. Minister, and saying, don't go back to the 1970s 

with your oil royalty structure. Don't pick on us. We can do 

good. We can find oil. We can find gas. And it'll pay. And I 

think you have to admit today that the oil royalty structure that 

we put in place and that you have tinkered with pays very well. 

The upgraders have generated a lot of economic activity and 

pay very well. You are changing tune in terms of utilities. They 

certainly paid you well, but it's cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers 

a great deal. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could comment about the amount 

of natural gas that is consumed by a project the size of 

Saskferco and what impact that might have on the economy in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me begin by saying that we 

don't have that figure. That would be a question that would 



March 8, 1995 

 

748 

be probably more appropriately addressed to SaskEnergy when 

we're doing Crown corporation estimates. We just don't have 

the figures from SaskEnergy here. We're dealing with the 

estimates of Energy and Mines. 

 

I just want to comment on your analysis of what we've been 

discussing here. You talk about this portfolio in total generating 

perhaps $700 million in revenue. But what you're forgetting is, 

and what you're not understanding, is that this is not 

incremental revenue. There was a revenue base before this 

royalty structure was put in. There was a revenue base from the 

oil and the gas sector before the upgraders were put in. 

 

And I think what you also need to understand in this year's 

budget, from Crown Investments Corporation there's something 

like $50 million towards, on the revenue side, estimated for '95-

96, which is all of the Crowns, the whole Crown corporation 

and the whole branch of Crown corporations. 

 

And I don't want to be argumentative, but I want to say that 

certainly there are some similarities between the oil structure 

that we've put in place and the one that you had in the 1980s. 

 

And I would not be so foolish as to stand here and indicate to 

you that I felt all of the initiatives that you did when you were 

the premier of the province were negative initiatives. I don't feel 

that way because I really do believe you tried to govern this 

province in the best way you could when you were the premier. 

There could be lots of arguments made as to why your 

administration was a success or was a failure. And I certainly 

wouldn't stand in my place today and say that I thought 

everything that you did was a failure because I don't believe 

that. 

 

But what I also don't want is for you, with a similar royalty 

structure to ours, to stand in this House today and take credit for 

balanced budget initiatives that this government started in 

October 1991 and was able to succeed. And I hope that's not 

what you were doing because with the same royalty structure in 

every budget that you delivered, you were never once able to 

deliver a balanced budget. 

 

And I'll give you the argument, and I know the argument that 

you will use: you had drought, and you had grasshoppers, and 

we had difficult times in agriculture. And I understand all of 

that, and I don't want to go back to the 1980s and discuss with 

you . . . although we can, but I don't think that it's going to be 

any benefit to us or the people of Saskatchewan. And we can 

discuss what Allan Blakeney did in the 1970s, but I don't know 

that that's going to be a benefit to us either. What I would rather 

do is sit here and discuss with you how this department, how 

the regulations and how the licensing branch and how our 

interaction with the industry can benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan in terms of job opportunities in the 1990s, and 

what we do into the next century after the year 2000. 

 

And so I say in closing that these certainly are interesting times, 

exciting times. They're exciting times for Saskatchewan. They're 

exciting times for our young people to see youth 

employment opportunities that hadn't been there in the past. 

Young people able to get jobs. And we see our population 

growing. And I think those are all positive things. We see the 

number of jobs in Saskatchewan growing. 

 

(1645) 

 

But I want to say that part of it is, whether it's a Conservative 

administration or whether it's a New Democrat administration 

or even if it may — and I don't think this will happen, certainly 

not in this decade — a Liberal administration, but I think what's 

important is that governments deliver fairness. They deliver 

stability, and they take leadership in terms of sound fiscal 

management because that's what brings business here. It's more 

than just the royalty structure, and it's certainly more than just 

the tax levels in the province, although those are all part of the 

decision-making process. 

 

But I think the main thing that the business community want, 

and the business community that I talk to . . . and I'm part of the 

business community and have been for 25 years in this province 

. . . want stability, want to know what the ground rules are, and 

they want fairness. And that's what this administration and that's 

what this department is trying to create for investors in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would agree with a lot of 

what you said. What we want to do, sorting partisan stuff aside, 

is cause economic activity and not rewrite history any way other 

than it actually took place. And just rewrite it with truthfulness 

and with fairness. 

 

And what we're saying here is if we look at the . . . I used to call 

it the tax elasticity of demand in the oil business. If you relax a 

little bit, you make an awful lot more money. And that 

philosophy has generated a great deal of wealth in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and I'm happy you picked up on it. That's a 

very good thing to do. 

 

So if you could drop that price and increase your revenue, then 

it's just like the business you're in. You know at some point in 

time no matter what your business is in and you raise your price 

too high, you're not going to sell any. And if you lower your 

price, you might even do better because it's an elastic demand. 

Well it's the same with respect to taxes. 

 

And what you finally found out here is that the revenue coming 

into the province of Saskatchewan — $500 million a year — is 

in large part linked to the fact that administrations, ours and 

yours, finally recognized, if you treat this industry with the right 

kind of royalty and tax structure, you're going to make money, 

and they're going to make money. And I just want to put that on 

the record. 

 

And if you diversify and look at some of those things that can 

add some value and give us market power, what it does is 

increase the elasticity on our side. It becomes more inelastic if 

we get to control synthetic crude versus crude oil that is sitting 

there unprocessed. And if we can have that option of selling 



March 8, 1995 

 

749 

synthetic crude in the United States, the elasticity of demand is 

much more in our favour. 

 

And that makes us money. And that's why you tried to build 

upgraders, and that's why we did build them. And you can have 

the advantage of saying, well I restructured it; fair enough. But 

we built them, and they're both in Saskatchewan, and they're on 

the Saskatchewan side of borders, and they generate a great deal 

of income, plus oil royalties. 

 

What I wanted to pursue and to carry it on with you, is if we 

want to have more economic activity in the province of 

Saskatchewan then the pursuit of attracting industry here is 

helpful — more industry, less government. And if you can 

attract them here with your royalty policy or your taxation 

policy, you're going to make money. 

 

Let's look at Saskferco for an example. I believe it's fair to say 

Saskferco is providing to the province of Saskatchewan from 80 

to $100 million a year. Now the Government of Saskatchewan 

are partners with Cargill on that fertilizer project — they're 

partners. Do you have any idea, Mr. Minister, what your share 

of that project might be? Or do I have to wait and ask the 

Minister of Finance or somebody else? Or if you don't have 

that, would you have any impact on what the value to the 

natural gas business is as a result of that project? 

 

Or philosophically, I guess I could ask you this. Do you think 

it's a reasonable idea to encourage private sector people to come 

in, and how would you evaluate the Saskatchewan government's 

equity position in that fertilizer project with its partner, Cargill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well first of all let me make a 

couple of comments. One of the theories that you propose this 

afternoon is that less government will bring more industry. And 

I think it's safe to say that this government has done an awful 

lot in terms of cutting the operational costs of government. 

 

We've cut from 1991, when we took power on the operational 

side, to this point, if you exclude the amount that we're paying 

for incremental interest and the amount we're paying on the $15 

billion the province owes, we've cut the operational cost of 

government by around $300 million. And so, given those 

figures and given that as being fact, I guess you could say that 

in that respect, we agree. 

 

What we want to do is create the most cost-effective 

government that we can and that's why we've restructured 

government departments. We've amalgamated Environment and 

Natural Resources. We've done away with Rural Development 

and moved it into Municipal Government. And I think it's 

working well. So I guess what I'm saying is there are many 

initiatives that we've taken to try and streamline the operational 

costs. 

 

And I think you'll agree with me on this as well, that everything 

that government does as it relates to interaction with industry 

and with business, there has to be a balance. And there has to 

be a reasonable balance and it can't be slanted to one side where 

it's all for business, nothing for the shareholders, the people of 

Saskatchewan. There has to be a balance. You can find a 

balance. You sit down and work at it. There's always a situation 

where you can create fairness for both partners. 

 

And I guess that's how we view our interaction with the 

business community — as a partnership. And in any 

partnership, whether it's a business arrangement or whether it's 

a marriage, there has to be fairness on both sides. And I think 

by virtue of the investment . . . You indicate $500 million, and 

that's a fairly rough figure in terms of just the oil and gas 

industry, but we're generating revenue on that side. Quite 

clearly that indicates that we have reached, to a degree, some 

fairness, some balance — a scenario where business wants to 

perform and do what they do in our province. 

 

With respect to your questions on Saskferco, I can't comment. 

We don't have any of those figures here. Those would probably 

be best handled by either Crown Investments Corporation 

estimates or perhaps Executive Council estimates or the 

Committee of Finance. I don't have any officials who would 

have any of the information that you have requested. But I'm 

sure that the minister of Crown Investments Corporation . . . 

well the short-time minister for Crown Investments 

Corporation, if he was still the minister, would be more than 

willing to bring all of the details to you. And the Deputy 

Premier, the minister of Crown Investments Corporation, would 

be more than willing to discuss in a detailed fashion when they 

have the officials who are there to assist with the details of that 

particular operation. 

 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I mean you don't have the . . . I'm 

surprised your deputy wouldn't have the amount of gas that that 

company would use and the royalties we make off of using that 

much gas. I mean it's a fairly large user of natural gas. You're 

the Minister of Energy for gas and oil and energy. You must 

have some idea of what it's generating in terms of consumption 

of natural gas and what that might be worth to us. 

 

And secondly, I just wanted your general comment on how you 

thought the company was doing and how the province of 

Saskatchewan was doing in a joint venture where you're an 

equity partner, and how you felt about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well to the member from Estevan, I 

can give you the global numbers in terms of direct sales of gas. 

I can give you those from 1991 through to . . . or 1990 through 

to '93 with an estimate of 1994. But I can't give you a 

breakdown because I don't have a breakdown of all of the direct 

sales and how much their volumes were. 

 

That information would be available at SaskEnergy. And 

certainly our officials of SaskEnergy will be able to bring those 

kind of detailed breakdowns. I guess it's . . . what would it be 

here? In 1994, the global estimate that we have is 32,000 bcf 

(billion cubic feet), but that includes all of the direct sales. 

 

So in order to get that kind of detail, certainly we would have to 



March 8, 1995 

 

750 

have the officials from SaskEnergy, and those would be 

available at Crown corporations estimates. And if you're 

available to ask those questions, we'd be more than willing to 

give you a breakdown. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 

 

 

 


