






















































March 22, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 22, 1995 

 

 
1043 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to present petitions on behalf of the people from 
Tompkins, Gull Lake, Kyle, Medicine Hat, Swift Current, and 
the Webb area, mostly from the south-west part of the province. 
I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Hepburn, Debden, Martensville, 
Osler, and Saskatoon areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so 
present them. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The petition is from people of my home town of 
Shaunavon. The prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And to require the directors of the Pool to seek approval 

of Pool membership by a vote before the proposed 
changes to the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool are enacted by 
the Legislative Assembly. 

 
 And petitions to allocate adequate funding dedicated 

toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 
 
And according to order, the following petitions presented on 
March 20 and 21 urging the government to provide funds for 
acute care bed at the Prairie Health Care Centre at Cabri were 
found to be irregular and under rule 11(7) they therefore cannot 
be read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you 
to all members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of grade 4 
students from St. Gerard School in Saskatoon. These students, 
along with their teacher, Mr. Léon Bezaire, are part of the 
French language pilot for the new social studies curriculum. 
 
One unit of this new curriculum includes a study of government 
and how it works. Their trip to the legislature today is part of 
that study. Following their visit to the gallery today the students 
will be given a tour of the Legislative Building. I look forward 
to meeting with them later to share their impressions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in giving these 
young students a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my honour today to introduce some special guests 
in your gallery. Of course all people in the gallery are special, 
Mr. Speaker, but these people, today I would like to introduce, 
and I would ask them to stand as I introduce them, please. 
 
First of all, Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen, our child advocate, 
who will be confirmed later today; her husband Rob Loewen; 
Trent and Sarah; and Paul is at home writing an exam, so he has 
his priorities, I guess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also the staff of the child advocate office: Cathie Flood; Gina 
Alexander — I guess they're busy working — Leslie Erhardt. 
Anyway, those are the staff members and we thought they  



March 22, 1995 

 
1044 

would be here. Also, Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
Assembly, Lin Gallagher, Deborah's sister . . . boy, this is 
working well. Okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's also a pleasure to introduce, in your gallery, 
Barbara Tompkins, the Ombudsman — thank you, Barbara; and 
Gord Mayer, the legal counsel for the Ombudsman and child 
advocate offices. These people work closely together. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Should have quit while you were ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Okay. Well should have quit while I was 
ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members, as I know they will 
want to, to welcome the special guests in your gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, I would like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Dr. Deborah into the Assembly. And I 
think I would also ask the Assembly here to give her a very 
warm welcome. She has a tough job and she's doing it very 
well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
House today, Emmanuel Kaunda. He's a lecturer at the Bunda 
College of Agriculture, University of Malawi. 
 
Mr. Kaunda is in Saskatchewan for a short time to study 
aquaculture as part of an ongoing program where SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
and Bunda College of Agriculture are partners. 
 
I invite all members to join us in welcoming Mr. Kaunda to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly today, 21 grade 12 students that are 
situated in the Speaker's gallery with their teacher, Diana Ritter, 
with them today. I had the pleasure of joining them while they 
had dinner, I guess — I had it prior to that — and we had a fair 
discussion. 
 
And I certainly want to welcome them here today and hope they 
enjoyed their tour and hopefully enjoy the rest of their stay in 
Regina and have a safe trip home. And I ask the members to 
please welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for  

me today to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly, another guest with Mr. Emmanuel Kaunda from 
Malawi, at the very top of the west gallery, and that is Mr. Don 
Hovdebo, formerly of Saskatoon and now of Prince Albert. 
 
Don was a constituent of mine and ran a small business in 
Saskatoon, doing environmental testing working with 
aquaculture, so I know that Mr. Kaunda is in very good hands if 
he is looking at aquaculture with Don Hovdebo. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to rise and introduce to the Assembly and our guests, a mentor 
of mine, a 25-year veteran of the House of Commons, Les 
Benjamin, who is seated to my left and at the back here. 
 
Les, as many of you will know, represented Regina-Lumsden, 
by that and some other names as I mentioned, for 25 years; 
advocated tirelessly on behalf of farmers — and certainly with 
respect to the Crow rate debate — and was always known as a 
character in the House of Commons in his advocacy. 
 
For example, at one stage he described the drought and the 
wind in south-western Saskatchewan, and he described the 
gophers as eight feet high and digging. And that's sort of the 
tone of some of the work that Les Benjamin was able to do. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Les Benjamin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although I 
have risen many times, my enthusiasm for introducing this next 
group has not dimmed at all. 
 
In passing, I didn't actually rise to . . . in passing I also want to 
extend greetings to Les Benjamin.. I was involved in his first 
campaign and I was involved in every campaign throughout that 
to the last. This is a person who brought considerable warmth, 
humour, and dignity to the political process and a person whom 
we can well be proud of. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I rise though to more formally, Mr. 
Speaker, introduce another group of people who are important 
to the government process. From time to time we have public 
servants who join us; they are in your gallery. They joined us in 
order to observe the political process but it also gives us an 
opportunity to thank these public servants who come to our 
assistance and I think who also are increasingly professional 
and bring credit to the whole process of government. 
 
These public servants, I will not . . . They are too numerous to 
introduce one by one. I will simply add that they come from the 
departments of Justice, from Environment, from Highways, 
from Social Services. I invite all members present to welcome  



March 22, 1995 

 
1045 

them and to show our appreciation for all that these people do 
for the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, Mrs. 
Sarah Hopkins who is seated in the first row of your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. And she's here today with her daughter, Barb 
Olsen, who lives in Regina. And Mrs. Hopkins lives in 
Saskatoon, but was born in Northern Ireland and came to settle 
in rural Saskatchewan in 1927, but she's lived in Saskatoon 
since 1942. 
 
And she raised six children; she has many grandchildren and 
great-grandchildren and I'm sure that Mrs. Hopkins is interested 
in what's going on here in the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the work that we do, but she's also here to observe 
the work of her granddaughter, Rhonda Adams from Saskatoon, 
who is one of our pages. 
 
And I know we all want to wish Mrs. Hopkins a warm welcome 
to the legislature and a very pleasant stay here in the city of 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too want 
to join with the Minister of Social Services this afternoon in 
welcoming the Parker-Loewen family to the Assembly. The 
Parker-Loewen family, at least half of them, live in my 
constituency at this point in time. 
 
Over the years, Dr. Parker-Loewen and I have had the privileges 
of working with her on many, many constituency issues. And I 
know that Dr. Parker-Loewen has really been a pillar in the 
development of health and social policy in our community, and 
her name comes up and is noted very often. 
 
So on behalf of the constituents of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and 
the people of Saskatchewan, I want to wish her well and 
continued success in her work as our child advocate. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

McClean Lake Uranium Project 
 

Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last week an 
important announcement was made that is good news for the 
Saskatchewan economy and especially for workers in 
north-eastern Saskatchewan. 
 
Cogema Resources announced that construction will begin 
immediately on the McClean Lake uranium mine and mill north 
of La Ronge. The project will involve construction worth $250 
million and employ more than 250 people in the construction  

phase. When the project begins operations in 1997, it will 
provide 260 full-time jobs, a full 60 per cent going to 
Northerners. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, a project such as this not only provides 
the direct jobs I mentioned; it also will provide many 
opportunities for northern entrepreneurs and communities 
through spin-off benefits. This project will add to the ongoing 
economic development of the North, an area of our province 
that deserves and at last is seeing some economic development. 
The mining industry already employs 5,000 people directly and 
is responsible for at least another 10,000 indirectly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the McClean Lake project is a perfect example of 
how the Partnership for Renewal is working. The government, 
as partner, has worked with the local community and with the 
industry to provide jobs and economic development for 
northern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Saskatoon Police Pan Gun Law 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have here an 
issue affecting my constituency and indeed the whole province. 
And I'd like to read from an article in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix of today, titled which: "Police pan gun law." 
 
 City Police have come out . . . both barrels blazing in 

their attack on Bill C-68, the proposed gun-control 
legislation. 

 
 Saskatoon police officers have voted 99 per cent against 

the controversial bill which would require registration 
of all firearms . . . 

 
 "The law-abiding citizens of Saskatoon and 

Saskatchewan have enough restrictions placed on them 
by existing gun laws," Const. Murray Grismer said 
Tuesday. The membership of the Saskatoon Police 
Association was surveyed Monday. 

 
 "Further gun laws will do nothing to deter crime or 

prevent violence within our community." 
 
 "Firearms represent a very small portion of the weapons 

used." 
 
 The nine-year city police veteran said criminals rarely 

use firearms in violent acts in Saskatoon. 
 
 "Generally, I find that there is something else used in a 

violent crime long before a firearm is. 
 
 "In all the ones I've investigated, only one involved a 

legally owned firearm which happened to be stolen from 
a person who undertook exceptional steps to prevent it 
from being stolen." 

 



March 22, 1995 

 
1046 

 In that case, thieves cut through a steel cabinet to gain 
access to the weapon, which was later used in an armed 
robbery. 

 
 "The (Canadian Police Association) position was made, 

as are most political things, always on the upper level, 
assuming that some well-intentioned people think it is 
the opinion of the people they represent." 

 
 "We've done this so that the people of Saskatchewan 

and the government of Saskatchewan clearly know 
where the police stand on this issue." 

 
I agree with Constable Grismer, Mr. Speaker. It's time the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) understood the will of the people and 
acted. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Unless you changed your 
constituency, I called the member from Nipawin. 
 

Natural Reforestation 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 
know, I'm a farmer and a forester and a cattleman, and for eight 
years I was a provincial pasture manager. And I'm also a person 
that is interested in promoting the preservation of our province's 
natural resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm also one who appreciates a good idea. And I 
was struck by an article I saw recently in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix. The article announced, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan Agriculture will once again be using sheep 
instead of pesticides as part of the reforestation program for 
white spruce seedlings. 
 
Instead of using tonnes of herbicides into the environment to 
protect these seedlings, the department will be using 500 sheep 
from Saskatchewan farmers. The ranchers get paid, the sheep 
get fed, the seedlings get protected and grow, and our 
environment gets a break. 
 
Using . . . I think the plan is an intelligent one and I like it  
using a natural way to do some of the work that chemical 
companies would do and keeping our environment healthy. I 
applaud all those involved who devised the plan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Lakeland Videoconferencing 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sorry about that; the 
applause was so thunderous I didn't hear you say Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is moving at full speed down the 
information highway. Today I want to report about one of the 
new stops along the way. Lakeland College is an 
Alberta-Saskatchewan interprovincial college with a campus in  

Lloydminster. I was pleased, Mr. Speaker, to attend the 
electronic ribbon-cutting ceremonies for the launch of 
Lakeland's new videoconferencing units. 
 
Distance education is nothing new but the technology employed 
by Lakeland is the latest and best. Instructor-teacher reaction 
will take place without the half-second delay and freezing effect 
that was characteristic of the former technology. 
 
Recent advances has also made the technology very reasonable 
and affordable. As well, roll-about and computer desktop 
systems make videoconferencing very affordable. 
Videoconferencing, Mr. Speaker, will not only benefit rural 
education; local groups and businesses will find 
communications easier through this new technology. 
 
Lloydminster is one of 71 Canadian cities using 13,000 
videoconferencing units. Lakeland College is the first public 
college in Alberta to employ such a system. For their part in 
improving rural life, I want to congratulate the board and staff 
of Lakeland College. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Table Mountain 25th Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, 
March 18 I had the pleasure of attending the 25th anniversary 
of Table Mountain. 
 
Table Mountain, located 30 kilometres north-west of The 
Battlefords, has developed into Saskatchewan's finest downhill 
ski facility. This has not happened by accident. A dedicated 
staff under the management of Lawrence Blouin and an 
altruistic board has given exemplary effort in making Table 
Mountain what it is today. 
 
Saskatchewan residents should all congratulate the hundreds of 
local people who have made the facility a recreational and a 
financial success story. In 1970 the original board consisted of 
the late Irwin McIntosh, Dr. Irwin Zacharias, Joe Ulmer, Dennis 
Maher, Ted Noble, Don Asmussen, Maurice Shaw, Bill Thom, 
Bob Glanville, and Barry Conkin. 
 
At the 25th anniversary function, the board consisted of John 
Luckey, Bill Thom, Pat Janko, Bob Craig, Peter Tarnowsky, 
Bob Demkiw, and John Douville and Charlie Blais. Today I call 
on all members of this Assembly to convey their 
congratulations to the hundreds of people who have assisted in 
the development and ongoing operation of Table Mountain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial 4A Basketball Champions 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Sheldon-Williams Collegiate is in my constituency, and it's 
actually very close to my home. And I'm happy to report that I 
now live in a neighbourhood of champions. Last weekend in  



March 22, 1995 

 
1047 

Saskatoon, both the men's and women's basketball teams from 
Sheldon won their respective class 4A provincial 
championships. 
 
The women won over Thom Collegiate, also of Regina, after 
defeating Aden Bowman from Saskatoon — sorry about that, 
Mr. Speaker. I should mention that the only games that Thom 
and Sheldon lost all year were to each other. Winning for the 
women's team is nothing new; it's the third time in four years 
that Sheldon has won the provincial. 
 
The men's team defeated Campbell Collegiate in another 
all-Regina final. This team lost only three games all season. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the first time since 1982 that teams from Regina 
won both championships, and the first time since 1983 that a 
Regina men's team has won. And I think I'm correct in saying 
this the first championship ever for the Sheldon men's team. 
 
I want to congratulate all members of both teams, their coaches, 
Dave Taylor and Kevin Koster, and the entire school for their 
victories. Without taking anything away from the actual players 
on the court, it is fair to say, I believe, that accomplishments 
like this reflect well on the complete and balanced educational 
program offered by schools like Sheldon-Williams. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rail Strike Legislation 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this afternoon is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
 Grain exports are grinding to a halt, Companies coast to 

coast are losing millions and big city commuters are 
locked in traffic . . . 

 
As result of the rail strike, reads the front page of today's paper, 
Mr. Speaker. Big city commuting problems are inconvenient. 
Grain shipments are indispensable to Saskatchewan's economy, 
Mr. Speaker, yet the federal colleagues of the NDP government 
opposite saw fit to side with the unions and against 
Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, at least five members of the provincial 
NDP opposite are now publicly backing the NDP Member of 
Parliament who led the opposition to back-to-work legislation. 
The kingpin of the federal NDP attack on Saskatchewan grain 
shipments, Chris Axworthy, is being backed by the Minister of 
Finance, the former minister of Justice, the members from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, Saskatoon Idylwyld, and Saskatoon 
River Heights. 
 
Madam Minister, instead of writing a letter of support to the 
MP (Member of Parliament), Chris Axworthy, why didn't you 
write a letter of contempt for leading the NDP fight against 
Saskatchewan grain shipments? It would have been a lot more  

useful to the Saskatchewan farmers, Madam Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
opportunity to rise and respond to the Leader of the Opposition. 
I don't think he mentioned my name on that letter, and I'm not 
sure whether he has it or not. But to treat the matter of the rail 
strike and grain shipments in such a jocular manner, I think, 
tells you what those members are all about and probably why 
they will stay in the single digit numbers as it would relate to 
support in the public because they don't take this seriously. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what's more important is the attempt today by 
the federal Minister of Agriculture in what I would call a 
cowardly manner, after dithering for two weeks on the issue of 
rail transportation and the stalling of the action in dealing with 
this issue and after dismantling the Crow and the implications 
for agriculture and after he has announced major abandonment 
of rail lines in the provinces, to today somehow attack the NDP 
in Saskatchewan tells you something about the character of that 
federal minister and why the public in Saskatchewan is calling 
him weak and spineless when it comes to defending 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, my question to 
the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, Madam Minister, the 
farmers of this province aren't laughing. They are outraged at 
the NDP opposite and the NDP federally for their fight against 
the back-to-work legislation. 
 
Madam Minister, you are quoted in the paper saying that 
Axworthy has the right mixture of idealism and pragmatism to 
be the effective NDP national leader. This is just after that MP 
led the NDP blockage of the Bill that would have allowed 
Saskatchewan grain to move to port. 
 
You and your NDP colleagues need to show a lot more 
pragmatism than idealism on this issue, Madam Minister. Your 
inconsistencies, your inconsistencies are rivalling the Liberal 
leader's inconsistencies, which is darn near impossible. Madam 
Minister, which comes first in your heart, Saskatchewan farm 
families or your support for a federal NDP MP who sides with 
union leaders over Saskatchewan farm families? Which comes 
first? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition continues in a frivolous manner to make light of a 
very serious issue, that is the grain movement in Canada. I say 
again, that last week — a week ago yesterday, on Tuesday — 
we had an all-party agreement; a resolution passed in this 
House to support negotiation and, at last resort, back-to-work 
legislation. 
 
We have made it very clear that we have supported the action of  



March 22, 1995 

 
1048 

this Assembly in supporting negotiation and, as a last resort, 
back-to-work legislation. It was at that time the Liberals who 
skipped out on the vote — and it's today that Mr. Goodale 
inaccurately says that the NDP in the House of Commons are 
stopping the Bill from being passed. That's absolutely wrong. 
It's dishonest, and it's old-style politics. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Liberal Party that she should, if 
she believes in honesty and integrity, get hold of the Minister of 
Agriculture today because she knows darn well what has gone 
in in the House on the debate. She didn't vote on it, but she 
knows the debate, that we support the federal government's 
passage of this Bill as quickly as possible, as does the federal 
NDP in the House of Commons. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations Construction Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. Mr. Minister, some time ago I asked 
what studies you have done to estimate the additional costs to 
the taxpayers of your union-preference tendering policy. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you estimated that additional cost? How 
much do you expect the Crown construction cost to increase as 
a result of your union preference policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to answer 
the question of the member opposite and tell him that we took a 
careful look at all over Canada where these kinds of agreements 
exist — the federal government level; in the private sector, a 
couple of them which have existed in Saskatchewan in the 
private sector and under the former administration. And the 
evidence shows that there is no significant increase in cost. 
 
And because in the agreement, Mr. Speaker, all sides had to 
give up something, there is a provision for a no strike, no 
lockout provision, which in many cases saves a considerable 
amount of money because member opposite knows that when 
sometimes you get a work disruption — and that happens from 
time to time — it increases the cost considerably. 
 
That was a major concession on the part of the workers, as there 
have been in this agreement concessions on the part of the 
employees . . . or the part of management, in order to make sure 
that there is a fair policy in place on which decisions as to who 
gets the contract are based by free and open tender, based on 
the ability to do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have a Health minister who won't admit hospitals have closed 
even though everyone knows that they have. And we have a 
Gaming minister who won't admit that VLTs (video lottery  

terminals) cause gambling addiction, even though everybody 
else knows it. And now we have a minister who won't admit 
that he is driving up construction costs even though that 
everyone else knows it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have here a summary of a study conducted by 
three professors from the UBC (University of British Columbia) 
and Simon Fraser University. This is a real study, not one of 
those fictitious studies that the Minister of Social Services 
would like to quote. This independent analysis of B.C.'s (British 
Columbia) union preference policy says, and I quote: Taxpayers 
are unambiguous losers from this policy. They will pay higher 
taxes, about $100 million annually, to pay the price of 
provincial construction projects. End of quote. 
 
Mr. Minister, clearly your union preference policy is going to 
drive up construction costs here as well. How much extra will 
Saskatchewan taxpayers wind up paying as a result of this 
policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm quite always 
interested in reading what the Fraser Institute has to say; I have 
done that regularly on a regular basis. But we all know where 
they come from. The Fraser Institute is an extremely right-wing 
organization, often spokesman for the Reform Party and the 
Conservative Party, which has a philosophical bent to it, as 
opposed to research based on what the real situation is out 
there. 
 
But that's the way it is and I accept that, Mr. Speaker, and they 
can publish all the reports they want. But if you look at the 
evidence in Saskatchewan, as the member from Estevan will 
testify to, when this kind of project agreement existed in 
NewGrade, it didn't increase the costs during the 1980s. It 
supposedly did not increase the costs on the Shand project; it 
hasn't increased the cost in the uranium mine industry where 
this kind of principle applies. And I suspect it may in fact 
decrease the cost because of the provision for a no strike/no 
lockout arrangement which will make sure that there are no 
work stoppages, which on many occasions cost a great deal of 
money in any project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, 
perhaps I should borrow you my hearing aid. What I said was 
the Simon Fraser University, not the Simon Fraser institute. 
And there's I think a fairly significant difference there. 
 
Mr. Minister, this report goes on to point out the inherent 
unfairness in this so-called fair wage policy. It says, and I 
quote: there is irony in the fact that a fair wage policy provides 
employers with an opportunity to discriminate against 
individual workers on non-efficiency dimensions. End of quote. 
Why is this fair? This just eludes me, the author says about this 
report. 
 



March 22, 1995 

 
1049 

Now the same arguments apply to your union preference policy, 
Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the authors of this report conclude 
that union-preference tendering policies are unfair — unfair to 
taxpayers and unfair to non-union workers. 
 
Will you admit this policy has nothing to do with fairness and 
everything to do with trying to buy support from the unions for 
your next provincial election, which is just around the corner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me assure the member 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, that this government doesn't have to buy 
support from the public. The record of this government is such 
that the public appreciates the fact that we have taken on the 
challenge, quite honestly, of repairing the grievous damage that 
was created by the former Conservative government in 
Saskatchewan and which would be re-created if there ever 
should be a Liberal government in Saskatchewan because they 
take the same kind of track. 
 
We don't need to do that, Mr. Speaker. Our approach is to be 
open, honest, and fair, and that's what this project agreement is 
all about. In the agreement, among other provisions is a 
provision that it will be reviewed at the end of the construction 
season. If there are some things in it that need changing, they 
will be changed. Both the unions and the employers have 
agreed to it. We will continue to study it, if that's what the 
member wants. But that's what we want to do, as well. And if 
there's some changes that need to be made, they will be made 
because it is the right way to go as far as Crown corporation 
major construction projects are concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Inquiring minds want to know, Mr. Speaker, they want to know 
whether dealings between the Phoenix Advertising Group and 
the NDP MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) have 
been above board and ethical or whether more charges should 
be laid. And people need to hear from someone totally removed 
from the politics of this issue. And a precedent has already been 
set  set by this very government when they sent the Milgaard 
case to Alberta for review. My question is for the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain why it made sense to move 
the Milgaard case out of province for review because two 
elected members were involved, but not this case which could 
involve many, many from your caucus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I assume the member 
from Saskatoon Greystone has been in the House during 
previous question periods when I have set out the fact that to 
table a report would, in the end, politicize the prosecutions. 
 
Let me describe for the member opposite where the matter rests.  

Saskatchewan has, throughout several governments, had an 
independent police force and an independent prosecutions 
branch. This matter has been investigated and it has been 
decided by the prosecutions branch that there is no evidence to 
go to trial. I say to members opposite who continue to repeat the 
allegation, the trial was public; the evidence is as freely 
available to you as it is to anyone else. 
 
If you believe that the prosecutions branch have covered up or 
that I have interfered, it's incumbent upon you to come forth 
with the evidence that's available to you. If you don't have any 
evidence of it, and you continue to make baseless allegations, 
I'm not sure, Madam, the reputation of the public prosecutions 
branch is going to suffer, but I'm quite certain that your 
reputation is going to suffer if you continue to make baseless 
allegations when evidence, if it's available, is freely available to 
you as well as anyone else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, one member of this NDP government has already 
failed to prove innocence in his dealings with the Phoenix 
Advertising Group and was convicted of fraud. In testimony by 
Phoenix Advertising Group the public was told, they were told 
that the exchanging of political contributions for advertising 
business was a common practice, and that is what they said in 
court, Mr. Speaker. Phoenix Advertising Group may be guilty 
of doing the same thing with other members of this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Other governments have shown leadership on issues such as 
this. The Premier of Alberta referred a case involving elected 
members to Saskatchewan because, and I quote: we want to 
have a completely unbiased and independent review of the 
situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: will you today refer 
the prosecutor's report to an out-of-province ethics 
commissioner, with instructions to review the report and release 
a public summary of it's recommendations within the next 10 
days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. If 
you ask outside counsel to review the decision of the 
prosecutors, you wind up in the same place. You wind up with 
the special counsel commenting on the prosecutor’s decision 
and then it is the prosecutor's decision which becomes the 
subject of the debate and you politicize public prosecutions. 
 
Outside counsel gets you to exactly the same position. The 
answer is no. This province has been well served by an 
independent public prosecutions branch, and there the matter 
rests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, if this government has 
nothing to hide, then they have to agree to prove that there is  



March 22, 1995 

 
1050 

nothing to hide. They're evasive and of course as we've heard 
already this week, their arrogant remarks simply fuel public 
suspicion. 
 
It is unacceptable that this government investigate itself on an 
issue involving members of this Assembly, and a firm that is 
currently under contract with this government, a firm that has 
received over $6.8 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money in 
1993 and 1994 alone. An impartial review, Mr. Speaker, is an 
absolute must. 
 
And my question is to the Premier this afternoon. If the Justice 
minister sees this as politicizing the process, as he says, will 
you take it out of the hands of Justice and put it into the realm 
of political ethics, political ethics, Mr. Premier, by having the 
prosecutor's report reviewed by an out-of-province ethics 
commissioner to determine whether a full investigation should 
be launched. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
respond to that question because I want to deal with the matter 
of the ethics of the member from Greystone, the Leader of the 
Liberal Party. And I want to address the matter of integrity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is clear what the policy of this government is with regard to 
the allocation of advertising for the government. It is a free and 
open tendering competition of all projects over $50,000 and 
that the selection is made not by the government alone. The 
selections are made by a panel of representatives of the client 
department, the coordination unit of communications, and a 
representative from the general public who sits there as a 
stakeholder to make sure that those allocations are made 
appropriately. 
 
Now that's quite different than the kind of policy which the 
Liberal leader espouses, Mr. Speaker, wherein it is reported in 
The Globe and Mail as follows: 
 
 The federal Liberals have hired David Herle, former 

president of the Young Liberals and a campaign worker 
for the federal finance minister, as point man on a 
$15,000-a-month contract — billed to the taxpayer — to 
supervise third-party polling for that same federal 
finance minister. 

 
Now I have heard in this House and I have read in the press 
where the Liberal leader has talked about, she would make 
patronage appointments, but they would be competent because 
they would be Liberal, Mr. Speaker. I'm saying to the House 
and to her, use a policy which is an open tendering policy as 
opposed to the kind of lack of integrity policy that you espouse, 
that you would put into place if you were the premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible SaskPower Job Loss 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it  

appears that the organ grinder over at SaskPower has found 
himself a new chimp. Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a question 
of who's in charge at SaskPower, the minister or Jack Messer. 
The minister tells the folks yesterday there's not going to be any 
job loss, Mr. Speaker, at SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Messer says that there's going to be a couple hundred jobs 
missing. He sent every employee a letter, Mr. Speaker, without 
the approval of the minister, the approval of SaskPower's board, 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), or 
cabinet. So, Mr. Minister, I guess Jack doesn't really need your 
approval does he? 
 
Now you said you'd be asking Mr. Messer to clarify his 
statements. Now, Mr. Minister, has that happened? Has he 
clarified his statements? Who's telling the truth, you or your 
boss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I'm actually quite 
pleased to be able to respond to the member's question. In fact 
the chief executive officer of Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
has communicated with the employees this morning with 
respect to this issue. But I want to say to the member from 
Thunder Cweek . . . Creek, from the member from Thunder 
Creek, that with respect to the operations and the initiatives that 
we are embarking on at SaskPower Corporation, I think we've 
been able to take a very responsive approach in that we are 
reorganizing that utility to make it comparable and competitive 
with other utilities across western Canada. 
 
That process has involved the employees, both in scope and out 
of scope, who have divided into 12 business units to do an 
analysis of the corporation and how it operates. And I want to 
say to the member from Thunder Creek that in actual fact, I 
think it's a process that has been very positive. I think that it's 
been well received by the employees, who are pleased to have 
the opportunity to be part of the analysis of the corporation; I 
think will result in a very healthy company. And I think it will 
serve well the people of Saskatchewan in the future decades, 
which is what this initiative is intended to do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
appears that this minister, like most that have dealt with Mr. 
Messer, is up the cweek without a paddle. 
 
Mr. Minister, the very fact that this has come once again to the 
public's attention; the fact that your president of SaskPower, the 
Premier's friend and campaign manager, has been able to dictate 
policy inside the Crown corporations means that the statements 
of the Provincial Auditor and others who say that those Crown 
corporations should come before this Assembly before they 
dictate public policy in this province, is a very true fact. And 
you've just confirmed it, Mr. Minister, today. 
 
Jack Messer virtually does what he wants inside SaskPower. He  



March 22, 1995 

 
1051 

does it without CIC's approval, without cabinet's approval. Mr. 
Minister, would you not agree? Would you not agree with the 
public and the Provincial Auditor that SaskPower should come 
before this House for its budgets and for its allocations and the 
decisions to fire people, rather than leave it up to Mr. Messer to 
do that? Wouldn't you agree, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member from Thunder Creek that quite clearly he can't accuse 
me of political influence in this instance. But what I want to do 
is describe for the member from Thunder Creek the process. 
 
SaskPower Corporation is directed by a group of people from 
this province who sit on the board of directors and who develop 
policy which is then initiated by the management of the Power 
Corporation. That process has been long-standing within that 
corporation. The chief executive officer understands the 
process, he understands the role of the minister, he understands 
the role of cabinet. 
 
And I only say to the member from Thunder Creek, if you can't 
understand the process or don't want to understand the process, 
that is no fault of the board, nor is it a fault of the board of 
directors or anyone else associated with this issue. 
 
With respect to an analysis of the operations of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, you had 10 years in which 
you brought it on an annual basis to the Crown Corporations 
Committee where it was scrutinized by a committee of this 
legislature and members of this legislature. It was good enough 
then and it's good enough now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Addiction 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to address another form of monkey business this government 
has been involved in lately, and that is the gambling issue. And 
I direct my question to the minister of gambling. 
 
Madam Minister, it's no surprise that we learn your government 
knew of the addictive nature of VLTs back in 1993, as is 
evidenced in the report in the Star-Phoenix recently. Yet in 
spite of that, in your untamed grab for more money out of 
Saskatchewan citizens, you've gone ahead with that anyway. 
And now we have people like the man from Kindersley who 
stole from his church, and others who stole from SARCAN and 
from their places of employment. 
 
And what do you do? You blame churches, you blame 
charitable organizations, you blame the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations), you blame the former 
administration. 
 
Madam Minister, in a response to an earlier question that I 
asked you, you added another group to your blame, and that is 
the hotel industry, which you said at that time came up with the 
original proposal. 

I'm wondering, is there anyone left that you would not be able 
to blame for this chaos before you get about solving the 
problem? I'm wondering about the Premier from Riversdale. 
Wouldn't you say that he would be the individual where the 
blame should be put at? Would you not agree with that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member opposite for his 
question. And I like getting it every time I get it. 
 
But I'll say that this government never initiated the VLT 
program. It was at the request of the hotels association and rural 
hoteliers that we established a program in recognition of the 
fact that Saskatchewan is not an island. Our people have to 
compete with businesses on three borders. And they need to be 
able to offer, both in the liquor industry and in the gaming 
industry, the same range of products that other people offer. 
 
Now you know that we're concerned about problem gaming, 
because you've asked this question before and I've explained to 
you that we spend the most that any government in Canada 
spends. In fact half of all expenditures in Canada on education 
and prevention of gaming problems are spent by this 
government. We're the only people who have education 
programs at the high school level. 
 
We are concerned but we also have to recognize that our 
province cannot separate itself from the activities that are taking 
place in the rest of the world. I know that you've heard the 
Premier express his concern over this issue, and I can only say 
that we are dealing with this from the perspective of control and 
regulation and being as responsible as we can be towards the 
addictive nature of gaming, as we are towards cigarette 
smoking, alcohol, and other substances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, before I begin, may I have leave to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — There are those individuals that I read 
into the record earlier that are connected with the child advocate 
office and family members are now here, so I won't read them 
in again, but I would ask all members to please welcome them 
very warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 



March 22, 1995 

 
1052 

Appointment of Children's Advocate 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my 
remarks, I will be moving a motion that Dr. Deborah 
Parker-Loewen be appointed on a permanent basis as the 
Children's Advocate for Saskatchewan by this Assembly. 
 
As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, during the last session of the 
legislature, we introduced a Bill to amend The Ombudsman's 
Act which provided for the appointment of Saskatchewan's first 
Children's Advocate. Implementation of The Ombudsman’s 
Act, amendment Act 1994, has been a major step in our 
commitment to improve the well-being of Saskatchewan 
children, youth, and families. 
 
The office of the child advocate was created on November 7, 
1994, at which time Deborah Parker-Loewen assumed her 
duties on an active basis. Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the 
wishes of Saskatchewan people, as shared with an independent 
task force appointed to examine options for child and youth 
advocacy, the Children's Advocate is appointed by and reports 
to this Assembly rather than to any one minister. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, protects the advocacy's freedom to conduct 
investigations and review situations without any political or 
other outside interference. Issues raised with the advocate's 
office are dealt with confidentially and the Children's Advocate 
can initiate an independent investigation, if the situation 
warrants it. 
 
This office, Mr. Speaker, has equal status with the Ombudsman 
and Provincial Auditor, for example, who also report, as you 
know, to this Assembly. 
 
The legislative mandate of the Office of the Children's 
Advocate provides that the advocate has the power to receive, 
review, and investigate any matter that comes to her attention 
from any source. 
 
Secondly, wherever appropriate, the advocate office will 
attempt to resolve matters through the use of negotiations, 
conciliation, mediation, or other non-confrontational methods. 
 
Thirdly, the advocate may conduct research to improve the 
interests and well-being of children and provide advice to any 
minister responsible for services to children or families. 
 
Fourthly, the advocate can prepare special reports for the 
legislature at any time, either at the request of the legislature, 
any minister or department, or upon her own initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the advocate's office may provide education to the 
public respecting the well-being of children. 
 
Since she assumed her duties on November 7, 1994, Mr. 
Speaker, Dr. Parker-Loewen has received numerous calls from 
children, parents, teachers, and others interested in the 
well-being of children and their families. Issues have ranged 
from concerns about apprehension of children to school-related  

matters. While not all of the calls fell within the mandate of the 
Office of the Children's Advocate, she has attempted to provide 
callers with information and assistance to access the appropriate 
person or agency. 
 
Dr. Parker-Loewen strongly believes in the role of families and 
community in advocating for children, Mr. Speaker, and is 
engaged in consultations with individuals and groups with an 
interest in enhancing the status of youth and children and their 
families in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel there is no need to emphasize the impressive 
qualifications and experience which Deborah Parker-Loewen 
brings to the position of Children's Advocate. Her appointment 
on November 7 was the result of a public competition and the 
recommendation of this Assembly. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are indeed fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have 
an individual of Dr. Parker-Loewen's calibre as our first 
Children's Advocate. As she undertakes groundwork required to 
establish the office of the advocate, clarify its mandate, and set 
initial direction, her knowledge, experience, and commitment to 
children and youth will be invaluable. 
 
I would like to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by making 
the following motion: 
 
 That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending to the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council that Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen 
be appointed the Children's Advocate pursuant to 
section 12.1 of The Ombudsman and Children's 
Advocate Act. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the . . . we need some 
correction here. The Minister needs a seconder to this motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — This is seconded by the hon. member 
from Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a sincere 
pleasure to participate in the motion confirming Dr. Deborah 
Parker-Loewen as the Children's Advocate of Saskatchewan. 
Dr. Parker-Loewen has held this position, Mr. Speaker, since 
November. And I am sure she will agree with me when I say 
she and the members of her staff have a difficult job ahead of 
them. 
 
Our office has already made use of the Children's Advocate by 
referring a couple of very serious concerns brought to our 
attention by parents and guardians. And we were pleased to be 
able to refer these people to Dr. Parker-Loewen's office. And I 
also would like to mention how helpful and courteous her staff 
was. 
 



March 22, 1995 

 
1053 

Mr. Speaker, the position of Children's Advocate is a very 
important one. And while I do not know Dr. Parker-Loewen 
personally, I am familiar with her credentials, her previous 
work, her history, and experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she is eminently qualified for this job, and I am 
pleased she accepted the position. 
 
My colleagues and I are fully confident in Deborah's ability to 
fulfil this role and to conduct herself in the impartial and 
dedicated manner it commands and deserves. Our province's 
children are in very good hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Deborah, on behalf of the official opposition I am pleased to 
extend our sincere congratulations and best wishes to you in 
your position as Saskatchewan's Children's Advocate. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased today to rise on behalf of the third party and 
congratulate our new Children's Advocate, Dr. Deb 
Parker-Loewen — someone I've known for many, many years. 
Actually it's kind of frightening to remember how many years 
I've known of her. We haven't spent much time together as of 
late, but it came as no surprise to me at all when her name was 
amongst those who had applied for this particular position, that 
ultimately she was the one who was appointed. 
 
I know that there were many excellent candidates, and there 
were indeed, for those who applied for this position. And the 
task of selecting only one was not an easy one. All who applied 
should be acknowledged and should be thanked for their 
interest in public service in our province. 
 
Dr. Parker-Loewen brings to this position a particularly rich 
background, working with children and youth for many years. 
Her past experience working with the Yorkton mental health 
region as the acting regional executive director and with the 
Yorkton community health services branch as an early 
childhood psychologist as well as director, will have prepared 
her most well for these new duties. 
 
And additionally, her work with groups such as the 
Inter-Agency Committee on Youth in Yorkton, and the Yorkton 
Race Relations Committee, further add to her most impressive 
professional qualifications. 
 
As a mother of three — and in case you don't know, Deb, I'm 
now a grandmother of two — Dr. Parker-Loewen brings to this 
position one of the most important and perhaps often under-
appreciated qualifications, that of being a parent. The role that 
Dr. Parker-Loewen will perform on behalf of our province's 
children is vital to many of their futures, and to our future as 
well. 

I extend to her not only my congratulations on her appointment, 
but my gratitude for taking on such an onerous responsibility. 
And I wish her well in her most important work. 
 
Today I want to extend some thanks to our Minister of Social 
Services for keeping the third party caucus informed throughout 
this process of advertising, screening, and selection of the new 
Children's Advocate. 
 
And again I want to extend my congratulations to Dr. 
Parker-Loewen's family, to her friends, to her, and to her staff. I 
wish them all very well. And I'm confident that she will serve 
this Assembly and the people of our province very well over the 
next five years. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although the 
formal legislative appointment to the position of child's 
advocate will be effective today, Dr. Parker-Loewen has 
assumed the new responsibilities with great dispatch, 
competence, and humanity. The position of child advocate is 
newly created and Dr. Parker-Loewen will be instrumental in 
defining this vital role, advocating for the future of our children 
and grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we expressed some concern during the legislation 
about how the work of the child advocate would be defined. 
But in the midst of the myriad priorities and preparations of 
setting up the child advocate's office, Dr. Parker-Loewen 
expedited meetings with me, as opposition critic, and with 
many others who could contribute to the well-being of 
Saskatchewan children. 
 
Her immediate accessibility to children bodes well for the 
future of the province. I am pleased today to enthusiastically 
support today's motion to appoint Dr. Parker-Loewen to 
advocate for our children. And I would repeat our concern that 
children must have the first call on the resources of our 
province and of society. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Renaud that Bill No. 22 — An Act to 
establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation and 
to enact a Consequential Amendment be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to continue 
the discussion I began the other day on this issue, the Crown  



March 22, 1995 

 
1054 

corporation dealing with . . . or establishing the Crown 
corporation in relation to the Department of Highways and 
allowing them the . . . or giving them the responsibility to take 
over some major parts of the business in SaskPower and the 
department of . . . or, I'm sorry, in the business of Department 
of Highways and taking over the Department of Highways in 
various ways. 
 
In thinking about it and continuing to address some of the 
issues that I believe need to be addressed, I want to point out to 
the Assembly some of the things that I believe impact into this 
Bill. And it raises some concerns on our part and I want to point 
them out to the Assembly. 
 
We have, I believe, a concern in a number of areas. We have 
concerns in the areas of labour, what this Crown corporation's 
going to do in relation to its involvement with a new policy of 
union preference tendering in Crown corporations; and also the 
part of the policy that allows 21 cents an hour to be charged 
back to the employer and also allows that money to be 
deposited for work by the unions, and has serious implications, 
I believe, in Saskatchewan and the cost of doing business. 
 
We have raised questions about this matter on a continual basis, 
and we did that today, Mr. Speaker. Reports are coming to us 
from places where this is a policy. And this policy reflects 
negatively on Crown corporations and their ability to do 
business in the most cost-effective way, and we are concerned 
about that. And we're concerned about that from the aspect of 
this new transportation corporation that is coming into 
existence. 
 
There are also other things that concern us, Mr. Speaker. What 
will the mandate of this Crown corporation be, this 
transportation Crown? If I was to speculate, Mr. Speaker, on its 
role in the future in Saskatchewan, I would begin to ask the 
questions. 
 
This government has been notorious, and through its history has 
been notorious for nationalizing agencies and businesses on a 
regular basis. What will it do next? 
 
We go back in history, Mr. Speaker, to think about what they 
did with the potash industry. We go back in history and ask the 
question, what it did with the pulp industry in the province. 
And if you go back through the history, you can add oil to that; 
you can add natural gas to that. You can add a whole lot of 
different corporations that have been piled into Crown 
corporations, and Crown corporations have been built on the 
basis that they would provide the best opportunity back to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well they didn't accomplish what they set out to do. Or perhaps 
they did — we can ask the question that way too. Perhaps they 
did accomplish what they wanted to do and really was not a 
benefit to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. That raises the 
question about this Bill and the concern we have about it. What 
will the total dynamic of this transportation Act provide to the 
people of Saskatchewan? Will it be an asset to them, or a  

liability? 
 
The discussion we had today about information that has been 
relayed to us from people who have investigated this very same 
Crown corporation being involved with the businesses in 
British Columbia have estimated that the volume increase in 
cost is 25 to 30 per cent. 
 
Now if you have $100 million worth of business to do in the 
construction side in Highways and it's going to increase the cost 
25 to 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker, that increased cost is going to 
be between 25 and $30 million; 25 to $30 million, Mr. Speaker, 
is a very significant amount. And that amount, we want to talk 
about that in its relation to the implication to the taxpayer. The 
taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, is going to have to put into the system 
another 25 to $30 million that he is already under some pressure 
to provide to the people of Saskatchewan on the basis that it's 
an increased cost. 
 
So having said that and dealing with that, we have a very 
serious problem I believe in what the government is intending 
to do. We have questions to ask that need to be answered. And I 
don't believe that we can have a clear understanding of this until 
we have the minister tell us all of what he wants to do in this 
corporation. 
 
There are all kinds of possibilities that this Crown corporation 
could be involved with, business ventures that the Crown 
corporation could be involved with. It was stated that this was a 
part of an involvement to provide money from the federal 
government to the provincial government, and that the 
provincial government would have a way of moving money 
funded by the federal government into building roads in the 
province. That's the way it began. And as it began in the 
discussions in November and December, the Minister of 
Highways said that this Crown corporation would take that 
money and put it into use as a way to construct highways, 
bridges, and things like that. 
 
What we have, in fact, Mr. Speaker, we had the federal Liberal 
government decide that they weren't going to do this sort of 
thing. They weren't going to become involved in putting money 
into road construction in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What it has meant, I believe, is a serious cut-back to the people 
of Saskatchewan. If you put that together with the volume of 
money that the government is going to reduce its transportation 
benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, we have hundreds of 
millions of dollars being lost to the province of Saskatchewan 
in lieu of the transportation policy set out by the federal 
government. And that is going to seriously erode the 
effectiveness of this Crown corporation. 
 
And we see that as a very significant negative to establishing 
this Crown corporation to start with, because they said they 
weren't going to become involved. And we on this side of the 
House say, well if they're not going to become involved with 
this Crown corporation as a way to put money into building 
roads and constructing bridges in the province of  



March 22, 1995 

 
1055 

Saskatchewan, then why should we have confidence . . . as the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan, why should we 
have confidence in doing business with this corporation? 
 
Another concern that I think needs to be addressed in this 
discussion deals with how this transportation corporation is 
going to respond to agencies that are already in existence. And I 
want to point out some of them. One of them is the short-line 
railroad that we have in southern Saskatchewan. Is this an 
aspect of the provincial government, that they are thinking 
about how to handle the short-line railroads in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Is this a method, for example, of them 
establishing across this province a control of the railroad beds 
in the province of Saskatchewan? Is that an option that this 
Crown corporation is going to use? And we ask that question in 
a very legitimate way. And, Mr. Speaker, we're concerned about 
it. 
 
We're particularly concerned about it from the fact that the 
people . . . the federal government have given 1.6 billions of 
dollars to be paid out over the next year or year and a half. 
They've given this money to the people of Saskatchewan who 
are farmers in lieu of the fact of a $7 billion . . . effectively a $7 
billion payment to western Canadian farmers. And that volume 
of dollars has been taken away from Saskatchewan or western 
Canada. That $7 billion has been removed from the federal 
budget. It was annualized in its payment to contribute to 
Saskatchewan roughly $320 million. 
 
(1445) 
 
Now it's our wish that the people of Saskatchewan should 
know, does this minister of transport have any idea of using this 
corporation in dealing with the transportation problems that 
have been placed upon the grain producers in the province of 
Saskatchewan? And we raise this as a question to the Minister 
of Highways in order for us to understand the dynamics of this 
corporation. 
 
The reason we ask it, Mr. Speaker, is because the reputation and 
history of this government and this party have always been that 
for them to own and control and manipulate and guide the 
economic policies of individuals in the province of 
Saskatchewan is one of the foremost ideas that they have. It is 
fundamental to their philosophy. 
 
And in that, Mr. Speaker, we raise this question. Are they going 
to establish a Crown corporation that is going to control the 
roadbeds in the province of Saskatchewan? That's a question we 
have of the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Another area that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is we need 
to raise questions about, and we are planning on doing that, is 
what area of the Department of Highways and Transportation is 
the Minister of Highways putting up to put into this Crown 
corporation? 
 
We see as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that the Finance 
minister has decided to put $20 million into this Crown  

corporation to establish it, and that's the start-up fee. Or that's 
the start-up money that the Crown corporation's going to have 
— a very, very significant number, Mr. Speaker. This $20 
million that the Minister of Finance is going to put into the pot 
or the grubstake of the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation to manage this Crown corporation is in my view 
a very significant number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I look through the Highways and Transportation 
Estimates by themselves, $20 million is one-fifth . . . no, sorry, 
it is about one-twelfth of the volume of dollars for the whole 
Department of Highways. 
 
If I look through various areas of the Estimates book, I find out 
that there are significant departments in this government who 
have less money to deal with than the Crown corporation in 
transportation is going to have. And I think that that is a very 
serious thing to consider. Is this money well worth spending in 
a Crown corporation just to put it aside and have it build for 
itself? If I take a look at the total revenue of the Liquor Board 
for example, this volume of $20 million being put into this 
Crown corporation is about again one-twelfth of the volume of 
dollars and . . . or 12 per cent, I'm sorry. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
is a very significant amount of money. 
 
If I look at the gaming, the profit from gaming, $95 million in 
gaming is estimated to be the value of the contribution of 
gaming to the province of Saskatchewan. This Crown 
corporation is going to get 20 per cent of that budget. And as 
we look through the whole volume of Estimates, we have to 
consider what does this Bill and what will this Bill impact and 
what will its impact be in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Will this Bill be a Bill that is a beginning of putting the 
Department of Highways into a Crown corporation that will not 
be able to be dealt with in this Assembly? Mr. Speaker, this 
Assembly has always dealt with the Department of Highways 
and the estimates of the Department of Highways. My question 
to the Speaker and to the Minister of Highways would be this: 
what volume of dollars are going to be transferred to this 
Crown corporation so that this Legislative Assembly hasn't 
access to find out what is going to happen with that $20 million 
or the budget of that Crown corporation? Is this Assembly 
going to have any access into that budget? 
 
And the answer very likely is going to be no. We are not going 
to be able to ask questions. So when the auditor comes to the 
people of Saskatchewan and he says, 45 per cent of the budgets 
of the province of Saskatchewan are not dealt with by this 
Legislative Assembly, we're going to have an increase and an 
increase and an increase of the volume of dollars dealt with by 
this Assembly, to the place where what is the purpose of doing 
estimates in this Assembly? 
 
And I say that if you have the whole thing go to Crown 
corporations — and the back-benchers in the government side 
should be concerned about this — how much control do you 
have . . . in relation to the ministers responsible for those 
Crown corporations in doing the things that they do, how much  



March 22, 1995 

 
1056 

responsibility will you be able to show for the taxpayers and 
giving them an idea of what that money is being spent for? 
 
And I would say to the members of this Assembly that the 
people on your front benches, the executive branch of 
government, are the ones that will regulate and control the 
volume of dollars that flow into this, and you will not be able to 
access information regarding that. Neither will anybody else. 
 
And when we have the discussion in Crown Corporations 
Committee, we don't get access to that except in an 
after-the-fact kind of fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this leads me to the concern I have in relation to 
which part of the Department of Highways is also going to be 
put into this Crown corporation. It's obviously going to have to 
have some administration in it. Is the administration from the 
Department of Highways going to administer this Crown 
corporation? 
 
The administration for the Department of Highways is 4.3 
millions of dollars. Is that going to be a part of this Crown 
corporation? Or is it going to establish its own administration in 
order to measure out where the dollars in that corporation are 
supposed to go? 
 
So we have that question to ask, Mr. Speaker. Is the 
administration going to be a part of the Department of 
Highways' administration or is it going to have its own? If it's 
going to have its own, why would you want to put another set 
of administrators into place to deliver an opportunity for 
serving the people of Saskatchewan? They already have all of 
the administration available to deliver on the funding required 
for contracts; they have all the funding . . . administration 
required to deliver on all of the administration of the repair 
depots; all of the administration in regard to the employees — 
all of that is already in place. 
 
Why would they want to put another set of administrators into 
this Crown corporation in order to deal with the problem? I 
want to just point out that I believe that the fact of the matter is 
and the reason that they're going to do this, put these people 
into this Crown corporation, is it's another ploy on patronage. 
 
The other day we dealt with a whole list of people who will be 
likely sitting in administration on the board of directors and 
dealing with this Crown corporation. So we already know that 
it's going to have a board of directors. That administration cost 
is already going to come out of there. 
 
What would be the problem of having the administration come 
right out of the administration of the Department of Highways? 
Why wouldn't the board of directors be eliminated and allow 
the Department of Highways to run it? That's the question we 
have, and it's a very serious one. 
 
So which part of the Department of Highways are going to be 
put into a Crown corporation to deliver this Crown corporation 
to the tax . . . before service to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan?  

It's a question we have. 
 
This morning the member from Thunder Creek, driving in from 
his home, ran into a very serious snow problem on the 
highways, six to eight inches of snow on the highways. And 
you know what, Mr. Speaker? There were cars in the ditches, 
semi-trailer trucks jack-knifed on the highway by the overpass 
at Belle Plaine, traffic backed up at least a mile past the Belle 
Plain turn-off. And what did we have, Mr. Speaker? What did 
we have? We had absolutely no — absolutely no Highways 
department people on the job. There wasn't one person in a 
grader; there wasn't one person in a truck-driven snowplough; 
there was nothing of that sort. 
 
Now is this Crown corporation suddenly going to eliminate all 
of these problems in the Department of Highways? Is it going to 
eliminate that? I doubt it, Mr. Speaker, because I think that 
what it's going to do is have a place for political appointments 
of individuals from the NDP Party. That's what's going to be 
there. And I'm not sure that they have the concern of the 
citizens of the province in mind. They have their own vested 
interests in determining how they're going to respond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of thing that we're concerned about. 
And the question is this. Is this Crown corporation going to 
enhance the opportunity and responsibility of the Department of 
Highways in a way that is going to make it better than it was 
before? And I would suggest from the information that we 
have, the answer is no. The answer is no. So we have this 
Crown corporation which we haven't been told what it's 
supposed to do. We haven't been told what its mandate is, and 
we're concerned about it. 
 
Will this Crown corporation do the snowploughing in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Will it? Will it be responsible for 
going out there this morning and cleaning off the snow? Will it 
be responsible for that? Or going to Lumsden? And I heard 
people coming in from Lumsden that cars were in the ditch all 
over. Will the people who are in this Crown corporation be 
responsible for the snowploughs or will they move that into 
there after the fact. Is this an opportunity to put the Crown 
corporation into existence for them to do a couple of things. 
 
And if we think about this a bit . . . just think about this 
process, Mr. Speaker. We have a Crown corporation 
established. We have a Crown corporation union preference 
policy on contracts in the Crown corporation. Now we'll have 
employees in this Crown corporation who will be responsible to 
deliver services, very likely. 
 
And when they do that, Mr. Speaker, 21 cents of every hour 
will be funnelled from the treasury bench of this government 
into a union coffer some place down the road. And who will get 
the money from that, Mr. Speaker? Who will have access to that 
money? 
 
When we take that third step, Mr. Speaker, then we begin to 
assess where does the real concern of ours come into play. And 
that is that the money that has been expressed in this  



March 22, 1995 

 
1057 

government, the money from this union preference policy in 
Crown corporations will be used to tell other people that unions 
are good. It will go from contract site to contract site to tell 
people that unions are good. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what that 21 cents an hour, its 
purpose is. And we suspect that the money that will be 
funnelled for construction purposes in the Department of 
Highways will be used to be funnelled into this process and into 
the program of the unions. And we are very concerned about 
that. 
 
(1500) 
 
We're concerned about that from the area of what it will do in 
relation to the engineering, and particularly the engineering 
requirement by the rural municipalities. Rural municipalities get 
funding from the provincial government. Funding coming from 
the provincial government can be funnelled through the 
Municipal Affairs minister. It can be funnelled through in a way 
that will say, okay, contracts will be awarded on this basis. 
 
And I'll use the example of the Department of Health. We had 
people writing to us and saying, from the Department of 
Health's perspective: union preference hiring was the order of 
the day for construction on a facility. Okay? 
 
Take that one step further. When the engineers and the 
architects filed that letter with the contract firms, they then had 
to say, okay, we will have union preference in tendering. That 
came from the Department of Health and instructions for the 
Department of Health. 
 
Next in line will be the RMs (rural municipality). And the RMs 
will be told, you have a responsibility to hire union-only in your 
contract. Is that what we have to do? Is that what this funding is 
going to do to the rural municipalities? 
 
And we are concerned about that because this minister has not 
identified what the purpose of this Crown corporation is. And 
we are suspicious on the basis of all of these things that I have 
mentioned. And we're concerned about it because what is in 
reality is what I said, and it is verified by instances that we have 
been notified of. And we're concerned about the implication for 
the future. Will RMs and cities be required to have union-only 
in their preference of hiring for contracts? Is that what's going 
to happen? 
 
We'll go on to another point that I have a concern about this 
Bill. This Bill talks about setting up a Crown corporation that is 
going to administer certain volumes of dollars. I talked about 
the administrative side. What about the real side? What about 
the real side in this issue? 
 
For example, one item that has already been privatized is one 
item like cutting grass in the province of Saskatchewan. Is that 
going to be required through this Crown corporation to deliver 
a union-preference-only in its role for getting the grass cut 
along the highways? Is that what it's going to be? And we are  

asking that question and I believe it needs to be answered. 
 
All across this province, people have purchased mowers and 
grass-cutting equipment to eliminate the grass along the 
roadsides. And now, if the policy of the Provincial Secretary 
and the minister responsible for CIC were to follow, each one 
of those individuals will have to have a contract of individuals 
with union preference preferable. And, Mr. Speaker, we're only 
raising these questions as a part of our concern in relation to the 
delivery of service to the people of Saskatchewan. We are 
concerned about it, very concerned. And we have to deal with it 
on an ongoing basis. 
 
Another area that we have a concern with is grading. There are 
a lot of roads in the province of Saskatchewan today that are in 
areas where there is reduced volumes of traffic. We have roads 
that are operated by the Department of Highways and there are 
highways that are gravel. And will the responsibility of these 
roads be tendered out to people to come in through this Crown 
corporation to deliver that service? Will they have to have 
union preference in their policy in dealing with how they handle 
the grading of those roads? 
 
This has small contractors very concerned, very concerned. And 
we have to be concerned about this from the aspect of dealing 
with this in a way that is going to give a benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This concern for us is getting the highest degree 
of efficiency for tax dollars that have been contributed to this 
Assembly by the people of Saskatchewan. It's very important 
for us to do that. It's very important for us to consider that. And 
that's why we're raising this as a part of our concern. 
 
The construction industry in Saskatchewan is a big industry but 
it's made up of many players. And the problem being, Mr. 
Speaker, that these individuals come together from all across 
Saskatchewan; they run one or two graders, three or four 
buggies, and that's the way they do business. They've done that 
business with RMs. They've done that business with the people 
of rural communities and they will continue to do that. That's 
why we, on this side of the House, have a real serious concern 
about this Crown corporation. 
 
This Crown corporation has many areas that it needs to be . . . 
and we will be asking the question about addressing these to the 
minister. What about the area of patching roads? What about 
resurfacing? 
 
One of the big areas in this province is the signs. Across this 
province you see signs all over the place, along the highways. Is 
the Department of Highways going to turn that over to the 
Crown corporation so that the money can go into that and then 
be transferred as a contract to that union and then the union 
preference hiring will be required to pay 21 cents to the coffers 
of the union? Is that the reason why these people are doing it? 
Or pavement markings — the trucks that go up and down and 
paint the white and yellow stripes along the highway. What 
about the ice treatment? And what about the 13 ferries we have 
across the province of Saskatchewan? What about those? 



March 22, 1995 

 
1058 

Is this the area that you're going to make into a Crown 
corporation so that the money can flow from the treasury into 
the Crown corporation so that the Crown corporation then can 
deliver it back to the union? And then the union, on 21 cents an 
hour under the Crown corporation's union-preference hiring 
policy, can deliver 21 cents an hour back to the coffers of the 
union. 
 
The interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is they don't necessarily 
always have to hire union people but they will have to compete 
on the basis of union wages in order to deliver that. And that's 
what is going to cost money. And in British Columbia, they 
have concluded that it's cost their budget an extra $100 million. 
And that's why this is a concern to us. 
 
Is this going to increase the costs to the people of Saskatchewan 
for exactly the same volume of business, exactly the same 
service? 
 
I could go on to add bridges to this whole discussion, or 
construction of new bridges. We've got construction of a major 
bridge across the Saskatchewan River at Cumberland. Is this 
bridge going to be 10 million, or 15 or $20 million? And in 
order to deliver that amount of money, is that amount of money 
going to then be able to be turned around on the labour 
component, be able to deliver 21 cents an hour back to the 
union people? That's the concern that we have. It's a major, 
major concern. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, could go on for hours talking about these things 
as I've already pointed out. I won't. But I will, in questions in 
Committee of Finance and Committee of the Whole, I will be 
asking the Minister of Highways these questions in order to 
confirm in our own minds what the real reason for the purpose 
of this Crown corporation is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
number of concerns about this Bill. It essentially creates a 
Crown corporation to handle highway construction projects. 
The minister has confirmed during his second reading speech 
that this Crown was initially intended to accommodate funds 
promised by the Liberals for the federal-provincial highways 
improvement program. 
 
Since the original announcement of this Crown last November, 
the feds have squashed this program. Instead of starting the . . . 
Instead of killing this Crown as well, the NDP have decided to 
add a new addition to their family of Crown corporations. Mr. 
Speaker, after all, a new Crown corp will allow for a multitude 
of new patronage appointments and will assist the NDP 
government's pay-off to organized labour — another one in the 
long list of those. 
 
The only function anyone can see for the new Crown is to 
ensure that all highway tenders are awarded to union 
companies. Mr. Speaker, this isn't necessary, this Crown 
corporation; there is no need for it whatsoever. They can use  

CIC. They can use other agencies to move this money through 
from the federal government, if indeed there's going to be any 
from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see little need for something of this nature. All 
it will allow, as we have said, is to ensure that all highway 
tenders are awarded to union companies rather than the lowest 
qualified tender as the policy of Sask Highways is currently. 
And for that reason alone, you shouldn't be bringing something 
like this forward. 
 
The minister himself has stated the new Crown cannot hire 
employees and requires all administrative functions and 
expenses to be borne by the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. You see, Mr. Speaker, if this Crown is not 
created, the Highways department must award highway 
construction tenders, as I've said, to the lowest qualified bidder 
— not the lowest qualified, unionized labour bidder, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The government is sneaking this legislation by the public, or at 
least attempting to. And what we are trying to do, Mr. Speaker, 
is alert the public all across this province to the kinds of thing 
that this government is doing with regard to unionized policies. 
The NDP knows that people are not happy with its new union-
preference Crown tendering policy. And we see this as another 
step towards that in another one of the line departments of the 
government, a policy that requires 75 per cent of workers must 
belong to a union. 
 
Although the construction industry is only 20 per cent 
unionized, the NDP are guaranteeing them 75 per cent of the 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. And I can't see, in a free and democratic 
society, how this can possibly be justified by the government 
opposite. 
 
To add insult to injury, non-union employees are prohibited 
from applying for union-designated jobs. Clearly this 
discrimination . . . and this is discrimination, and that is why we 
have notified the Human Rights Commission on this matter. 
 
In plain and simple terms, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government's 
new union-preference tendering policy is a political pay-off. 
The NDP needs votes and money from trade unions. 
 
Consider the following. For the past two years the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour did not contribute 
financially to the NDP, yet in 1991 they donated $28,000. The 
government needs the support of organized labour, obviously 
will do anything to recoup union donations, including, Mr. 
Speaker, creating a new Crown corporation. If that's what's 
necessary to do it, that's what they'll do, and widen the circle a 
little bit more. 
 
With this addition, non-unionized workers won't have a chance, 
Mr. Speaker, won't have a chance. If you don't belong to a 
union, the NDP doesn't care about your employment prospects. 
This is becoming more and more obvious. 
 



March 22, 1995 

 
1059 

And the minister brags that this new Crown will mean new jobs 
for Saskatchewan. I suspect he meant new union jobs. This is, 
in our view, Mr. Speaker, a very, very disturbing trend. 
 
We've seen the union preference policy rear its ugly head in the 
Department of Health, and now we see it again in the 
Department of Highways. We wonder what department will be 
next. Will it be the Department of Education? Will every 
government department that has money to spend on capital 
construction projects be limited to hiring unionized labour? 
Will our non-unionized construction workers be forced to leave 
the province to find new work? 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of concerns that we're hearing 
from companies across this province. Those are the kinds of 
concerns that we're hearing from ordinary folks all across this 
province. 
 
I spoke to a business group up in Saskatoon just last week, Mr. 
Speaker. And they were absolutely astounded that a government 
would bring in a union tendering policy such as they brought in. 
In fact they were so astounded, Mr. Speaker, I don't think they 
believed that any government would bring forward that. 
 
And since that time, we've sent them copies of the legislation as 
well as this policy, and copies of the union-only preference 
tendering policy. And what the reaction, Mr. Speaker, has been, 
such that they are appalled that a government would do 
something of such a discriminatory nature against non-union 
companies and non-union employees. They think it is blatantly 
unfair that you want to tip the table, unlevel the playing-field to 
such an immense degree. 
 
Twenty per cent of the companies in Saskatchewan are 
unionized, Mr. Speaker . . . construction related companies are 
unionized. And now they're going to tip that balance to 75 per 
cent in favour of unionized corporations, unionized companies, 
unionized labour. And we think that that's wrong. 
 
(1515) 
 
The Progressive Conservative policy is very, very clear on this, 
Mr. Speaker. The tendering policy should be very simple  to 
the lowest qualified tender, union or non-union, simple as that. 
 
And that's the kind of policy I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people across this province want. This fair wage policy, as they 
call it, is nothing more than a sham to attract unionized support 
and unionized dollars in the next election campaign, Mr. 
Speaker. And that's why, Mr. Speaker, that I think people across 
this province are beginning to look at this government in a 
whole different way than they may have looked at six months 
ago or maybe even a year ago. 
 
I was in Melfort the other day, Mr. Speaker, talking to business 
people up there, and they were appalled, Madam Minister, that 
your government would be bringing in such legislation of this 
nature. They see it as so discriminatory and blatantly unfair that 
you would bring forward pieces of legislation . . . (inaudible)  

. . . And that's why that minister is in some degree of political 
difficulty up there, and she knows it. 
 
And she knows, Mr. Speaker, that policies such as this one and 
setting up new Crown corporations like this one, Mr. Speaker, 
will be her undoing. It will be her undoing in Melfort. And I 
suspect it will be the undoing of a number of members. When 
the people in your constituency, sir, find out, I think it will be 
the undoing. 
 
We do not need new Crown corporations in this province. 
There's lots of Crown corporations that could be doing this job 
for you, Mr. Speaker. There's not a need for this, and the people 
across this province realize that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate one single thing in conclusion 
of my remarks, that it is plain and simple; the policy that the 
Government of Saskatchewan should have is a policy which 
says to the lowest qualified bidder — union or non-union — the 
contract should go to. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, we have a great deal of concerns 
about this piece of legislation — many, many questions, many 
more things to say about this piece of legislation, many more 
people who would like to speak on that, Mr. Speaker. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, with the conclusion of my remarks now, I'd like to 
move to adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No 25 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 25 — An 
Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability Act be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the point that the 
opposition would like to make at this time is that we do have 
some questions left in this Farm Financial Stability Act that we 
would like to ask the minister. And to help facilitate matters, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we will simply allow this Bill, as the next 
Bill, to be passed into committee, and we'll ask our questions 
directly at that point. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 39 — An Act to 
amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as my 
colleague from Rosthern just indicated regarding the previous 
Bill, we find as well that it might be . . . we might gain more by  



March 22, 1995 

 
1060 

allowing this Bill to go to committee as well, and addressing 
some of the concerns and the questions we have. 
 
However, I might also indicate, as I indicated the other day, the 
fact that it appears that the minister has consulted with the 
specific groups that would be duly affected by this piece of 
legislation. We certainly will bring that to the minister's 
attention and find out who all the minister talked to, which 
doctors he talked to, and whether or not there is unanimity and 
agreement regarding the process. 
 
I therefore find that it isn't in our best interests just to continue 
the debate in second reading, but it would be appropriate for us 
to allow this Bill as well to move to committee and address our 
questions directly through committee. Therefore we'll allow this 
Bill to move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to establish The Agri-Food Innovation 
Fund 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause-by-clause 
consideration, perhaps the minister could introduce the officials 
who have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to introduce the officials. Next to me is Dr. Hartley Furtan, 
who is the deputy minister; Doug Matthies, who's the general 
manager of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, behind me; John 
Gruszka, who is from sustainable production branch, to my left; 
and Doug Winsor, to my right. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to 
the minister and his officials today to the discussion 
surrounding Bill 23, An Act to establish The Agri-Food 
Innovation Fund. 
 
That is a very catchy title, Mr. Minister, given everything that 
we see going on in agriculture today. I think everyone that 
farms in this province and everyone that is associated with the 
ag food industry today understands that we must be innovative 
and that we must diversify and that we have to change the ways 
that we've done things. 
 
And I think the fact that the government has committed some 
money is also a plus. I guess what I'm hearing from people is 
that they're not sure that the amount of money is significant 
enough to make much difference, particularly in the short term, 
given the changes that are upon us. And number two, that the 
type of input that farmers and farm organizations and others 
that truly want to be innovative and accomplish new ways of 
doing things . . . won't necessarily have their voices heard as 
strongly as they might like. And there is some concern about  

the make-up of the board and how they will in turn pass money 
out. 
 
The regulations, Minister, seem quite vague on criteria. I had 
one individual phone me up, and he says, well does that mean 
because I'm a farmer and I happen to want to diversify my 
operation that I could start up a motorcycle repair operation on 
my farm because I enjoy motorcycles, and there's a lot of them 
in my district — quad-runners that type of thing — and 
therefore I'm going to apply to this particular agency to start up 
a motorcycle repair shop on my farm? And I, from reading the 
Bill, have not seen anything that would tell me that that 
definitely would be ruled out, just looking at some of the 
criteria. 
 
So given those concerns — and I'm sure they must have been 
voiced to your officials if not yourself — if you could give us 
some indication of how those will be addressed, why you feel 
very comfortable with this. And do you feel that the amount of 
funds allocated is sufficient to actually target and jump-start 
parts of the agri-food industry in a big enough way? Given that 
transportation costs have increased, fuel costs have increased, 
fertilizer costs have increased, taxation across the board has 
increased to most people in the agri-food industry, is this 
enough money to accomplish what you purport the Bill to 
accomplish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would be 
glad to respond to the member. We are planning to have a 
conference with the industry after this Bill is passed to fine tune 
what the criteria are. The plan behind this Bill is to help 
develop the infrastructure for emerging industries related to 
value added agricultural products. We've developed this by 
talking with industries and a committee of industry. 
 
Will it be enough money? Obviously we could always use more 
money. This will not replace $300 million that we're losing in 
the Crow benefit. It will not be grants to individual producers. 
 
In the long run, we firmly believe that this will return us many 
times over the investment that we put into it. As a provincial 
government, it is almost impossible to prop up and support an 
agricultural industry in this province because the industry is so 
huge. Our province depends so much on the industry that it's 
extremely difficult as a provincial government to support the 
price of wheat or the price of cattle in order to keep that 
industry viable in the long run. 
 
What we think we can do in this province is help to people who 
are going to help themselves, to diversify on the farm and off 
the farm, to get some jobs into rural communities, to help them 
find markets, to be sure we build the infrastructure, and to help 
them with things like business plans and development of small 
industry in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This fits in with our strategy in the Ag 2000. We have the Ag 
Development Fund which the member opposite is well aware 
of; it's been around for a good number of years. There's 11 or 
$12 million in there that's targeted at research and development.  



March 22, 1995 

 
1061 

It's targeted at research into things that can be commercialized 
in this province so we can help with devising new crops and so 
on, and new industries. 
 
(1530) 
 
The ag innovation fund will be for similar purposes, although 
more targeted to the development side of the industry. So when 
we find that we have a raspberry that grows very well in the 
province, we then will have some help for somebody who 
wants to grow it, process it. 
 
There will hopefully be help for things like test markets, like 
pilot-scale production, like doing business plans, and so on. We 
don't see this as giving out grants; we see it more as help to 
emerging industries to give them the leg up they need to 
become viable in the world market. And we certainly see a wide 
range of opportunities in that field and we think this will be 
very successful in time, although it certainly won't happen 
overnight. 
 
With the federal money that's going into this fund, we will have 
a total of $91 million over a four-year period going into this 
activity. That certainly would be nice, if we had more than that, 
but we think that's certainly enough to, as the member says, 
jump-start some value added industry in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, that $91 million is something 
certainly new to me. I have never heard that total put on this 
before. 
 
I'd like you to answer a couple of questions. I'd like you to 
answer how that funding flows, federal-provincial share, over 
the next four years. Are they equal amounts? Are they on a 
percentage basis? Is it a very structured amount of money that 
will flow each year? And I would like you to, I guess, to assure 
both ourselves and agriculture producers that this isn't some 
kind of initiative instigated at the bureaucratic level to prop up 
Ag 2000, which in my view, to date, has been a lot of talk and 
not much else. 
 
We'd like some examples, and you give me quite a list here in 
section 8 of the Bill about the kind of things you are very 
interested in this board and fund taking a part of. And there 
must be people around there that have a crying need, that have 
been coming back to you and saying, this is the area, and you've 
identified them in this Bill where I think there's a possibility. 
And rather then telling us that it's . . . Because quite frankly, Ag 
2000 identified exactly the same things, but we haven't seen a 
whole lot of results out of that operation to date. 
 
So can you tell me the breakdown of the funding on a yearly 
basis, over the next four years, and then give us some specific 
examples of what you're talking about so we've got an idea of 
where this money is going to start to float to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, I can give a breakdown on the 
funding. The Bill that's here will put $18 million into a fund. 
There's another $9 million in the '95-96 budget. That's the  

provincial contribution. The federal government will contribute 
$10 million in '95-96, $18 million in '96-97, $18 million in 
'97-98, and another $18 million in '98-99. That gives you the 
total $91 million as per the agreement that we made with the 
federal government when we negotiated a new safety net last 
fall. 
 
As for specific examples, as the member knows, there will be a 
board that will make those final decisions. But there are some 
things that certainly we see as strong possibilities for this 
funding. One of the things is a food incubation centre where we 
would have a centre where somebody who was interested in 
food processing would be able to go to get help with some of 
the things I mentioned before — a business plan, labelling, test 
small-scale production so that they can get enough product to 
put it into a market somewhere and test the market — those 
sorts of things. 
 
Contrary to what the member says, there has been a good deal 
of activity in rural Saskatchewan. We are having some 
successes there. There are things like Drake meats and 
Thomson Meats and a greenhouse in Biggar and a flax straw 
plant in my riding. So there are some successes that are 
happening. 
 
One of the things that we're finding is that there's a very long 
time period between some communities with an idea, and when 
it actually comes to production. I think the greenhouse in 
Biggar, when we were out there to cut the ribbon they were 
telling us, five to six years they worked from the time they had 
the idea until they get the ribbon cut on the greenhouse. 
 
I know the flax straw plant in my riding, they've been working 
on that for at least five or six years, and some of that is 
unavoidable. You have to do research, you have to do testing, 
you have to test market, you have to do business plans — all of 
those things take some time. 
 
But often community groups are slowed down because of the 
process of not being able to raise enough money to get a 
business plan done or going to different arms of government 
and so on, in order to fight their way through. What we're 
hoping for with this fund is, that firstly we'll get more of those 
projects, more of the good ideas that are out in rural 
Saskatchewan, coming to commercialization. But secondly, also 
that hopefully we can speed up the time cycles that it takes to 
get them off the ground. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, I'm glad to see that the 
federal government have committed themselves out to that area. 
But I hope when you were down there giving away the $317 
million in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) fund 
that this isn't what you got in return. Because that's a rather 
lousy trade, 317 for 64, and we can discuss that a little bit later. 
 
And I'm very familiar with all of those things that you 
mentioned because I know when they were all started. And 
you're right, those things do take some time to come to fruition, 
and they have to have a government that understands  



March 22, 1995 

 
1062 

diversification and allowing people to think about the future. 
 
And the reason that that flax straw thing and other operations in 
the province . . . is because there was people in primarily the ag 
caucus of the former government that did understand that and 
encouraged people to do those type of things to diversify this 
province; not just grow wheat. 
 
And what we want, I guess, is some assurance from you that 
your government is prepared to move in similar directions 
rather than being hidebound by some of the constraints that 
traditionally went with New Democratic Party governments. 
And that's why I asked you about specifics. 
 
Because there's people out there talking about trading north and 
south and about doing things that have nothing to do with 
orderly marketing, that have nothing to do with the Canadian 
Wheat Board, that have absolutely nothing to with some of the 
truisms in agriculture as we knew it in this province, and 
truisms that were in many cases dictated by politics, not 
practicality. And given what we face in agriculture going into 
this next century, I think practicality probably has more to show 
us today than it has ever shown us before. 
 
And I guess I'd ask you this: is this organization open-minded 
enough and free enough and has the ability to put seed money 
into something, for instance, that might run counter to Canadian 
Wheat Board jurisdiction, or might run counter to shipping east 
or west, or might run counter to some of the things that we've 
sort of taken for granted? Are we truly talking about leading 
edge here, free of ideological constraints, or is this more of 
what we've seen in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
raises excellent points. We do have to change in Saskatchewan. 
We've always changed. I don't think that when we talk about 
change, it's new for Saskatchewan farmers. The first tractor I 
drove had steel wheels on it and you had to reach back and pull 
a rope to get the cultivator out of the ground, and I'm not that 
old. And I've seen a lot of change and certainly don't expect that 
to slow down. 
 
So I think Saskatchewan farmers are well prepared to adapt, and 
we're being forced to changed by circumstance. And we're 
prepared to do that. 
 
Saskatchewan people have always been practical and not 
ideological in their endeavours. We certainly are prepared to 
look at whatever is there, including different marketing 
structures for different industries. We hope that the member 
opposite has dropped his ideology and doesn't continue to make 
derogatory remarks about Canadian Wheat Board, because 
certainly they have a role to play, and they may need to change 
their functions in order to function in a new world. But we 
certainly are prepared to take advantage of the opportunities 
that are there. 
 
I must say that right now in the changing world and the growing 
markets in some of the third world countries for our  

products, that there are certainly huge opportunities in rural 
Saskatchewan. It's a question of tapping into them and finding 
the money and the capital to change and adjust to the changing 
times without too much pain for the people that are out there 
now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if I'm 
not mistaken, you laid out a period of funding that will be 
coming forward to the agri-food innovation fund. I believe you 
indicated that the federal government will be putting funds in 
for — if I'm not mistaken — about five years. But from the Bill 
here I see there's an injection, when this Bill comes into force, 
of some $18 million out of the General Revenue Fund and I 
don't see any other commitments by the provincial government 
to this fund. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could explain to us why the 
provincial government is only making one contribution and the 
federal government is then making the rest of the contributions. 
Who then is actually controlling the fund? And who is 
managing the fund? And at the end of the day, who makes the 
appointments to the board? If you're only making one 
contribution and the feds are making the rest, they obviously 
must want to have some input or some involvement. If you 
could clarify some of those questions, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, we are putting in 
$18 million right now, when passage of this Bill, and that's to 
have some money in the fund as soon as possible. We have 
another $9 million budgeted for in the '95-96 budget, which is 
before the House at this time. The federal government is putting 
theirs in over a four-year period. 
 
The board structure will be made up of mostly industry people. 
Some of them will be appointed by the federal government; 
some will be appointed by the provincial government. We don't 
see a problem with that. In fact I think it will help to eliminate 
the duplication and overlap that could otherwise occur. We're 
much better spending it through one board than we are having 
two boards doing their own thing. 
 
So we certainly will have control of this fund and the industry 
will have adequate input into decisions that it makes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, the Bill indicates the money 
is coming out of the General Revenue Fund. Where is that 
money really coming from? 
 
I'm not sure . . . We're just trying to find out in the financial or 
the budgetary address given by the Minister of Finance about a 
month or so ago, and we're not exactly sure . . . we haven't been 
able to pinpoint where the $18 million is coming from this year. 
And I'm wondering if you could indicate where that money is 
being accounted for. 
 
Is it coming out of your budget? Is it coming out of the 
Department of Finance? Where is funding for this particular 
fund . . . your contribution to this fund actually coming from? 
 



March 22, 1995 

 
1063 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — That money will . . . this $18 
million that's going in this year will come out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So that is not coming out the agricultural 
portfolio then. It's coming out of the General Revenue Fund. 
Where is the budget . . . or where is it accounted for in the 
budget? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — As I understand it, because this is a 
statute it would be statutory funding. It will show up that way 
and not be a special warrant thing. Nine million dollars that's in 
the . . . for next year is in the budget. 
 
This was not money that was budgeted for at the beginning of 
last year, wasn't in the budget when we drew up the budget. It's 
something that we decided to spend after we had negotiated a 
new deal with the federal Department of Agriculture, and it will 
be statutory spending coming out of the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess, Mr. Minister, that's the concern we have 
here, and it comes back to some of the discussions we've been 
having with the auditor lately. The auditor continually brings to 
our attention the fact that for us as MLAs and as opposition 
members trying to establish how the money is being spent in 
this province, where the money is going, how it's flowing 
around, the auditor continues to remind us of the fact that we 
seem to have basically three different . . . and I'm going to use 
the analogy of grain bins on the premises. The grain is moving 
from one bin to the next, but it's not necessarily out there in a 
place where the public can actually see where it's coming from, 
and how is the government really accountable for this $18 
million that's going into this fund. 
 
It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, if this fund is being 
administered by the Department of Agriculture, that it probably 
would have been appropriate or would have been more 
appropriate for that funding to have come out of your 
department; your department being accountable for it versus 
just through a statutory motion brought before this Assembly 
where again it's not necessarily out in front for the public to see. 
 
And those are some of the concerns we have when we see a 
funding in this manner and $18 million being poured into a 
fund, and where that money is being accounted for. At the end 
of the day, how do we determine whether or not every cent and 
every dollar that the Finance minister has talked about is 
actually being accounted for, especially if you're responsible for 
a fund and yet the money comes from another area of 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I'm not sure what the member's 
difficulty with this is. If we hadn't done it through an Act . . . If 
the Department of Agriculture, with government decisions, 
spends more money during the year — money that is not 
budgeted during the year — it would normally show up as a 
special warrant and that would pass an OC (order in council) in  

cabinet and be made public. That's all the publicity there would 
be had we spent this just out of our agricultural budget. 
 
We're here today in front of the legislature, in public and on 
TV, saying we're spending $18 million. I don't know how much 
more accountable we could be than that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, while we're talking of 
spending $18 million, and yes, while we're discussing it here, 
we're accountable. But at the end of the day we still . . . I think 
it needs to show up on a line within government spending and 
budgetary figures as well, to show that that money has been 
expended and where that money has actually gone. And I think 
that's something that's important that it's there, is brought 
forward, is shown. 
 
And I guess I would have taken for granted that, because this is 
a fund that's being established under the department, your 
department, that there would have been a line in your 
department to show that expenditure, rather than just coming 
out of the General Revenue Fund. And that's a concern we 
raise, and I think we can continue to have, in the fact if it's . . . 
exactly where do you find the expenditure, and that's what I'm 
trying to bring forward. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess when we look at the agri-food 
development fund, or innovation fund as we see it here, and I 
think it indicated . . . I was looking through the Bill. It talks 
about diversification. We've talked about research and 
development in this province as far as agriculture, and we talk 
about encouraging farmers and rural residents to create 
economic opportunities and jobs. 
 
I think over the past number of years, regardless of whether or 
not people knew or may have had an inclination in the backs of 
their minds that Mr. Martin, when he brought forward his 
budget, was going to axe the Crow, if you will . . . many people 
in this province, many farmers, many innovative farmers both 
young and old, have for the past number of years been looking 
at ways in which they can become more successful in their 
farming operations and can define or find off-shoot avenues 
whereby they can make their farms productive. 
 
And I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, if . . . and a couple of 
questions I'm going to raise here because there's been 
discussion out in our area on it regarding a number of projects. 
One is the mainland terminal. We've seen a number of terminals 
or . . . I don't know if there's . . . maybe two or three have been 
set up, and a couple of others are already on the go. And 
Moosomin main line terminal is one . . . whether or not the 
funding of this nature will be beneficial or be available or 
accessible or is for groups that are trying to establish terminals 
in the province, whether or not this innovative fund is going to 
address some of the value added that groups like the Moosomin 
main line terminal are looking at. They're looking at the 
possibility of a flour mill being added on or being part of their 
economic complex, their manufacturing complex. 
 
I know there's a group in Grenfell that have been talking over  



March 22, 1995 

 
1064 

the past number of years about an ethanol project. And I know 
these are somewhat larger. There are a lot of other small 
innovative projects across the province, but maybe you could 
give us an idea of what this fund will do to actually help 
farmers diversify and encourage job creation throughout the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly that is the purpose of this 
fund . . . is to help with value added. Certainly a flour mill 
would be something that would certainly fall into this category. 
Ethanol is an excellent example. Ethanol is something that has a 
potential to create jobs in rural Saskatchewan. The problem 
right now is not quite being able to show economic viability 
with ethanol plants. 
 
If we can help to develop new products . . . and there are many 
potential new products that could be developed and new 
technology to extract or process those products which could 
make those plants viable or help with marketing of those 
products. If it's a human food product out of ethanol that is a 
by-product of the ethanol production that needs some help with 
test marketing and those sorts of things, that's what this fund 
would be designed for. It wouldn't necessarily be to give a grant 
to people to build an ethanol plant, but it certainly would be 
there to do some research in the ethanol area to help with test 
markets to test or help develop new equipment and new 
technology. So that's certainly exactly what this fund is intended 
for. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is 
that the fund is basically out there for research purposes to look 
at alternative methods of generating economic activity in the 
agricultural sector. And whether it's through ethanol production 
. . . and I think you're probably right in the fact that it's not just 
the ethanol by-product that you're looking at from an ethanol 
plant. There are the opportunities of taking some of the pulp 
and the meal from that and turning it into either human forms of 
consumption or even animal consumption. 
 
And I believe when you look at an ethanol plant overall, that is 
part of the broad picture, that you've got to look beyond just the 
ethanol production. You've got to look at the pulp or the meal 
— or whatever they call it — that you arrive at and methods in 
which you can utilize it. 
 
But on the other hand, when it comes to . . . and this question, 
Mr. Minister, may not deal directly with the Bill in front of us. I 
know I've talked to your office, and I think it's been a lack of 
ability for myself to get in touch with your officials as they've 
been tied up, and when they've called I haven't been available. 
But I know a question that has come from Moosomin main line 
terminal is whether or not there's any seed money available for a 
terminal in establishing or building their terminal. And I'm not 
sure if your department has any or if there is any funds available 
on that matter or even whether or not this agri-food Bill 
presents that or makes that possibility available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — There isn't anything available for 
construction of terminals at the present time. Many of them are  

going up . . . or not many, but some of them are going up, and 
they seem to be able to raise the capital. It's not impossible that 
when the board is set up that that might be a use of the money, 
although it's not really what we're targeting, certainly not at 
least with the capital expenditures. 
 
What we see from this Bill is trying to get together the ideas 
and the development of an idea into something that's 
commercial. And from that point on, usually private capital will 
take over. 
 
If you can design a business plan for an ethanol plant that 
shows that there's been some work done on the market so that 
we know they can market the products — we've done the 
research on the equipment, and we know it works, and you can 
put together a business plan that says this will work — then 
government probably doesn't need to be involved with capital 
because private individuals out in communities and banks and 
so on will put money into a project. The problem is trying to get 
the money to get the groundwork done to prove that the idea 
will work. So that's more what the fund is targeted at. 
 
We do have — and I didn't mention earlier — an ag equity fund 
that we passed last year which has $20 million over four years 
in, and that fund is designed to take an equity position to help 
raise capital for some of the processing projects that might arise 
from the sort of research that's going on in rural Saskatchewan, 
the idea being that it gives a source of . . . (inaudible) . . . 
capital that will take a chance on some new ventures. And then 
as they become viable, the capital will be pulled out and rolled 
into another one. 
 
So we have the ag development fund. We have the ag 
innovation fund, and at the end of the line we have the ag 
equity fund. So I think we have all the pieces there although 
certainly it's not intended to replace the private capital and the 
capital from lending institutions that's going to be needed to get 
the kind of activity going in rural Saskatchewan we need. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, prior to or even during your 
discussions with the federal government, were there any 
discussions with the effect that industry groups, organizations, 
or individuals prior to the establishment of this fund? Were 
there any organizations that were contacted, consulted with? 
And if so, Mr. Minister, could you give us the type of feedback 
that you may have received from organizations that would have 
been affected with or may have been consulted in trying to put 
together this innovation fund and program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, we have actually six areas in 
the province or six areas in the department, six committees: 
special crops, special livestock, horticulture, biotechnology, 
crop processing, food processing, and sustainable agriculture. 
And we've had those committees working for quite some time. 
They all have private-sector people on those committees, and 
they've also dealt of course with private-sector industry, looking 
for things that we can do in those sectors to help them develop, 
and they were all very supportive of this sort of fund. 
 



March 22, 1995 

 
1065 

So that's really . . . it's certainly coming from the industry. And 
that's basically what industry is asking us for. They're not asking 
us for grants. They're not asking us for tax breaks. What they're 
asking us for is some help to get developed to get an idea to the 
stage where it's potentially . . . they can prove out its 
commercial value. And at that point the industries mostly feel 
that private interests can take over from there. But it's very 
difficult to raise capital, particularly in a community. If it takes 
even small amounts to do business plans and to do some 
research on ideas and so on, it's very difficult to raise. And 
that's where we're trying to fill that need with this fund. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically what you're saying then, most of the 
consultations took place with individual groups right within 
different departments in the Department of Agriculture, rather 
than private or independent groups outside of the department. Is 
that true? And what suggestions were brought forward by these 
groups? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, as far as this innovation fund that we're 
talking of, as we have it here before us today, were there any 
objections to the fund? And maybe you could specify whether 
there were any, what they were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — These committees, as I said earlier, 
have actually not only department people but industry people 
actually sitting on the committees, and the committees have 
done broad consultation. I think we'll find that many of these 
committees and many of the industries are sitting, waiting for 
this fund to come in place because they have a whole lot of 
ideas as to how it could be spent. So I think there will be a 
quick uptake on the fund, and industries will certainly be ready 
to partake. I don't know of anybody who has protested against 
this sort of funding. 
 
Mr. Toth: — What specific groups from the industry are you 
talking about would have made representations proposals for 
this fund? Which sectors would it have been, manufacturing or 
as far as the machinery or food processing or . . . And I know 
there's a number of different avenues. Specifically can you give 
us an idea of the type of groups you might have been talking to, 
who they would have represented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly. In for instance the food 
processing industry, we've consulted with the Saskatchewan 
Food Processors Association. We've consulted with university 
people. We've consulted with individuals such as David White 
from Drake Meats and other people. The horticulture committee 
has talked to the vegetable growers and other societies in the 
industry. 
 
So biotechnology . . . of course we've consulted with biotech 
companies and POS in Saskatoon. We really have had a very 
broad based consultation and a broad based strategy, which 
goes back to Ag 2000. We've been working on a strategy. 
 
This, I think, fills in a bit of a hole that we were told was in the  

strategy of getting that researched idea into actual production, 
that there was a gap, and that this was one way to fix it. So 
really it comes, as has all of our strategy, basically arisen from 
the agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, how did you arrive at the level of 
funding? Was this part of the discussion with these groups at 
determining what level of funding that you should be asking? It 
would seem to me that you must have had a level that you kind 
of had in the back of your mind that you felt would be 
appropriate for this fund to really operate and operate efficiently 
and effectively. 
 
And when you went to Ottawa to negotiate with the federal 
government, I'm just trying to determine what level of funding 
the different organizations would have suggested would have 
been appropriate for it to be a worthwhile fund, and what that 
level would have been, and whether or not you were able to 
achieve that level in the amount of funding that you're 
suggesting you have arrived at today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well obviously governments 
always have to make choices as to where they spend their 
money. This was part of the negotiation with the federal 
government, and we negotiated an increased . . . enhanced 
NISA (net income stabilization account) or whole farm account. 
We negotiated a sector program for grains and oilseeds which 
we felt our producers were in drastic need of. And we 
negotiated probably as much money as we possibly could for 
this area. 
 
I don't think that $91 million is going to be enough to develop 
all the ideas that are out there. Certainly each sector would 
probably be happy if they got it all. But certainly we think that's 
. . . because this is not investing in capital . . . $91 million in 
capital might not build a whole lot of plants, but $91 million in 
research and development and marketing and so on could see a 
huge industry develop if there's a decent success rate at the ones 
that begin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're basically saying, Mr. Minister, 
you really didn't have a level of funding that you had 
established that you were looking at and going to the federal 
government with a suggestion that this is a specific level we 
think would be appropriate, between our contribution and the 
contribution from you, that would make this innovation fund 
workable. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, you just went with a suggestion 
that we should maybe establish one, at least from the comments 
you made, without knowing really where you wanted to end up 
at the end of the day. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly we went to the 
federal government with funding levels that we wanted for the 
province that we felt were fair for the province overall. We 
wanted a safety net that was fair to Saskatchewan. 
 
I would say that this is probably the biggest research  



March 22, 1995 

 
1066 

development fund that's ever been established in Saskatchewan. 
It's certainly better than a lot of other provinces have. I don't 
think anybody else has anything comparable to this. 
 
I think there's no doubt that the federal government is going to 
get some heat from places like Alberta, who are now out of 
GRIP and don't have the enhanced NISA that we have and don't 
have a sector program and also don't have a research and 
development fund of $91 million that we have. 
 
So while we would've liked to have seen it bigger, I think we 
did get a reasonable amount of money into it. 
 
And I think it would've been very much more difficult trying to 
negotiate that at this time. Remember that the federal 
government has reduced their spending on agriculture 
dramatically, talking about going from 850 down to $600 
million in safety net funding. So in hindsight, I think this deal 
looks better all the time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, how do you see this fund meeting 
the objectives and purposes as you outline in the Bill in section 
4(1)(a) through (c) where you talk about enhancing the 
diversification of the Saskatchewan agriculture and food 
industry. And I'm wondering what you really mean on that line 
there; what you're really talking about; what you're looking at at 
the end of the day; what your goals and objectives are. 
 
And in support of research and development of the 
Saskatchewan agriculture and food industry, and encourage 
Saskatchewan farmers and rural residents to create economic 
opportunities and jobs  it seems to me that that is somewhat 
vague. I think it's a fairly open statement and it could be 
interpreted in a number of different forms or manners. And I'm 
wondering what the department, what your department and the 
industry as they've come to you and established this fund, what 
they see by these objectives and purposes you've outlined here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we certainly 
tried to have some flexibility because we have a board that's 
going to be appointed, and we're not going to be telling them 
specifically what projects they should or shouldn't choose. 
 
But we've done the research, having the six groups working on 
trying to determine what the needs are in each of these sectors. 
So we have a very good idea of what the needs are, based on 
our study and on consultation with the industry. So I think the 
board shouldn't have a great deal of difficulty in achieving those 
goals. 
 
The goal is obviously to create wealth in rural Saskatchewan, to 
help with jobs and people . . . depopulation in rural 
Saskatchewan. We certainly see huge opportunities in rural 
Saskatchewan. We see problems. We've certainly come through 
some difficult times, and things like changing of the Crow 
benefit are going to put a great deal of stress, and some of the 
change and adjustment that's going to happen is likely going to 
happen with a great deal of pain. And we want to protect our 
producers and our rural residents to the best of our ability. 

But we also see huge opportunities out there, and this fund is 
designed so that we can get on with creating some new jobs and 
some viable farms and communities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, as you see this fund, do you see this 
fund as being a fund that will be available to a number of — 
and how can I put it? — could I say individual producers, farm 
organizations farm business groups. And when I say that, I look 
under 4(2)(a), you talk about supporting "the biotechnology 
infrastructure to the extent that the Fund considers necessary to 
allow Saskatchewan farmers and rural residents to be on the 
leading edge of new economic opportunities." 
 
It seems to me when we talk of biotechnology, that in itself can 
absorb a fair chunk of the funds, if you will, if you looked at 
just the innovative features of biotechnology in the agricultural 
sector. 
 
I guess I'm wondering how does this directly relate to farmers in 
general? Will specific farmers have access to it? Or how will 
this fund be allocated and how do you endeavour or how do 
you see the fund being utilized to enhance the objectives and 
purposes and the goals that you're outlining for us here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the board will have the final 
say in all decisions and it will be dominated by industry people. 
 
But certainly what I would see is individual farmers . . . It may 
be money going into researching a new variety of saskatoons 
that grows well in some areas of the province. It could be to 
help some farmer do a business plan, who wants to crush the 
saskatoons and sell the saskatoon juice, or whatever they might 
come up with as an idea. 
 
There might be money available for PAMI (Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute) to some research on equipment to do a 
mechanical picker of those berries. And there might even be 
money for biotechnology or research that finds certain 
components in saskatoon berries that have high value and uses 
somewhere in the world, and then genetically engineering a 
saskatoon bush to produce that. 
 
So I think that range goes right from certainly individual 
farmers, agronomic research to help them produce products on 
the farm, to processing which might be done right on the farm 
or in the community as a community project or a larger scale 
project or plant that's based on high-tech research from 
biotechnology. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Could you define, Mr. Minister, what you mean 
by food and non-food uses more closely and what sort of 
technologies do you have in mind. Just for an example, would a 
microbrewery, if you will, fit into that definition? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, certainly food is fairly simple, 
but there are a lot of non-food uses for agricultural  



March 22, 1995 

 
1067 

products that are becoming some of the more exciting markets. 
An example of that might be canola where you can genetically 
engineer a canola plant to produce an oil that's suitable for 
power saws to be used in forestry where people are concerned 
about the environment. 
 
Another non-food use might be, for example, the flax straw 
processing plant that's going up in my riding, or is up. There are 
many areas for products that could be developed. There are an 
awful lot of good ideas out there. A microbrewery is certainly 
one that probably would fit in a category that might get some 
help from this fund. 
 
So there certainly are a lot of ideas -- all the way from the 
Premier's favourite of making golf balls out of wheat. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I missed that last one, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
is there any requirement that agriculture products actually have 
to come from Saskatchewan? When we look at this fund and 
the fact that we're . . . a lot of our borders are fairly accessible, 
and I think in some cases, like you look at the Lloydminster 
area, there's people just basically cross back and forth over the 
border fairly easy and trade back and forth, and certainly on the 
east side there are examples of it too. 
 
I'm wondering, is this fund limited just to Saskatchewan-based 
agricultural opportunities and initiatives, or would projects that 
are in close proximity of the borders where some of the other, 
say, agricultural innovative opportunities might arise that may 
. . . A person, say, lives in Saskatchewan but does most of their 
farming in Manitoba or Alberta per se, are we eliminating this 
to specifically Saskatchewan-related initiatives or is there 
opportunity for people from outside the province? Has that been 
a question that has been raised with you in regard to this fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly we would like to see 
particularly the plants and stuff in Saskatchewan. But if, you 
know, if somebody is going to want some research into how to 
pick berries, a mechanical berry-picker, or some way to make a 
new product out of carrots or whatever, we wouldn't be able to 
restrict that research within the boundaries of the province, and 
certainly easily see a processing plant that would be drawing 
commodities from other provinces. 
 
As an example, last year there were 200,000 pounds of 
choke-cherries that were sold out of Saskatchewan on a 
test-market basis. If that market were to expand and this fund 
may end up helping with some research in the choke-cherry 
area or a marketing plan for choke-cherries, wouldn't 
necessarily limit people from bringing their choke-cherries from 
Alberta or Manitoba, for example. So certainly we would . . . 
the idea is to develop Saskatchewan industries but, as you point 
out, there are pretty open borders in Canada. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I find that interesting, Mr. Minister, your 
comment about . . . I think you said 200,000 — did I hear you 
right? — about choke-cherries developed? And, I don't know, 
that probably would be jellies and syrups and whatever, that  

were processed and sold out of the province. 
 
It seems to me that the saskatoon berry industry is another 
avenue that seems to be springing up as an alternative to . . . an 
alternative crop in agriculture, and certainly opportunities there. 
But I'm hoping, Mr. Minister, that they can find a saskatoon 
bush that I can purchase to put on my farm. I've purchased eight 
already and they still haven't given me anything. I don't know 
what the problem is. 
 
But when it comes to other alternatives than being a 
Saskatchewan product . . . and I think of the flax plant that is 
going up in your area. Certainly flax straw is something that 
people over the past number of years . . . well as far back as I 
can remember, even 10 or 15 years ago, they were gathering 
flax straw in our area. In fact at that time, if I'm not mistaken, it 
was trucked into Manitoba to be utilized in a plant at that time, 
and then all of a sudden it just quit. So it seems to me there's 
opportunities out there. 
 
Maybe utilizing flax straw is maybe not something that you'll 
find in every province. Maybe like you say, if this project at 
Canora really gets up and running there'll be people from the 
Manitoba side looking at whether or not they could access the 
opportunity to dispose of their flax straw in that manner. 
 
So it seems to me that if we can come up with some real 
alternatives and initiatives and be promoters and, if you will, be 
the initiators of some of these processes, other provinces and 
groups and individuals will certainly come and take a look at 
us. 
 
I'm wondering what you necessarily mean when you talk of 
primary production alternatives in the objectives and purposes 
under (2)(d) and you talk about . . . What do your foresee as 
being new skills that would be supported by this fund? And 
whether or not there will be, as we look at new alternatives, 
whether or not there will be classes. Do you foresee classes or 
conferences being held to promote utilization of the innovation 
fund? And who would be responsible for setting up and 
managing such educational opportunities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly some of the sectors have 
identified a need for skill training in particular skills — for 
example, in the horticulture sector. And in order to get 
development, some of those opportunities for training will have 
to be there. 
 
We are already doing an awful lot of seminars and information 
within the department. We're having huge turnouts to things 
like herb and spice seminars and game farming seminars and 
many other areas. So skill training is one of the things that some 
of the sectors will require. 
 
We're also, in the department, working on getting onto the 
information highway to be able to transfer information that's 
going to be needed as we gear up and diversify our economy. 
It's no longer good enough for the Department of Agriculture to 
know about wheat and barley and cattle and hogs; we also are  



March 22, 1995 

 
1068 

being asked to know about saskatoons and raspberries and what 
you treat elk with, and on and on it goes. So we need to gear up 
and get information out to producers as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well maybe, Mr. Minister, it's unfortunate . . . 
And if you will . . . I'm not exactly sure . . . until this fund is up 
and running and we see the actual results that take place . . . 
You talked about the fact that we've probably reached the point 
where we need to look well beyond just producing wheat and 
barley in this province and maybe marketing hogs. Maybe it's 
unfortunate that more people didn't, even a few years back as 
we were struggling through the '80s with the low commodity 
prices especially in the wheat and barley or the coarse grains, 
look at the fact that there were some other alternatives out there. 
 
And I note in our area that one producer has gone to taking the 
hulls off of oats and removing the meal, and set up a little 
operation just on his own because he couldn't seem to make it 
any other way. And now he's basically rented out his land and 
that's all he's doing — he buys his oats and he's found a market 
for it. 
 
So it seems that while through the years we were tied in to the 
method of payment as going strictly to the producer, it really 
limited many of the opportunities to expand or to look at . . . for 
producers to look at alternative methods of being more 
productive in this province and the avenues that were available 
to them. 
 
And so I guess I could only say we trust that this fund indeed 
meets some of the objectives and the goals that you are setting 
out for it. 
 
I am wondering . . . I look at sections (e) and (f) and I see it 
mentions: 
 
 work in co-operation with persons or organizations 

having objects and purposes similar to those of the 
Fund; 

 
 support the development of skills that will assist 

agricultural producers in adapting to the changing 
agriculture and food industry; 

 
I look at that, and I'm taking from those two sections, (e) and 
(f), that there are specific requirements for people in order to 
qualify for any assistance under this fund. 
 
And what I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what has the 
department set up as specific requirements; and what do you 
really mean by “work in co-operation with persons” . . . You 
must have some specific requirements and objectives that you're 
bringing forward as to the availability or the access to funds 
under this fund in order for people to maybe look at accessing it 
and getting help or looking at ways in which they can work 
together with the fund. I wonder if you could outline those for 
us, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly we will be working with  

many different groups and organizations, including universities, 
and associations within commodity groups and so on. It's quite 
possible that we would be cost sharing some project with the 
pulse growers, for example. They have a check-off fund, so 
they may bring a project to the board that asks for cost sharing. 
So this will allow us to work with other people and cost share 
and develop things in conjunction with other organizations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And you had also indicated a moment earlier that, 
I believe, there's a lot of research, as you've indicated, in the 
area of canola oil and some of the other avenues that it could be 
utilized for. I believe there's also research looking at whether it 
could be used as a fuel for farm equipment or even . . . I'm not 
exactly sure if they've got into a lubricant value but I know 
there is some research in that area. 
 
And I'm wondering, is this an avenue that . . . you talked about 
pulse crops and the different avenues in which pulses could be 
marketed and some of the processing that could take place. 
 
I take it these are some of the things that you're looking at that 
could possibly fit into what you see as the overall objectives of 
this fund. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's exactly what we hoped 
to accomplish. One of the strong advantages we have in 
Saskatchewan is the biotechnology centre at Saskatoon and 
other research there as well. There are very exciting things 
happening with breaking down the different plants, whether it's 
oats . . . as Canamino is now going to be selling oats for 
cosmetics. They're finding components of oats that may be 
useful in the pharmaceutical area. They're working on different 
types of canola for oils for different uses. 
 
And one of the things we hope is because we have the research 
here, we're fast becoming . . . we are one of the centres of 
excellence for biotechnology in the world — 30 per cent of 
Canada's ag biotech happens in Saskatoon. 
 
So we need to take advantage of that, have people who are there 
to pick up some of these new products and commercialize them 
right here in Saskatchewan. And it's helpful in that we have the 
research here in Saskatoon. We have POS there who does a lot 
of work with testing of products and so on. And so it becomes 
attractive for companies to locate in Saskatchewan because 
although that takes place in Saskatoon, many times we will be 
on the very leading edge of these new products, and if we can 
take advantage of having that research done in Saskatchewan 
and actually commercialize the products here and ship out the 
finished products, that's exactly the goal of our whole strategy. 
And we think this fund will help us to do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, just before I turn it over to 
one of my other colleagues with some questions, what do you 
or your department or the government perceive as being the 
economic benefit at the end of the day of this fund to the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
It would seem to me, as we look at all these different ideas and  



March 22, 1995 

 
1069 

avenues that are available to us, as we do research, as we find 
different methods of marketing our product, there must be in 
the back of, either your mind or the mind of the officials or the 
government in general, that I guess what we're saying at the end 
of the day is we're hoping that there's some economic spin-off 
and economic benefit to the province. 
 
And I wonder, is there any economic benefit that you perceive 
right now that you could identify in specific numbers, even a 
ball-point figure, that the potential of benefit to this province  
which at the end of the day becomes a benefit to the taxpayers, 
certainly as an asset to the province and to the Finance minister 
as well  is there any idea of what you perceive that benefit 
could be? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Much of the work that's been done 
on the value of agricultural research is somewhere usually in 
the neighbourhood of 50 to 100 times the return of the money 
that you put into agricultural research. And certainly in my 
opinion there's no more fertile place, and more opportunities for 
new development, than in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have some space. We have the climate. We have innovative 
people. We've got the infrastructure. We've got markets for food 
products that are rapidly growing. We certainly expect a huge 
increase. We think we can probably double the value of crops 
produced, and that's just in the crop sector. 
 
So we're certainly expecting a huge rate of return, and I think 
that's often the better return for your dollar than direct to 
support the producers, although that continues to be important. 
 
Some of the research that's been done in the past . . . Dr. 
Slinkard, in his research on lentil varieties, has put our lentil 
producers at the forefront in the world and created an industry 
that made a lot of dollars for our producers. And most of that, 
or a lot of that, can be contributed to the fact that we did some 
research here and got ahead of the competition. So we certainly 
expect huge returns over time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the beginning 
of your discussion on this Bill, you indicated that there were 
payments of 18 million, 9 million, 10 . . . 18 and 9 from the 
province and 10 and 18 and 18 and 18 from the federal 
government. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In the Saskatchewan Estimates 1995-96, does 
the 9 million come into place in that year, or is the 18 million in 
'95-96? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The 9 million is in '95-96. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is it in this Estimates book? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It's in there. I don't have the book  

here to . . . I don't know if it shows up in a line as ag innovation 
fund, but it's in the budget. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Can you show me where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — It's on page 35 under section 9: 
sector programing and development, $9 million. That's where it 
shows up in the budget. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Okay, so it's 9 million there. Where does the 
18 million show up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — The 18 million is current year 
funding. We went through this earlier. It's statutory so it won't 
show up in the budget. But it's from general revenue. It's a 
decision that was made part way through the year and it's part of 
. . . will show up in the final statements of '94-5 when it's 
audited. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Will it show up in the Minister of Finance's 
estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We're not sure where it shows up. 
It will either be in the Finance or Ag department. Again, it's not 
in the '94-95 budget because it wasn't in the budget at the 
beginning of the year. It's additional spending. Would have 
been . . . had we not done the Act, a statutory funding would 
have showed up as special warrant and would have showed up 
in the Ag department. 
 
But because it's statutory, it will show up in the final estimates 
that the Finance minister tables and gives to the auditor. I'm not 
sure whether it will show up . . . exactly where it will show up. 
We could find that out if you're interested. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Will the Provincial Auditor have an 
observation to make on this or will he be able to do the . . . will 
he do the audit on the $18 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, he will do the audit on it. 
 
Mr. Martens: — The $18 million, the money runs out in 10 
days or 11 days — no, 9 days. Would you be able to give us a 
list of projects that this has funded in order to deal with the $18 
million, or have you spent nothing, or is it all spent? Where is 
the money at right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We haven't spent a cent of it. We 
will put the $18 million into the fund and establish a board and 
begin getting applications immediately. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Then, Mr. Minister, why didn't you budget for 
it in 1996 and allow us to see what was happening? Why did 
you use that as a part of your finance strategy on how to fudge 
the books from one year to the next? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — As I pointed out to your colleague 
earlier, this was part of safety net negotiations with the federal 
government. We needed to put our money into the fund and we  



March 22, 1995 

 
1070 

wanted to get it up and get it started in this year. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, so we're going to have 
$27 million to spend in the year under review under this 
program. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — One of the reasons for setting up 
this fund is that we want to put the money into a fund. It's 
money that we have to put towards agriculture. One of the 
things the industry keeps telling us is, give us some committed 
funding so we can see what's there so we can plan. 
 
These funds, many of them will be for projects that maybe take 
five years to completion or even 10 years to completion. So 
while the money is put into the fund — it's there, it's available 
— the board will start making decisions, but it won't all be 
spent within any given time frame. 
 
Mr. Martens: — My suggestion to you perhaps, and my 
observation, would be that 27 million spent and promises made 
over the next three months would be a significant benefit to 
you, and that's what we think you're doing with it. You're 
putting it into place in last year so you can spend it in this year, 
or in '95-96, with a view to put in for an election gimmick that's 
going to transcend all opportunities for us to even discuss it and 
provide us with an opportunity to have even a discussion with 
you about what it's going to be used for and how it's going to be 
spent. 
 
There'll be $18 million that we put into this fund, and you don't 
know what you're going to do with it and we don't know what 
you're going to do with it. And I think that that's not a good 
thing for this Assembly to be considering. I think it's wrong. 
And the auditor has said over and over again that this is one 
other condition that the Legislative Assembly does not have 
access to any opportunity to discuss in a budgetary basis. 
 
You make it in a statute . . . If it wasn't coming here under this 
year in particular, we wouldn't have an opportunity . . . Next 
year, you can do it over and over again and you can just say, 
well it's under statute, and just let it slide through and nobody 
gets to talk about it. 
 
And I know what your answer's going . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well a warrant wouldn't be any better, but at 
least we would know where it was being spent. And that's what 
we want to have as a consideration for this discussion. 
 
And I think you're wrong to do it this way. And it is just as 
wrong as putting it in a warrant. We should have it on this 
Assembly floor so we can discuss exactly what you want to do 
with it. That's what we should have an opportunity for — in the 
year under review, because it was paid out in '95-96 . . . or 
'94-95, not in '95-96. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the money is paid out in 
'94-95 into a fund, and you certainly have the potential right 
now to ask questions. And you have spent a good part of the 
day asking questions about how it's going to be spent. This is  

the opportunity you have. It's pretty hard for us to bring back 
details as to how money is spent before it's spent. 
 
And it will be spent by a board. If you want industry 
participation in the process, much as we do with ADF 
(Agriculture Development Fund) and other funds that you're 
well aware of, the opportunity will be here next year after the 
money is spent for you to question how it's spent. But I don't 
know how you anticipate us predicting exactly how our board is 
going to divide up $18 million until it's been done. Certainly 
this is as open a process as you can get. We're coming here in 
public, on TV, saying we've got $18 million to spend on 
agriculture. And I don't know how much more open a process 
you could possibly have. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My colleague 
from Morse has asked some very good questions of the 
minister, so I think we should get into a discussion of this board 
and understand clearly how it's going to operate, the make-up of 
it, because I'm sure the minister must have some ideas. 
 
And he's outlined some things in the legislation here about the 
board  12 in number. That's a fairly large board. I wonder, 
Minister, why you selected 12 and why you have very clearly 
defined that only a third of the people on that board will either 
be primary or secondary producers. Why did you do that, 
minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — This board is going to be 
appointed, six by the federal government and six by the 
provincial government which, seeing there's funds from both 
governments, would seem to me to be sensible. 
 
A third is a minimum. We are still working with the federal 
government on who to put on the board. I think it's fair to say 
that both the federal government and the provincial government 
are in agreement that at a very minimum the majority of the 
board should be industry participants. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, you've got to understand our 
reluctance to give you another board to play with when one 
reads the newspaper on Monday or Tuesday and saw a column 
that stretched the entire length of the newspaper of what you've 
done with boards and commissions since taking power in '91, 
even though your Premier said that was a terrible no-no and 
ought not to be done. 
 
And yet you've packed every possible niche and cranny full of 
patronage appointments. And we see twelve more here on a list; 
six of them, I guess, at your discretion. And you've got an 
identification that you don't want too many producers on it, and 
that leaves us very suspicious about why you would be that 
way. 
 
And I'm wondering if you would give me a definition of what a 
secondary producer would be. Is this sort of like someone in a 
grain company, or what is it? Tell me what a secondary 
producer is in your mind so that I get an idea of who we're 
including in the farmer category here. 



March 22, 1995 

 
1071 

(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — A secondary producer would be a 
food processor, remembering that this fund is certainly going to 
be aimed at a lot of value added and industry people, as well as 
right-on-farm activity. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So you're telling me that Sask Wheat Pool, 
UGG (United Grain Growers Limited), Cargill — all sorts of 
people like that — or anybody in the crushing business, could 
be on this board that you're going to appoint? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes, that's true. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay. As a primary producer gives me some 
consternation because people that are in the buying side and the 
marketing side often have a different agenda than what I as a 
primary producer have. In some cases it's profit driven, other 
cases it's their own agenda. 
 
And I'm wondering why you would not say, okay, I've got the 
ability to appoint six individuals here that I will have primary 
producers being in the majority and secondary, and other 
academic types or bureaucratic types being in the minority. If 
your mission statement that you laid out to us earlier in the day 
is what you say it is, then I would think that you would want 
those primary producers to feel that a company, a grain 
company or others, whose agenda may be different than theirs, 
would not be in control of a publicly funded agency that you 
have just told us carried over 18 million bucks from last budget 
year to this year so that you can play with it in an election year. 
 
Wouldn't you think primary producers would be a little bit 
suspicious, Minister, of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I think the primary producers 
will want people on this board who are competent and who 
understand the industry, and certainly your primary producers 
will be on the board and they will have a role to play. But I 
think it's also fair to say that somebody in the food processing 
industry will have a good understanding of the food processing 
industry and will have some idea of what idea might or might 
not fly in the food processing industry and what sort of business 
plan is reasonable and not reasonable. 
 
So I don't see your objection to having people in the industry on 
a board that's making decisions in the food processing industry. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — You obviously, Minister . . . and you're the 
Minister of Agriculture. You're the person that's supposed to 
have the heartbeat of Saskatchewan farm families firmly within 
your grasp; understand what the heck's going on out there as 
they go through this period of transition . . . must understand 
that there is a significant difference between a farm family and 
a grain company who market in the best interests of a grain 
company. 
 
Your legislation clearly says that the board has the power to 
structure committees, to seek input from all types of  

professionals that you can pay per diem, that you can pay 
remuneration to anybody who you would consider of a 
professional nature. 
 
The issue at hand here is why you would want this board 
primarily stocked up with folks whose interests may be 
different than the diversification of the family farm in this 
province and the maintenance of rural Saskatchewan versus the 
agenda of a profit-driven corporation who want to develop X 
product because they can probably buy it cheaper from the 
farmer and sell it for more money. I mean that's often the case. 
You're a farmer; you understand that. 
 
And I'm wondering why, given that your legislation says that 
you can use any of these people in any means that you wish, 
you would not have given the primary producer of this province 
primacy when it's their money, their taxpayers' money that's 
going into this operation; and why you would let the federal 
government dictate to you otherwise. 
 
This is for Saskatchewan to diversify its agricultural sector and 
you have all opportunity, according to the legislation, to use all 
the professional help you want and pay for it. Why would you 
not give primary producers in this province the primacy on that 
board of directors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
opposite has a very bad approach to economic development in 
this province. The people who are producing beef — the 
cow/calf guy and the feedlot operator and Drake Meats and 
Thomson Meats — are all on the same side in this battle. 
 
In order for the food processors to compete in the world market, 
they need product from primary producers. Primary producers 
need further processors to find markets for their products. And 
we're finding more and more industries that are working 
cooperatively rather than competitively within the industry, and 
there needs to be those ties. 
 
So I don't know — certainly the primary producer needs to be 
represented and will be represented on the board. But I also 
certainly think that you need somebody who understands the 
food processing industry on the board to sort out the 
applications that come for research and development and 
business plans and so on. When the first producer comes 
forward with a business plan to make golf balls out of wheat, 
we need not only a farmer but we need somebody who 
understands the manufacturing process and so on, on the board 
to help make those decisions. And I don't think that the groups 
are enemies. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I didn't imply they were 
enemies. There's a lot farmers in this province that are every bit 
as smart business-wise as anyone else. I mean it kind of amazes 
me because the Minister of Economic Development comes in 
here and talks about his estimates and he trots out the same 
names you do. I mean most of the folks that you just mentioned 
are busy flying around with the Minister of Economic 
Development, would you not admit, to places like Mexico and  



March 22, 1995 

 
1072 

Taiwan and Hong Kong. 
 
They've all been on those junkets. And the Minister of 
Economic Development says, well, I've got to have them on my 
advisory group because they know how to do this, this, and this. 
Okay? And then the Minister of Agriculture comes into the 
House, says, I got another bunch of money to spend and I've got 
to have these folks back on my board because these dumb 
farmers don't understand how to manage their business. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's terrible. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that's what he said to the Assembly. 
And I don't buy that. I don't buy that. I agree with you. 
 
And the Minister of Economic Development probably needs 
those people and needs to fly them around to make sure that our 
products get marketed properly and developed properly and that 
we open up those niches. 
 
But I think farm families in this province expect you, Minister, 
given what's happened . . . I mean you're the guy that took their 
insurance away. You're the guy that let the federal government 
get away with taking a whole bunch of money out of this 
province. It's your government that fought getting $7.2 billion 
and settled for 1.6. 
 
And when you come up with a fund here, an innovation fund 
which you're, I suspect, going to trot around this province on all 
sorts of platforms . . . And the Premier's already been doing it, 
already been doing it because he's going to call an election one 
of these days and he's saying, have we ever got a deal for you, 
farm family; it's called the ag innovation fund; we've got X 
number of dollars and we're going to do wonderful things for 
you. 
 
Why in the world you would not want to have some farm 
families represented on the board of directors at least, and not 
the Economic Development minister's friends who he flies 
around the world. They're already getting their fix. Why in the 
world wouldn't you want farmers, Minister, to have the majority 
on the board for this small amount of money that you've left 
them after you either took or gave the rest of it away. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well it's interesting that the 
member opposite continues to be stuck in the old days and want 
to go back to the '91 GRIP program rather than doing the 
innovation fund and the diversification and value added that 
needs to be done in this province. This is probably a new first, 
Mr. Chairman, when we're having a board that's been criticized 
before it's been appointed because we might appoint somebody 
to a board. I think that has to be a new . . . It really is rather 
ironic to have a board criticized before it's even been appointed. 
 
And I know the opposition has spent a lot of time criticizing 
board members and personalizing some of the issues, but to be 
criticizing a board that's not yet appointed, I think is certainly a 
new area for this House. 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, if you don't clear the process 
. . . if you think that your appointments can stand up to the 
process, why don't we agree here today that when you start 
selecting board members, you'll bring them in here to the House 
and we'll talk about them. Okay? 
 
If you've got a few folks in the secondary business, as you like 
to put it, that you think farmers in this province would be quite 
comfortable with, why don't you just bring those names in here 
and we'll stack that up with our federal appointments, and we'll 
see who is coming with the straight goods, you know. 
 
Will those appointments stand the test of this House? Will it 
stand the test of the farmers in this House? Would you agree to 
do that, Minister? Before this House rises, that you'll bring us a 
list of potential board appointments, and we can discuss 
whether they would be appropriate for the mission statement 
that you've outlined for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We'll appoint a board, and farmers 
will judge that board very shortly in the election. That's the way 
the system works. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 
 


