






















































March 1, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 1, 1995 

 

 
541 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to present, 
on behalf of people from the Maple Creek area of my 
constituency and as well a few people from Medicine Hat and 
Redcliff, a petition today. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'd be happy to table these at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today from members of south-west Saskatchewan. The 
prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most of these are from the Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg-Limerick area. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I as well wish to present petitions to 
the Assembly. I'd like to read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
And these petitions are signed by individuals from Maple 
Creek, Nikaneet, Gleichen. I so present them. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have  

a petition that I want to present today on behalf of Wheat Pool 
members in my area of the province, and I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to require the directors of the 
Pool to seek approval of the members of the Pool by a 
vote before the proposed changes are enacted by the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of member shareholders of the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool petitioning the Assembly to require the directors of 
the Pool to seek the approval of the Pool membership by 
a vote before the proposed changes to The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act are enacted by the 
Legislative Assembly. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated toward 
the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's my 
pleasure on behalf of my seat mate, the member from Thunder 
Creek, to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly a group of 13 grade 8 students and their 
teacher, Mr. Matheson, from Pense, Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to welcome these students here and I want you to 
also know that Pense is actually more known throughout the 
world than you may be aware of. 
 
I was about your age when I first heard about Pense, 
Saskatchewan and it was in my geography book where there 
was a picture of Pense as an illustration of some good old rich 
farming land, the best that there was in the world, I think was 
the caption at the time. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to the students and teacher, I look 
forward to meeting with you later on in the Speaker's 
boardroom. I hope you have an enjoyable and informative 
afternoon and I'd be only too pleased to answer any questions 
that you may have. Thank you. 
 
And I ask all members to help me welcome these students and 
teacher. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 1, 1995 

 
542 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan's Jurassic Park 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know 1994 
was another strong year for tourism in Saskatchewan and there 
is great anticipation for 1995. Technology will play its part this 
year as the information highway draws tourists to 
Saskatchewan's version of Jurassic Park. 
 
I am referring to the Tyrannosaurus rex fossil at Eastend. A 
computer file about the town of Eastend and the dinosaur dig is 
now available on the Internet. It is estimated that the 
information can be accessed by as many as 60 million users 
from around the globe. 
 
One of the big tourism draws last summer was this dinosaur 
fossil. Visitors to this site numbered 6,000 by the time the 
season closed. The economic impact on the province's south-
west region has been estimated as high as $800,000. 
 
Now that information about this very important tourism 
attraction is available on the Internet. The potential for visitors 
to the region known as the Valley of Hidden Secrets is 
enormous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another example of how these technological 
advances are being used to our advantage to attract tourists and 
help bolster the economy at the same time. 
 
This summer the Eastend region will be attracting people 
worldwide — people who will want to see the fossilized 
skeleton of the most ferocious predator to walk the earth. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, . . . or I should say no, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
not talking about the federal Finance minister, but the T-Rex at 
Eastend. 
 
Thank you. 
 

St. David's Day 
 
Mr. Draper: — Borw da, Mr. Speaker, sir. I wish to remind 
members that today, March 1, is the feast day of St. David, the 
patron saint of Wales. 
 
This worthy man was born about 520 A.D., apparently the 
result of the rape of his mother, St. Non, by the chieftain Sant. 
Perhaps we have a saint here for the protection of victims of 
indecent assault. 
 
David was educated at Henfynyw, Cardigan, and was successful 
in suppressing the Pelagian heresy in Britain at Synods 
Llanddewi-Brefi and later at Caerleon-on-Usk. He moved the 
seat of ecclesiastical government from Caerleon to Mynyw, 
which has later been renamed Ty-Dewi, or in English, St. 
David's, in honour of him. 
 
He founded numerous churches and more than 50 are dedicated  

to him in Wales today. His shrine at St. David's is a notable 
place of pilgrimage and the site of the National University of 
Wales. 
 
I ask members to join with me in celebrating a less well-known 
but equally important compatriot of Patrick — David, patron 
saint of the land that we call Cymru; Wales being the enemy 
Saxons’ name for gwlad y gan, the land of song. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closing of Regina Weather Office 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my statement today 
concerns the weather. In today's paper, I find out that the 
Regina weather office will be closing in a few years. This I find 
out on one of the coldest days of our winter; so if there are any 
weather warnings, blizzard warnings, and so on, we'll have to 
rely on Saskatoon to inform us. 
 
We all know there are highs and lows on the weather map when 
we watch the weather forecasters on TV, but today there aren't 
any highs, just two lows. Combine the wind with the low and 
you have a low blow. 
 
The first low blow is the announcement that the weather office 
will be closed. The second low blow was when I heard that our 
senators in Ottawa will be getting another pay raise. I am 
speaking about the parliamentary ones, Mr. Speaker, not the 
hockey ones — not that it makes much difference, neither group 
has distinguished itself lately. 
 
Now I understand the staff at the weather office are given the 
option of an early retirement package if they are over 50 years 
of age. Could the same principle apply to the senators? Give 
them an early retirement package for the ones over the age of 
50? 
 
When those newly retired senators decide to come back to 
Saskatchewan and want to find out what the weather will be 
like, they will find out like the rest of us: please don't phone 
Regina, please don't phone Prince Albert, you'll have to phone 
Saskatoon, and if the line is busy, don't worry, there'll be more 
weather tomorrow — if you can get through. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crow Benefit Compensation 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, I've 
just spent the last few days in rural Saskatchewan, and people 
are not happy. They're not happy with the Liberals for taking 
away the Crow benefit, but they're not happy with your 
government either. Because once again, Mr. Premier, you're 
only telling half the story. 
 



March 1, 1995 

 
543 

It was you, Mr. Premier, who conspired with the Wheat Pool 
and your buddy, Garf Stevenson, to ensure the $7 billion 
offered by the PC (Progressive Conservative) government in 
Ottawa was not paid to producers. You and Garf Stevenson, 
Mr. Premier, left $7 billion on the table, and now it's gone. 
 
Mr. Premier, why don't you tell farmers the entire story? Why 
don't you tell them it was your political agenda that blocked $7 
billion of Crow benefit to be paid to Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had the 
Liberal leader taking a run at the president of the Wheat Pool; 
today we have the Tory leader doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member opposite to table this said 
offer that was supposedly on the table. Certainly I never saw it. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you go back to the '60s when I first 
remember talking about the Crow benefit, we had the federal 
Liberals who were talking about changing the Crow benefit. 
When they changed, what they did was they reduced it. We 
went from the Crow rate to the Crow benefit. We took a major 
hit in western Canada on that benefit. We had the federal Tories 
talking about changing the Crow benefit. And they didn't give 
us $7 billion. What they did do was cut 10 per cent and then cut 
another 10 per cent. 
 
We now have a federal Liberal government who has been 
talking about changing the Crow benefit, come and talk about 
changing the Crow benefit. And what did they do? They 
eliminated it — completely eliminated it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, whether it's a federal Liberal government or 
a federal Tory government, that has been the game and the goal 
of the last 20 years, is to get rid of this benefit. And it's finally 
gone and now the members opposite are saying: oh, well, we're 
onside; we're sorry we lost it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you know 
very well you opposed pay-the-producer since day one. There 
was $7.2 billion on the table a number of years ago. Former 
Agriculture minister Charlie Mayer confirmed that, and it was 
also confirmed by the United Grain Growers and the Western 
Canadian Wheat Growers. They also confirmed it today, Mr. 
Minister, and you know that. 
 
You blocked the offer. Your government is responsible for this, 
along with your buddy, Garf Stevenson, the same guy that you 
gave $500 a day last year for that phoney commission that went 
around the province to study health care in this province. It's 
your government that we can lay the blame squarely at the feet 
of, as well as the Wheat Pools across western Canada. It is you 
people who are responsible for it, and farmers across this 
province know that. 
 
How can you pretend to stand up for farm families in this  

province when first of all you strip them of their GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) premiums and then strip them of 
their GRIP program, as well as now strip them of the Crow 
benefit, Mr. Minister. You take responsibility for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member must ask a 
question some time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There 
may not have been a question there. I think that's not surprising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's strange that the members opposite defend a 
defeated Tory cabinet minister. If they have those documents, I 
would like to see them tabled here. I never saw any offer of 
$7.2 billion. I think the people of western Canada quite clearly 
passed judgement on Charlie Mayer's Crow policy in the last 
federal election, Mr. Speaker. I think they told your party 
exactly what they thought of your policies on the Crow rate in 
the last federal election. And if you have documents to prove 
your statements, I would like to see them tabled here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There isn't a farm group 
in Saskatchewan that will not confirm that. The Western 
Canadian Wheat Growers have confirmed it; United Grain 
Growers and Ted Allen have confirmed it. 
 
Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that Ted Allen of the United 
Grain Growers is misleading the people of this province — 
misleading farmers across this province? Because I think it is 
you that is misleading the farmers of this province. They know, 
Mr. Minister, that it is you and your government, along with the 
Wheat Pools across this western Canada, that conspired against 
farmers with regard to the Crow benefit. 
 
Who's agenda are you on, Mr. Minister? Is it the farm agenda 
for the people of this province or is it the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) agenda of ruining rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we are on the agenda 
of the Saskatchewan farmers. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
farmers very clearly said — not only to farm groups but in 
public hearings — they very clearly said to Charlie Mayer, we 
want to keep the Crow payment and we want to keep it being 
paid to the railways. That was a clear message that was sent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Charlie Mayer made an offer to the Western 
Canadian Wheat Growers, he may well have done. Leroy 
Larsen says that there was no offer; I saw no offer. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, if there was an offer, let the member opposite table it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you're not 
only dishonest; you're a coward. 
 



March 1, 1995 

 
544 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I ask the Leader of 
the Opposition to categorically withdraw that statement. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I withdraw that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are not being straight with the farmers of this 
province and you know it. There was an offer on the table and 
everyone, every farm group across this province, knows that, 
Mr. Minister. It was well-known by farm groups across this 
province. 
 
And farmers are seeing right through your phoney little act, Mr. 
Minister. They know what you've done to them, and they know 
that it's too late to start acting like you're on their side now, Mr. 
Minister, because they know you've never been on their side. 
 
You took away millions of dollars of provincial GRIP 
premiums. You left federal dollars on the table in terms of 
GRIP all along, Mr. Minister. You stripped their GRIP contract 
from them and now you've stripped their Crow benefit as well 
from them. All because your political agenda was more 
important than farm families across this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to own up to your own 
actions in regard to this and be responsible for the people in this 
province, the farm families across this province, and speak up 
and be in favour of a payment of $7.2 billion that was on the 
table? And you know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, again we have rather 
strange occurrences happening in the House in the past two 
days. Mr. Speaker, those two parties opposite supported 
destroying the Crow benefit for the last 20 years. The Liberal 
leader supported it right up until Monday night when the people 
of the province . . . when Leroy Larsen and Sinc Harrison and 
Murray Westby and the Premier and everybody else in this 
province was saying we are being treated unfairly; now they're 
saying, well we're onside, it's your fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is ludicrous. Both these parties have 
supported Charlie Mayer and his cuts to the Crow, they 
supported Ralph Goodale and his cuts to the Crow, and now 
they're saying, well it's your fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly welcome them being on our side and 
hope they will . . . having changed their view and hope will now 
fight with us to get some more money. But I think you're a little 
late. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Before I take the next question, I think 
we just have to tone it down a bit. I've got a tough time hearing 
the questions and I certainly couldn't hear the answers because 
there's just too much help given by members. So please just 
tone it down a bit, allow the member to ask his question, and 
allow the minister to answer it. 

Welfare Fraud 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a couple of 
questions to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, we 
have been contacted by many people around the province with 
concerns over rampant welfare fraud. Recently we received 
correspondence from an individual on the James Smith 
Reserve, who alleges that members from the band are abusing 
the welfare system by placing SaskPower bills in the name of a 
child or an individual within the household that is receiving 
social assistance. And so by doing, Mr. Minister, the members 
with jobs and income are able to have their SaskPower bills 
paid by the welfare system. 
 
Now I realize that the welfare on Indian reserves is a federal 
responsibility, Mr. Minister, but this does involve SaskPower, 
and in the end, Mr. Minister, tax dollars come from the same 
source. Would you endeavour to investigate this unacceptable 
situation, Mr. Minister, or are you still maintaining that all is 
well within the welfare system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly if the 
member would be kind enough to send the information, we will 
do what we can. As he acknowledged, certainly the fact that this 
is on the reserve is a federal responsibility. And to the extent 
that we can cooperate  in fact we're doing that already  
we'd be happy to do that. 
 
I'm sorry that he felt the need to take a shot though generally, 
because I think that we have demonstrated continued 
improvement in the accountability measures on a social 
assistance program to the point where the Provincial Auditor is 
satisfied with the accounting. And we've made many major 
improvements since then. 
 
So I think it's important that your leader and you quit promoting 
the image out there that people on welfare, who are unfortunate 
enough to be unemployed, and young people  you're 
promoting the image that they're all not trustworthy, except the 
ones that you happen to refer to me where you want more 
money for them. You can't have it both ways. 
 
Now that, as a critic, you've got a responsibility to promote the 
fact, to promote positive images towards people who are 
unemployed, and to be part of the solution. So get us the 
information and I'll be very happy to see what we can do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
what I have been saying to you is if you clean up the 
mismanagement part you could have the extra money we're 
asking for for those people who need it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the individual who contacted us is one of 
many concerned citizens who feel the system is not working, 
not just one. He sent 27 pages of information, including copies 
of SaskPower bills, biographies of 22 households on the reserve 
that are abusing the system, averaging $4,000 a month. Now  



March 1, 1995 

 
545 

that's a considerable amount of money. And on-reserve social 
assistance recipients need only to make one phone call 
informing SaskPower of the name of the individual that will be 
responsible for the bill — no checks, no balances, nothing else, 
just a phone call. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it not time for you to act, not just in this case, 
but on the welfare abuse and fraud so that those who really and 
truly need it will get the assistance? That's all we're asking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean this member 
has not called me about any of this. Is he really interested in 
sorting this out or is he interested in grandstanding? I released 
today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . if I can answer the 
question. 
 
I released today two pages of verification accountability 
measures to BBS (Baton Broadcasting Services) so that once 
and for all we can put to rest this bashing of low income, 
unemployed people. That's very irresponsible of you. Those 
accountability measures are better and more effective than any 
province in Canada. Now those are public; I released them 
publicly today. I'll release them to the member, which I actually 
did last year except for the two or three new ones. 
 
But we're accountable because we're trying to preserve precious 
tax dollars. We're not trying to bring these measures in place, 
Mr. Speaker, to be punitive, which is exactly what Ralph Klein 
and their people are doing. They were so decimated in the last 
election, Mr. Speaker, they're looking around for models. They 
got Klein as a model and the scapegoat are unemployed youth 
and poor people and you should be ashamed of yourself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crow Benefit Elimination 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday we heard the Minister of Agriculture tell us that his 
Finance minister had met with Paul Martin, that the Premier had 
met with the Prime Minister, and that he personally has met 
several times with Mr. Goodale, but none of them has told us 
what proposals they went with. We have no evidence that they 
made any kind of credible case for farmers at all, Mr. Speaker, 
because we've never seen any evidence of what proposals were 
made to the federal government by the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Agriculture. From your 
comments, Mr. Minister, we assume the Saskatchewan 
government made a formal presentation to Ottawa for a $7 
billion pay-out of the Crow. Will you table today the actual 
proposal so that farm families can see what the terms were, 
including which farm groups endorsed your proposal and the 
date that it was formally presented. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, at meetings and more  

importantly public, our government has taken the position that 
we were in favour of the status quo, leaving the Crow benefit in 
place. And that is well documented both publicly and in 
meetings. So that was our position that we took to the meetings. 
 
What is more interesting here, Mr. Speaker, is what position 
that member took when she met with Ralph Goodale before the 
budget. Because when the budget was read she said that the 
budget was regionally fair; which leads us to believe and the 
farmers to believe that her proposal was the payment that came 
out in the budget. And then realizing that it wasn't working, she 
flip-flopped and now says it isn't enough. 
 
But the more important issue is, what is your position that 
you're taking to Mr. Goodale this weekend. We know what it 
was before the budget; you agreed with him. But now that 
you've flip-flopped, what is your position going into the 
meeting that you've promised to go to this weekend? What are 
you asking for when you meet with the Minister of Agriculture 
from Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP were the first to cut agriculture spending in their budget, 
and this came on the heels of an exodus of 18,300 jobs from 
rural Saskatchewan. Breaking the GRIP contract was a betrayal 
of farm families and yesterday the Minister of Agriculture told 
us that he met personally several times with Mr. Goodale to 
discuss the status of the WGT (Western Grain Transportation) 
subsidy. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Agriculture, who seems to 
require either the Finance minister or the Economic 
Development minister to respond: were you or your colleagues 
ever told to expect a $7 billion pay-out by Mr. Goodale? 
 
And, sir, will you table today exactly the proposal that you went 
with so that people in this province can see the terms, including 
the date that you formally presented that proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite again, that her position is clear. That when it 
comes to dealing with her counterparts in Ottawa before the 
federal budget came down, she was in favour of the cuts. 
Absolutely in favour; it's absolutely clear. In fact on budget 
night, budget day, she said that farmers who expected $7 billion 
were dreaming in technicolor — that's what she said, that they 
were dreaming in technicolor. No support for farmers, but just 
telling them that she would not support them, until the point 
came when there was pressure from farm groups. 
 
She then did two things. One, she flip-flopped, but more 
importantly and I think something that speaks to the individual 
who said it, is quoted outside of the Assembly yesterday, and I 
want to quote. She said about the farm groups and 
organizations that met to take on the federal government: what 
we don't like is the way in which they, the government, are 
using groups who are needing legislation right at this time to  



March 1, 1995 

 
546 

make themselves in position of having to support the 
government's view and so forth. We think that in essence there's 
a lot of people across the province who won't buy into that kind 
of thing. 
 
Worse than your flip-flop is the accusation that SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and the 
Wheat Pool are playing to some political agenda and not out to 
fight for farmers. I ask you, Madam Member, when are you 
going to stand up for the farmers? And we hope this weekend 
you take a position to Mr. Goodale that's different than the one 
that you took before the federal budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
minister who has been in government ad nauseam — decades, 
in fact — isn't naïve enough to think that I would know what is 
going to be in the federal budget any more than he would know 
what is in the federal budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, times do change and the world trading order is 
changing, as will the face of agriculture in this province. 
 
This NDP government, and especially the Premier, opposed 
changing the method of payment and they said so today. The 
GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiations 
caused the end to the payment, and we all knew this was going 
to happen. Even the Premier is cited in June of 1994, stating it 
was going to happen. 
 
Instead of fighting for the farmers of this province, this 
government admits to fighting for the status quo. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP has always wanted the money to remain in the hands 
of the railways. GATT deemed this a direct export subsidy and 
stated it had to be changed. 
 
My question once again to the Minister of Agriculture: why, sir, 
were you spinning your wheels, trying to maintain the status 
quo, when you knew that you should be fighting to ensure that 
Saskatchewan farm families would receive the best that they 
possibly could, given the inevitable changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 
if she understood history, would know that the Crow benefit is 
a historic right of farmers of Saskatchewan. Just as the Indian 
people of the province have rights, the people of Quebec have 
rights, I say the farmers of Saskatchewan, in the huge give-
aways that were given to the railway companies, were given the 
Crow benefit. 
 
And I say to you, Madam Member, that if you had any 
understanding, you would be on your feet defending the Crow 
benefit in total to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what is incredible  

here is the flip-flop of the member opposite. In today's Leader-
Post, I quote: 
 
 Liberal leader Lynda Haverstock said $1.6 billion is not 

enough compensation and voted in favor of the motion, 
despite having told reporters moments earlier the budget 
is "regionally fair." 

 
Now where are you coming from? What I say to that member 
opposite, she is no different than Otto Lang, Jean-Luc Pepin, 
Trudeau. And the Mr. Goodale who worked for those people 
back in the '60s and '70s when that change was being made by 
the Liberals is now implementing that Liberal plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welfare 1-800 Line 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
couple of supplementary questions for the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government's record on welfare is abysmal, 
both in terms of the growing number of people needing 
assistance and a growing number of people abusing the system. 
We have brought forward several initiatives designed to 
mitigate these growing numbers, but it appears that your 
government would rather keep its head in the sand on this issue. 
 
My colleague from Wilkie has brought forward another 
example of how average citizens are fed up and willing to 
assist, willing to assist in the fight against welfare abuse. The 
government needs to encourage their willingness to help. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you implement a 1-800 tip line which will 
allow Saskatchewan people to fight against individuals who are 
taking taxpayers' money  and abusing it  from the welfare 
system, taking it from the people who truly need it in that 
welfare system. Will you act, Mr. Minister, instead of just 
talking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all there's a bit 
of hypocrisy here. He has voted against, as has the Liberal 
leader, every initiative of the last three years that were designed 
to help low income people — every single one of them. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I suggest the member do his research. Have you 
contacted Manitoba to find out how their dial-a-cheat number 
has worked? Have you done that? Have you done that? 
 
The result is that it cost them $650,000 to put dial-a-cheat signs 
up all over Manitoba. They've recovered $230,000. That is true. 
That is true. Quebec's experience is the very same. Well it's fine 
to start bashing people and categorizing people on assistance as 
cheats, but the reality is that your information is incorrect. It's 
not based on fact. Quebec abandoned that approach. 
 
Your process . . . the processes you had in place in 1989, you  



March 1, 1995 

 
547 

didn’t pick this up. There was a person receiving assistance in 
Swift Current, Medicine Hat. You didn't pick that up for two 
years. We picked that up, that duplicate assistance, because 
your systems didn't work. The member to your right spent 
$650,000 on the fraud squad; they recovered $250,000. Put that 
money to day care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, let's talk 
about the situation in Manitoba. Manitoba implemented the 1-
800 tip line in Winnipeg and the results . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I didn't want to call individual 
members but the member from Rosetown-Elrose has been 
going on throughout this whole question period interrupting. 
And he simply will not stop until I point him out singularly. 
And that's what I'm doing right now. I'm asking him to please, 
please quit interrupting. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. The results are in from Manitoba, 
Mr. Minister. In less than eight months of operation the 
Winnipeg line has received 2,600 calls, resulting in corrective 
action on 263 welfare cases. 
 
The line has resulted in an annual savings of $1.3 million; 1.3 
million, Mr. Minister. Manitoba has now announced that they're 
expanding the program to include the entire province of 
Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you consider that? Will you implement the 
proposal immediately and recognize the savings potential? 
Perhaps you could explain to the Assembly why it is so unfair 
to ensure that welfare abuse is curbed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I'll let the public of Saskatchewan 
decide. Where the Provincial Auditor says he's satisfied with 
our control measures, I'll let the public of Saskatchewan decide 
who he believes, you or me, who they believe. 
 
The reality is the information I have from the University of 
Manitoba — I'll give you the source — the research they've 
done is they have not recovered half of the cost of those cheat 
lines. What do you think they're going to tell you? That was an 
independent research I'm drawing on. 
 
If you had used the same scrutiny in your government before, 
for 10 years, used the same scrutiny for all those people who 
were lining up for those megaproject dollars, we wouldn't have 
a $15 billion debt. 
 
If you've got names of people who you think are cheating on 
welfare, give them to me. We'll look into it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Farm Financial 
Stability Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 
of a Bill to amend The Farm Financial Stability Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
questions 44 to 47, I move they be converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — 44, 45, 46, and 47, motions for return 
(debate). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to establish The Agri-Food Innovation 
Fund 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will move second reading 
of The Agri-Food Innovation Act, 1995. Mr. Speaker, the future 
of Saskatchewan's agriculture and food sector lies in the new, 
emerging agricultural sectors and further processing of our 
primary products. This government has laid out this vision in 
the Agriculture 2000 strategy. 
 
Currently the province's agriculture and food sector has 
achieved remarkable strides in diversification. Despite some 
very difficult times in the agricultural sector during the last few 
years, the agri-food industry has demonstrated that it is looking 
forward towards the future, and will be very much a part of the 
growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, diversification has taken place throughout the 
agri-food industry, in crops, livestock production, and in food 
processing. In recent years, Saskatchewan producers have 
intensified their efforts in crop and livestock diversification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in Saskatchewan's history, 
Saskatchewan farmers planted almost as many acres to 
diversified crops as they did to wheat. Mr. Speaker, with the 
remarkable record of 1994's crop production, Saskatchewan 
farmers have proved they are diversifying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel we can say that Saskatchewan is no longer a 
one-crop economy. Producers are planting diversified crops 
such as peas, lentils, beans, mustard, herbs, and spices — to 
name just a few — which give them a larger financial return 
than wheat. The effect on farm income is remarkable. 
Saskatchewan farmers have proved they intend to change  



March 1, 1995 

 
548 

Saskatchewan's agricultural economy so that it can be 
successful when the price of wheat declines so that they and 
their families are not dependent on the price of wheat or 
government support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government admires the initiative of 
Saskatchewan farmers and wishes to support that initiative. Mr. 
Speaker, at the same time the livestock sector of the agricultural 
economy continues to diversify. We have seen an increase in 
specialized livestock and exotic livestock. As well production 
of cattle, hogs, and sheep also show steady growth. 
 
The number of beef cows and replacement heifers is up 6 per 
cent from a year ago, at 1.275 million, the largest inventory 
since l977. The number of hogs is up 2 per cent from a year ago 
to 906,000 head, the largest inventory since l973. Mr. Speaker, 
the increase in these numbers is due again to the initiative of 
Saskatchewan producers who wish to diversify the agricultural 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government admires and supports the efforts 
of Saskatchewan farmers to diversify the sources of their 
income. Two roadblocks have prevented this province from 
capturing the full potential of agriculture diversification 
opportunities. These include traditionally based commodity 
support programs and the lack of research and development 
funding. 
 
This government has replaced the old GRIP and tripartite 
programs which favoured traditional commodities with a new, 
whole-farm income support. This new program encourages 
farmers to make production decisions based on the market and 
not on government programs. The benefit of this was clearly 
demonstrated in the previous crop year. 
 
The second roadblock has been a lack of research and 
development funding for the emerging agriculture and value 
added sectors. The success of Saskatchewan agriculture, and 
wheat in particular, has been the support governments and 
producers’ check-offs have provided to the various research 
institutions and infrastructure facilities. These emerging sectors 
however, do not have research programs, development 
facilities, or check-off funding in place to provide the support 
which is critical during the formative stages. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan wants to support these types 
of initiatives through the agri-food innovation fund. Mr. 
Speaker, we often forget about the opportunities that exist 
within our primary production. The areas of agricultural 
biotechnology, crop processing, food and non-food processing, 
play an important role in the health of our agriculture sector and 
the province's overall economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak briefly about two of these 
sectors: agricultural biotechnology and food processing. Mr. 
Speaker, this province's agricultural biotechnology centre in 
Saskatoon is recognized as being a leader in North America. 
Starting with one firm in 1982, there are now over 20 
companies involved in this field. These firms work  

cooperatively with research institutions such as the University 
of Saskatchewan, the POS (protein/oil/starch) pilot plant, the 
plant biotechnology institute, the crop development centre, and 
VIDO (Veterinary Infectious Disease Organization) just to 
name a few. 
 
The benefit to our farmers can be seen through new oil-seed 
varieties, vaccines, new crops, and other input products. For 
example there has been a tremendous growth in the food 
processing sector of the agri-food industry. Saskatchewan's 
food processing industry has enjoyed many successes in the last 
few years. There are more Saskatchewan-produced foods on 
grocery store shelves across Canada than at any time before in 
the history of food production in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a larger variety of Saskatchewan-
processed food products being exported beyond Canada's 
border than ever before. I'm happy to report that there are 270 
food processors in Saskatchewan, and of these, 234 are small 
businesses with fewer than 20 employees. The majority of these 
companies, Mr. Speaker, are located in rural Saskatchewan. The 
food processing companies create jobs for about 6,300 
Saskatchewan residents. Projections estimate that the payroll is 
about $189 million. 
 
(1415) 
 
Of the 270 food processing companies in Saskatchewan, 50 
export their food products outside of Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
what is particularly encouraging about these statistics is that it's 
mostly the smaller companies, the companies which have fewer 
than 20 employees, that are exporting outside of Canada. 
 
And even more encouraging is the fact that of the 50 companies 
which export to foreign companies, 32 are food processors 
located in rural Saskatchewan. We have learned that by adding 
value to our primary products we can create more wealth. 
 
This is positive news. The food processing industry has shown 
us that it can create and maintain food processing businesses in 
rural Saskatchewan, can create jobs, and can create wealth in 
rural Saskatchewan. These value added sectors, much like the 
agricultural commodity sectors, require research and 
development assistance to overcome technological, regulatory, 
and other development hurdles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agri-food innovation fund will, among other 
things, provide support for the continued growth and 
development of biotechnology, crop processing, food 
processing, and processing of agriculture products for other 
commercial uses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has worked in 
cooperation with the Saskatchewan agriculture and food 
industry to focus on diversification. Together, industry and 
government have developed a strategic direction for the future. 
Important components of this strategic direction are 
diversification, research and development, and the cooperation 
of all agricultural organizations in working together for  



March 1, 1995 

 
549 

development in economic expansion. 
 
Towards these objectives, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has provided from its GRIP surplus a total of $18 
million to establish the agri-food innovation fund. An 
additional 9 million has been provided in the '95-96 budget 
recently presented in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The agri-food innovation fund provides for federal government 
participation through a federal-provincial agreement and is part 
of a strategy developed with industry consultation. The agri-
food innovation fund will be used to enhance diversification of 
the agri-food industry through support to research and 
development initiatives for these new and emerging value 
added sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agri-food innovation fund will support 
endeavours such as biotechnology infrastructure in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We will support activities such as the commercial development 
of technologies for the processing of agricultural products for 
food and non-food uses. It will promote sustainable agricultural 
development. 
 
The new fund will support new primary production alternatives 
and skills within the agricultural community. The agri-food 
innovation fund will also support the development of skills that 
will assist agricultural producers in adapting to changing agri-
food industry. The fund will expand employment opportunities 
and economic activity in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agri-food innovation fund will be established 
through the proposed Agri-Food Innovation Act. The Act 
outlines the method whereby the fund will be operated. There 
are provisions for a board of directors and committees drawn 
from industry and government to manage the fund and set 
priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the agri-food innovation fund will 
greatly assist the growth and diversification of the agri-food 
industry in Saskatchewan. I believe the agri-food innovation 
fund will help to achieve the goals that Saskatchewan agri-food 
industry has set for itself as the 21st century approaches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative Assembly, I 
encourage you to adopt The Agri-Food Innovation Act. 
Therefore I move that The Agri-Food Innovation Act be read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
make a few comments before I move to adjourn the debate at 
this time on the Act to establish the agri-food innovation fund. 
 
There's no question, Mr. Speaker, that over the past number of 
years and certainly through the 1980s there was a real move to 
try and diversify the agricultural economy in this province. The  

farmers themselves began to see and even governments began 
to recognize that wheat was not the only alternative or should 
not be maintained as the only alternative to crop production in 
the province of Saskatchewan, that we shouldn't hang our hats 
on wheat, but we should look at other avenues available to 
producers. 
 
And the recent announcement in the federal budget about the 
dismantling of the Crow benefit brings it out even more clearly 
every day, the importance for this province to look at 
alternatives and the way of marketing its product, not only in 
the raw form, which we've traditionally been able to do or we've 
continued to do, but also looking at processed forms and 
putting our product to market by creating the jobs here, 
manufacturing and processing the crops that are so widely 
grown now across the province in such a diversified avenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've been at a number of meetings and heard 
people talk on the pork industry, and the suggestion is there that 
in Saskatchewan we could actually produce and we should be 
able to produce and market 3 million hogs out of the province 
of Saskatchewan. Right now we're marketing about 1 million 
hogs. Now for the hog producer who is out there who's facing 
some prices that don't seem to be very competitive, you might 
argue well, we really don't want to expand the business. 
 
But the industry that is talking about expanding the hog 
business and expanding hog production is talking about the fact 
that they don't want to ship hogs live to the market-place. They 
want to ship hogs in a processed form. 
 
And we certainly see in the Far East, in Japan and in China, that 
there are avenues opening. And as we've already seen in 
Mexico and other parts of the world, that there are avenues 
open for us to market the product that we are so able to produce 
at a very competitive rate in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Now the establishment of the agri-food innovation fund, as the 
minister has indicated, I trust will indeed enhance this process 
of . . . the process of processing and manufacturing and 
marketing of the many products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have seen across our province . . . not 
only do we see wheat and durum continue to be grown in the 
province, but the last couple of years it's taken a substantial 
reduction with a significant growth in canola production. And 
now we have sunola on the market, we have flax, and beyond 
that, we have peas and beans that have become a major avenue 
of income to farmers in this province as they have expanded 
from the oil-seeds . . . from the wheats, first of all, the bread 
wheats to the oil-seeds and now into the lentil and the peas and 
bean market. 
 
And even in our area, they're even expanding beyond that into 
other forms of oils such as coriander and caraway, and the 
possibility of an oil crushing plant being set up in Kipling is 
very real. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's very obvious that we need to look at ways 
in which we can innovatively come up with new technology,  



March 1, 1995 

 
550 

new marketing avenues in which to aid the Saskatchewan 
agriculture producer, whether they're in the livestock business 
or whether they're in the grain sector or the oil-seed sector, 
whatever sector they're involved in. 
 
And we trust that at the end of the day, as we get into the meat 
of this Bill, that we will find that the Bill put some real dollars 
and some real emphasis on avenues that are really open, that are 
marketable in the province rather than possibly establishing a 
fund that may not do a lot for producers. And I trust that, as the 
minister had indicated, that this is going to indeed create an 
avenue and a sphere whereby producers can find ways of not 
only processing but marketing their product. 
 
It's unfortunate though, Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. Speaker, that 
the minister has gone to the $8 million GRIP surplus, the funds 
that should have been available to agriculture producers in a 
time of grave difficulty, taken that money and put it into the 
agri-food sector. 
 
Now I guess on the one hand, while the minister's taking it from 
the producers, on the other hand, through the agri-food 
innovation fund, he's looking at a way of maybe putting it back 
into the hands of producers, and in that respect, we can give 
him credit for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that there are many other avenues and 
certainly a fair bit of debate that we will get into further as we 
continue the debate on this Bill and as we get into committee. 
And I look forward to that time. However at this time I would 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: —I would ask the minister to please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased to 
introduce on my right the deputy minister of Environment and 
Resource Management, Michael Shaw; on my left, the associate 
deputy, Bob Blackwell; behind me the associate deputy, Les 
Cooke; Ross MacLennan, assistant deputy minister of 
operations; and Donna Kellsey, director of financial and 
administrative services on my left and behind me; and at the 
back, Don Macaulay, director of parks and facilities and then 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and my room-mate, Mr. Maynard Sonntag. 
 
The Chair: — I don't want to get into that one at all, except to 
say that in referring to members, let's do it by their constituency. 
 
Item 1 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, I 
wouldn't want to make any comments on that particular issue 
either. 
 
I'd like to thank you for coming in today, Mr. Minister, and I'd 
like to welcome your officials here today. I believe that the 
environment is a very important aspect of Saskatchewan's life 
and a continuation of our society as we know it. So I think it's 
very important that things be done right and properly in this 
area. 
 
Before the chairman allowed us to start this questioning, Mr. 
Minister, you were commenting on the Crow. Now for those 
people who don't know in Saskatchewan, and I doubt that there 
are any, but that's talking about the Crow rate adjustment, the 
historical Crow rate for hauling grain. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It has nothing to do with hunting. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — And that's right. As my colleague says, it 
has nothing to do with hunting; it's not shooting those black 
guys that fly through the sky. In my country here last fall, Mr. 
Minister, we had over five miles of crows, sitting on every 
fence post for over five miles. It was quite the sight. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They must have known it was going. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — They were heading south; they knew 
what was coming in the budgets. 
 
Mr. Minister, but what happens now that the federal 
government has eliminated the Crow rate benefit? There are 
going to be massive changes in agriculture in Saskatchewan, 
and nobody is sure exactly what direction that's going to go; 
whether it's going to mean more extensive livestock operations; 
whether it's going to mean a shift from our cereal grain base to 
some of the pulse crops, to the oil-seeds, the more exotic crops; 
whether it means that farmers are going to try to get more 
production out of the land that they are currently farming in the 
crops that they're currently using, out of the cereal grains in 
particular. 
 
Are farmers going to get into the situation where they're mining 
the land with their crops? Are they going to get into a situation 
where they're breaking up more marginal lands to try and get 
more dollars out of those lands? Or are they going to turn 
around and seed those lands back to grasses, to develop a more 
intensive livestock operation? Nobody knows what's going to 
happen in this area yet, Mr. Minister. 
 
But if we go to a more intensive farm operation, if we start 
breaking up more of our marginal lands, we're going to get into 
a serious problem of soil erosion. And I believe, Mr. Minister, 
that is an area in which the Environment department must be a 
participant, in controlling soil erosion. 
 
We have the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association in  



March 1, 1995 

 
551 

Saskatchewan, which tries to deal with farmers and educate 
farmers and teach them the new techniques that are available to 
protect their land — to stop wind erosion, to stop water erosion. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, that's a very important organization because 
they try out the new techniques and then they disseminate that 
information throughout their membership, which in a lot of 
cases, Mr. Minister, are the more progressive farmers in every 
community. Not always, but in a lot of cases they are. 
 
When their neighbours see the actions that those farmers are 
taking towards soil conservation, they judge the results: whether 
they're working or not working, how intensive do you have to 
operate, how little do you have to operate — how many times 
do you have to go over your land or how few times do you have 
to go over your land. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think it's very important that the 
Environment department participate with the Saskatchewan Soil 
Conservation Association. What works do you do with them 
currently and how intensively are you involved within the 
Saskatchewan soil conservation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased that the 
member opposite has raised the issue of the Crow, because 
endangered species are a matter for consideration by our 
branch. And I'm mortified and devastated by the fact that just a 
couple of days ago the federal government has made this Crow 
extinct. 
 
It's a shame that this basis for Saskatchewan's economic 
structure, which began heavily in agriculture and has been 
diversified more more recently, with farmers diversifying and 
the economy generally taking hold in response to good 
management strategies by government, that the federal 
government would be so insensitive as to undermine such an 
important piece of Canada's infrastructure with no plan for the 
future, with no respect to the history on which it's based, with 
no provision for a strategy for transportation for holding 
Canada together, even though they with one swipe of the pen 
killed one of the most important bases for the prairie economy 
and the prairie culture. 
 
But to move away from that act of devastation and erosion of 
what is Saskatchewan, the question of what will farmers do in 
response? Well I can say one thing; knowing farmers, is that 
they will act responsibly. They will struggle and they will fight 
and they will look for ways in which they can respond, but I 
know they will not respond irresponsibly. 
 
One of the bases for the operations of our department is to work 
in a consensual fashion with all stakeholders. 
 
And one of our strongest partners in good environmental 
management are farmers. As you indicated, the strong work 
they are doing in the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation 
Association, which is a leading exercise in not only managing 
soil in Saskatchewan but making a major contribution to the 
greenhouse gas issue in Saskatchewan and Canada, is a tribute  

to the work that Saskatchewan farmers do. 
 
While that program is administered under the Department of 
Agriculture and you can discuss it at greater length with my 
colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, when his estimates come 
up, I'm proud to say that it does also make a significant 
contribution to the good environmental stewardship of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is really quite appropriate. We cannot look in 
government any more and as a society at issues in a narrow, 
tunnel vision sort of fashion. We have to each make a 
contribution to the well-being of society. And I just want to talk 
a little bit about the contribution that the soil conservation 
efforts make to the well-being of the Saskatchewan 
environment and the Canadian and the international 
environment. 
 
One of the very largest single contributors to the reduction of 
greenhouse gases is the move by Saskatchewan farmers to 
direct seeding. In the new strategies and the new no-till, 
minimum-till systems that farmers are adopting in 
Saskatchewan — and that, by the way, has led to a world-
leading industry in the manufacture of implements — one of the 
single largest contributors to the reduction of carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere, in actually keeping the carbon in a pool in the 
soil, is the change in seeding practices. 
 
Twenty-three per cent of Saskatchewan farmers in the last 
several years have shifted to direct seeding technologies. And 
as a result, it results in better wildlife management. It results in 
the organic matter staying in the soil and on top of the soil, both 
helping to keep the soil stable and reducing the amount of 
carbon dioxide going into the atmosphere. 
 
So I say that I know farmers will not respond irresponsibly 
because I know that through struggles of the past they have 
taken into consideration the well-being of not only 
Saskatchewan society but the world society. 
 
There are a couple of initiatives that we are doing in 
government. The clean air task force has been at work. It's not 
given me its final report yet, but it has given me an interim 
report. And I know they are commenting on the issue of soil 
erosion relative to the air quality in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are working with stakeholders on developing a wetlands 
policy, very much affected by soil management practices across 
the province. The Conservation Strategy for Sustainable 
Development in Saskatchewan, which was tabled in 1992 and 
from which our department is taking a great deal of leading, has 
a great amount of information and advice on where we should 
proceed with respect to the management of soils in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
All I can say to the member opposite in appreciation for his 
question is that we continue to intend to work with all the 
stakeholders in Saskatchewan, one of the key ones being 
farmers, to ensure a sustainable agriculture for Saskatchewan  



March 1, 1995 

 
552 

that can contribute to the well-being of the world in which we 
live. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You've 
covered a number of areas in your reply. You expanded a lot 
further than I had gone on my questions. 
 
You mentioned direct seeding. I'd just like you to know that in 
my new constituency, one of those new manufacturers for direct 
seeding equipment, Seedhawk, will be located in that area, and 
quite an impressive unit that they have, also. 
 
The book that you just held up, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could mind repeating the name of that for me, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — This is the Conservation Strategy for 
Sustainable Development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That is one of 
a number of various reports and studies that have come down 
since you formed government. Another one of those was the 
report of the Standing Committee on the Environment from this 
very legislature. 
 
I believe that committee forwarded to your department a 
number of very good recommendations. I'm not sure what your 
department thinks about those recommendations, but the 
committee felt that those were good recommendations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, are you including those recommendations as 
part of your considerations when you are bringing forward new 
proposals, new ideas? When you talk about the clean air task 
force, or the wetlands policy, are your including the 
recommendations from the Standing Committee on the 
Environment in your policy discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I would like to say to the member 
opposite that we take all submissions to us seriously and I want 
to thank the member opposite for the good work that he did and 
the members of the opposition benches did with us in the 
review of the standing committee work. 
 
I don't have at the top of my head the direct recommendations 
that the member refers to, but it is my recollection that many of 
them had to do with the public's interest in being more involved 
in the process of deciding where we go with environmental 
management in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can tell the member opposite that I get teased about one 
of my favourite little documents, called Building Consensus for 
a Sustainable Future, affectionately called my colouring book 
from time to time by people to whom I give it, which talks 
about strategies for involving the public in decision making. 
 
I can tell you that the department recently had a workshop in 
Saskatoon with all its senior employees, to look at that very 
question of involving the public fully as a partner in decision 
making. This is part of a new era of government, that the public 
has a right and an expectation to be involved. They know what  

the issues are. We need to find better mechanisms for involving 
them. 
 
And I can tell you that I appreciate the advice that your group 
gave us and that we also independently have headed in the 
direction of involving the public to the maximum degree 
possible in setting the course for a sustainable future. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
recommendations from the standing committee were not only 
. . . dealt just with recommendations for input from the public, 
but covered the whole, broad spectrum of the environment and 
dealing with government, Mr. Minister. 
 
The members of the committee look forward to something more 
substantial coming out of the government, based on that report. 
The original context in which we carried out our committee 
work was dealing with a particular piece of legislation dealing 
with environmental management. That legislation was dropped 
but nothing new came in to take its place. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you looking at any new pieces of legislation 
dealing with the areas that the committee studied which were 
included in that original piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Thank you again for that question. The 
particular piece of legislation that was being reviewed by the 
standing committee had to do with the right of the public to be 
protected and the right of the public to participate and to have a 
voice when they were concerned about any exposure they might 
have to an environmental hazard. 
 
One of the requirements in good environment management is 
the regulatory regime that underpins good environmental 
management. But we have come from an era where that was 
virtually the major involvement, through government legislation 
and regulation on the public's behalf. We have, since the '70s, 
entered an era where the public has a much greater interest in 
full participation in the development of policies and in having a 
voice in the implementation of policies so that by policy, rather 
than by legislation, they are involved and they have a voice and 
they will be responded to when they have a voice. 
 
So it has been again, with the same intent in mind as some of 
the proposals that came from the standing committee, it has 
been the department's direction in the time that I have been their 
minister to set in place processes that maximally give access to 
the public and give voice to the public, whether those be about 
specific concerns on matters of public health or safety, or 
whether they be on matters of writing new forest management 
licence agreements. 
 
From the big picture to the small, whether we're talking about 
setting aside processes for protected areas in the province, 
whether we're talking about questions of wildlife management 
issues, whether we're talking about mining regulations, whether 
we're talking about environmental assessment processes, the 
direction that we've taken is that the public has an interest. 



March 1, 1995 

 
553 

We depend on the public's interest to work with us to do the 
best protection of the environment. One cannot legislate that 
there will be a safe place on this earth for all of us. Until we 
believe and adapt our own behaviour to fit in with our concern 
for the well-being of the environment which nurtures us, there 
is no achieving of a sustainable future for any of us. 
 
Government cannot independently, of its own wisdom, create a 
healthy environment. We can set regulations, but if I as an 
individual continue to act in a way that harms the environment, 
there is not enough money on earth to give government the 
regulatory or the policing capability to adjust all of our personal 
behaviour. 
 
We need to come to understand that; we need to come to 
believe it. The strength of Saskatchewan society, as I said in my 
earlier answer, is that whether we are farmers or whether we are 
working people in another area, or whether we are businesses, 
there is a tremendous understanding and response to the need 
for all of us to do our part to provide a safe future here for our 
children. And the direction we've taken in our department is to 
open up the processes of our environmental management, so 
that the public can help contribute to our policies to achieve 
that goal that we commonly have. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You're 
right indeed when you say that not all of society's ills can be 
cured simply by legislation; it has to come from within 
whatever the people desire. If they want to have a clean land, 
then it's because of their desire, not because of legislation. 
 
This carries over into other areas, Mr. Minister. Perhaps that 
kind of an explanation should be given to Mr. Rock concerning 
his firearms legislation, because again legislation will not solve 
the problem that he's looking at. 
 
Mr. Minister, the report of the Standing Committee on the 
Environment dealt not only with people's access to the 
environment and environmental information and input into 
policy, but it also dealt with the rights of employees and 
employers, the rights of business versus the rights of those who 
have concerns with what's going on in business. 
 
What has your department done to address those concerns and 
the balance that the Standing Committee on the Environment 
recommended in their report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for his comments again. And to say . . . again, to be 
specific about the questions that he's asking with respect to one 
of the contentions in the originally proposed legislation, was 
whistle-blower protection, that somebody who was in a 
workplace who wanted to alert someone to a practice that was 
unsafe or inappropriate would be protected. 
 
The advice that the committee gave me, as I recall, is that those 
sort of legislated provisions should be very much an end point  

in a process, rather than a beginning point. They suggested that 
there really should be processes whereby people who are in 
disagreement about issues like that come to a place where those 
issues can be raised. And if people don't then act in a 
responsible fashion that there would be, at the end of the day, 
some legislative measures that might be taken. 
 
We are, in our department, working on the assumption that the 
attitudes of both employees and employers is very different 
today than it was five or ten years ago. In fact I have not had, in 
my recollection as minister, in two and a half years, one 
concern expressed by an employee that there was a concern in a 
workplace which they were not free to raise with their employer 
to deal with. Now there may be those concerns come to my 
department, or they may not been passed on to me, I'm not 
aware of that. I've not been made aware of any. But I think it 
suggests that those issues are being dealt with at an acceptable 
level within the present attitudes of the business and industry 
and consumers in the province. 
 
If in fact that is not true, then I would like . . . again, we would 
certainly further consider that kind of legislation. But I 
appreciate the work that the committee did in suggesting that 
the very intrusive measures that were suggested originally in the 
Bill were probably not the best starting point. We've been 
working on the assumption that we want to work on the other 
elements of it, and I think we're making good progress. But 
certainly if there are problems with that in our industry and in 
our communities, I would like to know about it so we could 
consider other measures. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — One of the other areas that the 
committee discussed, Mr. Minister, was the idea of legislation 
impacting on existing industries. That the industry is meeting 
the current regulation, but then as legislation changes, all of a 
sudden they are now behind the times and have to take some 
form of corrective measures. 
 
At some point in time, that corrective measure is perhaps too 
onerous on the industry to be maintained, and so the industry 
either goes out of business or moves away to some other 
location. And the committee was concerned that perhaps if the 
government was benefiting in some manner from the existence 
of that industry, that perhaps the government should bear some 
of the cost, or allow a longer time period for the upgrading of 
that establishment. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing along the line of those 
recommendations that were in the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — The general management of 
environmental matters and in the regulatory field is done with 
an eye to partnership, with responsible partners. Clearly, if 
business or industry is blatantly denying their responsibility or 
if they are blatantly ignoring commitments or if they are 
blatantly rejecting change that's occurred, there are measures 
available to our department to ensure that proper steps are taken 
for the protection of the environment and the public. 
 



March 1, 1995 

 
554 

But generally that's not the case. Generally, when business or 
industry finds out that there is a new challenge that they are 
faced with respect to their environmental management, they 
come to our department and look for advice. 
 
And I get phone calls personally from communities where that 
sort of thing is going on. They sometimes worry that they don't 
want to have a hammer brought down on their heads because 
they're identifying something to you, and therefore they come to 
me and say, we want you to know about this but we don't want 
to get hurt. And our response is that it is our objective to work 
with industry to achieve their goals and ours with respect to 
environmental management. 
 
I could list a number of examples where we have worked with 
communities where . . . or with industry, where there's been an 
important environmental challenge and we have asked them to 
set out a plan in order to achieve a new standard or to meet a 
new challenge they're aware of. And I can tell you that it's a 
credit to Saskatchewan industry, it's a credit to the 
Saskatchewan spirit, that I know of no incident that comes to 
the top of my mind right now where they were not fully 
cooperative in setting out with us some firm time lines and 
some firm circumstances under which they would achieve our 
common objectives in order to protect the public interest in the 
environment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It's one of 
the concerns of the members of the Standing Committee on the 
Environment that a number of the recommendations that were 
put forward in our report have seemed to have disappeared and 
nothing seems to be happening with it. 
 
And some of the committee members have asked me to bring 
this forward to you because they're wondering what is 
happening with the recommendations that they had done. How 
thoroughly were they being included in the deliberations of the 
department when new policy was coming forward and when 
various items were being decided by the department? And so 
that was the reason that I have brought these concerns forward. 
 
Mr. Minister, we'd like the assurance from you that the 
recommendations will be given the thorough study and 
consideration that they deserve because the people across this 
province — not the committee members — but the people 
across this province came out to our meetings that we held and 
expressed their opinions and were genuinely concerned from 
forestry to garbage dumps. And they believed that their input 
was going to have an impact on the environment in 
Saskatchewan and they felt that that was a very important issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman. Thank the member 
opposite again. I can tell the member opposite that while I don't 
have the direct recommendations of the committee in front of 
me, as I recall the nature of their input, it has been very strongly 
accepted as advice because there is a common sense nature to 
Saskatchewan people and there was a common sense nature to 
the report that you brought back. 
 

And when you mention from forestry to garbage dumps, it just 
brings up the opportunity to just say how much of an influence 
this in fact had because, since your report, we now have a new, 
integrated forest resource management strategy which will soon 
be tabled in the form of a White Paper in the House, as a new 
Act that reflects those sorts of values, that deals with an 
ecosystem approach to forest management. 
 
I can tell you that with respect to garbage dumps, as you are 
aware, we have established some regional pilot projects for new 
ways of looking at landfilling. I can tell you that we are 
constantly working with business and industry to implement 
ways of reducing waste from the waste stream. 
 
As you know again, we've tabled in this House a Bill that 
effectively facilitates industry setting up a collection system for 
used oil; 37 million litres of used oil will find a system to be 
collected, removing that from the waste stream and into a reuse 
of a resource. All of that means that there is less problems in 
either improper dumping or dumping properly and consuming 
space. 
 
I can tell you that the SARCAN system is looking at expanding 
the products its handling, all of which removes materials from 
the waste stream. I can tell you that in the little town of Outlook 
just on the edge of my constituency  and I'm sure there are a 
number of good examples like this across the province, but I 
know that one well because I participated in the opening of 
their recycling centre  the town established a recycling centre. 
They're one of the few places in Saskatchewan where they're 
collecting household plastics and profitably recycling them and 
a number of other product streams. 
 
Used newsprint has now become a profitable thing that people 
have set up these recycling centres. I can say that the advice that 
you gave us is common sense advice that's being implemented. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister . . . or 
Mr. Chairman. The minister, you outlined some of the aspects 
of the policy that you're going to implement and use in 
recycling old oil. Can you give us kind of an overview of what 
that will be and an overview of, number one, the areas that 
likely will have opportunity for this? 
 
What we also need to know is what kind of permits you're 
allowing to have or using to implement these facilities that 
recycle these used oils and all of the things that are in that used 
oil and how you're going to deal with the leads and mercuries, if 
there are any, in all of these oils. Could you outline some of 
those details for us so that we have an idea of what's going on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member 
for the question. I will respond, and if I get slightly off base I'll 
ask somebody to pull my leg and draw me to order, and then I'll 
give you a correct version of anything I might be incorrect on. 
 
But I want to say that one of the things that is very exciting to 
me is the nature of this process that's being put in place in  



March 1, 1995 

 
555 

Saskatchewan. I think it is probably a leading initiative in 
Canada, although the provinces of Manitoba and Alberta are 
very interested in implementing it on the same time frame as we 
are. I think the initiative which industry has taken in 
Saskatchewan as a result of about a year and a half of meetings 
with industry and government and municipal officials and, at 
the final meeting, the consumers' association and the 
environmental community, that one of the most important 
principles in modern-day environmental management is being 
led by this group, which is the idea that the person or the group 
that sells a product is responsible for its life cycle. 
 
What industry has advised me to do, with the cooperation of 
these other groups I mentioned, including ADD (agriculture 
development and diversification district) boards, what they've 
advised me to do is to alter the legislation so that we can require 
anyone who sells oil in Saskatchewan — that is, at the 
manufacturer's level — to participate in a recycling system. 
 
They've agreed to do this outside of government. They've 
agreed to set up an agency collectively which will then put the 
resources together in order to plan a system and to implement 
the system for used oil, for oil filters, and for oil containers. The 
details of that will be worked out in consultation with the other 
stakeholders who are at the table and advising us and with our 
department, with respect to the location and the nature of the 
centres where these materials will be collected. 
 
(1500) 
 
It is safe to say that the intention of this system is to provide a 
network throughout Saskatchewan. We do probably have about 
one-third of our used oil collected now across the province 
because through . . . where there are larger quantities of it, in 
urban centres. And I had somebody wrote me a letter the other 
day, expressing concern about what happened to the 
environmental fees that are being charged on oil. And I can tell 
you, there are no provincial environment fees being charged on 
oil. I think some service stations are because it costs them to 
have a member of this present ad hoc . . . somebody that's just 
participating in present ad hoc used oil collection system collect 
their oil. They charge an extra few dollars for an oil change, so 
they can provide this system on their own for that. And this sort 
of collection system probably exists in most larger towns and 
cities, but it is not getting to the smaller businesses in the 
province and it's not getting to the farms, where probably 
between one-third and one-half of the oil is located. 
 
And I'm getting increasing numbers of phone calls and letters 
and conversations with farmers who are saying, I've got X 
number of barrels of used oil collected on my farm. I don't want 
to dispose of it improperly, what can I do with it? And they're 
very pleased that the system's going to be set into place. 
 
There will either be a collection centre at a convenient location 
or the one possibility is that there could even be on-farm 
collection depending on how the system works out and what 
farmers prefer as well. Those details are going to be worked out 
between the department and the industries who are setting up  

the task . . . or designing the system and will be paying for the 
system. 
 
But suffice it to say that at locations convenient, intended to be 
accessible by every Saskatchewan resident, there will be places 
and opportunities to collect this oil. 
 
With respect to the contaminants you mentioned that are often a 
concern and what makes used oil a hazardous substance — I 
have farmers also asking me, aren't you going a bit overboard 
defining this as a hazardous substance. And there are 
contaminants, like ethylene glycol and lead and other metals 
that can be dangerous in used oil if they were ingested or 
improperly taken into the body. So there is a hazard to the 
product and that is a known in how that oil is disposed of. 
 
Presently oil is used as a dust control agent or a sealing agent in 
some potash mines, but it is also re-refined in a number of 
situations. Used oil is an excellent resource for re-refining 
because you can make a barrel of new lube oil out of about a 
barrel and a quarter of used oil, where you only get about 3 to 8 
per cent lube oil out of a barrel of crude oil. So it's an excellent 
renewable resource. 
 
And with respect to the disposal of the sludge if oil were re-
refined, that would be part of the existing regulated landfilling 
system where there are special sites created for disposing of 
materials in a safe way so that they don't get back into the 
environment. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Let's go into the area of the upgrading of this 
oil. Are you going to license individual groups or individuals 
who are going to do this in a processing fashion? How are you 
going to do that? Have you had some already apply to the 
Department of Environment for a study or a licence or whatever 
it takes to make this happen? 
 
I know that just north of Gull Lake they have already 
established a facility that upgrades oil that is used in the 
oilfields, to take the contaminants out of that. What are you 
doing in relation to this, so that it can be recycled back into a 
product as usable again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, that's a good question and 
I appreciate the opportunity to answer it. The system will be 
largely a market-driven system as it is presently working within 
appropriate government regulations. 
 
The industry group that will manage this exercise will manage it 
in a manner similar to the present chemical can system where 
the industry contracts to the crushers and collectors certain 
tasks. And so people will be contracted to do it, but contracted 
within appropriate environmental regulations. So if you're 
handling a hazardous substance, to the extent that that can be a 
hazard, then the way in which that activity is done has to be 
within the context of transportation regulations in the province 
or whatever piece of business that would be. 
 
If somebody were setting up a re-refining facility — and I know  



March 1, 1995 

 
556 

of at least one in the province that has already undergone 
environmental impact assessment — then those rules of 
environmental management would apply, where the proponent 
would have to apply for environmental impact assessment. 
They'd have to do environmental impact statement which would 
describe what impacts this business would have on the 
environment, and how those impacts would be mitigated by the 
plans of the proponent who is designing one of those systems. 
 
So the regular environmental assessment procedures would 
apply. Any regulatory measures with respect to air quality or the 
dumping of sludges or the transportation of goods would be 
according to the hazardous goods transportation regulations. So 
wherever an existing regulation in the net of environmental 
regulations applies, they would apply to these sorts of ventures. 
But in a broad way the system would be operating entirely in an 
open market-place. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So if I have an idea here from what you said 
that . . . how the process would begin to work, you would have 
to apply to the department for . . . with an environmental 
assessment based on the technology that you're going to use in 
relation to that upgrade. 
 
Then what happens? Does the department then look at other 
things that need to be done, or what's the dynamic of what we're 
looking at here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, that's a good question. 
After the environmental impact statement is done and the 
environmental approval is given, assuming that the technology 
meets approvals, it may meet it with certain conditions. And if 
there are . . . there might be certain operating conditions set and 
continuing tests that need to be met. 
 
But beyond that condition of operation that's given as a result of 
the environmental approval, the business is free to operate again 
with the understanding that regulatory personnel will come and 
check up on the operating conditions of the plant so that it 
continues to meet the regular testing requirements. So that 
whether it's the air or the soil or the water of the province that 
needs to be protected, those conditions will apply to any 
effluent or dumping provisions that a plant would want. 
 
The basic rule with respect to environmental assessment is that 
the process as described, if it is adequate, will be approved and 
the conditions will then need to be followed and monitored. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There's two aspects to this, Mr. Minister. One 
is the oil and the re-upgrade or whatever you want to call it, re-
establishment of its usefulness. But then you turn around and 
you've got to get rid of some of the impurities that are in there, 
or the things that are not wanted in the oil. 
 
You mentioned earlier as to something about setting up sludge 
areas that would be holding tanks or whatever. In a general 
sense, is this the way to do it, or was I incorrect in assessing 
what you said? How are they going to do that? How are they 
going to control and manage the things that are in the oil that  

shouldn't be there and disposing of them in a way that is good 
waste management? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, the reason this took a little 
time is because my understanding of what we are doing and 
what I'm told we are doing are different. So I will give you the 
officials' version of what's happening with respect to 
landfilling. 
 
It was my view that we have landfill provisions at landfill sites 
for some special hazardous materials that need to be landfilled. 
And I will be very surprised if I can't find a briefing note that 
says that, because I've read it. 
 
But the officials tell me that with respect to used oil, that the 
intent is to re-refine and that the only residual product should be 
a very small quantity and that quantity would then be disposed 
of at a site like Swan Hills, and hopefully there would be no 
residual left at the end of the day. 
 
And when I find out what happens to the lead in the used oil, 
I'll tell you how that gets disposed of out of Swan Hills, but I 
don't know the answer to that question right now. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So what I gather then is it will be disposed of 
to some other agency that will use it in refining some other 
product — for example, lead in batteries. Antifreeze will go 
back to its raw product. All of those things. 
 
Can you give me . . . surely you must know what some of the 
products that are going to be by-products in this used oil 
refinery? Can you give me a list of them? I'd like to know what 
they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Certainly the member is correct, Mr. 
Chairman, in saying that the ideal is to recapture every piece 
and reuse it in the product stream. The major products of used 
oil refining is either diesel or lube oil. 
 
But to the extent that there may be other potential products, I'll 
take notice of the question and have the department get back to 
you on any additional details on what other more minute 
quantities of other things might be recovered from this stream. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Martens: — If you don't mind, I'd like to have that by the 
time we have some estimates on this again. You mentioned 
earlier that sellers are going to be responsible for the whole life 
cycle and oil would be one of those. Is it in your mind the only 
person responsible for this the seller, or is the consumer also a 
part of the process. And should he be, in some way, responsible 
not for necessarily cleaning up the whole bill but his portion of 
value of . . . or the decrease in value of that product is as a 
result of his use of it? 
 
And when he bought the product, did he only pay for the use of 
it or did he pay to buy the product? 
 



March 1, 1995 

 
557 

And lots of people in today's society talk about well, I bought it, 
so therefore the guy that sold it to me is the guy that's the 
culprit. And really, in my opinion, the consumer is the person 
who should be not only buying the product to use it, but also 
giving it back to society in a way that's somewhat reasonable. 
Can you outline your position in those two areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, I want to say first of all that we're all 
responsible. I want to clarify, in case anybody misunderstood 
my original comments, because there is a nuance to the question 
of who the seller is with respect to who we're holding 
responsible and who have asked us to hold them responsible. 
They have been . . . in fact the manufacturers who have said this 
is an appropriate time to do this kind of thing, even though it's 
going to cost us money because they believe that's the 
responsible thing to do. 
 
Our system is based on the manufacturers/wholesalers that sell 
into the province participating in providing a system. Now they 
could do it independently, but they had already by the time they 
made this proposal to me collectively designed a system in their 
own minds of what it would look like. 
 
So they gave me both the request that we provide the legislative 
authority that would require them to do it, and they also 
outlined the system that would be done. That's a very different 
approach than having the retailers do it, because it gets quite 
complex and more difficult for retailers to do it. 
 
So I'm really pleased with the attitude of the manufacturers and 
the wholesalers that they have taken on that responsibility and 
I'm really pleased to say that they had the full support of an 
environmental group representative and the Consumers' 
Association of Canada, Saskatchewan branch, at the meeting 
when the final discussion was held, saying this was the right 
thing to do. 
 
The principle of product stewardship is that the owners do do 
the full life cycle of the product. The consumers are responsible 
because at the end of the day the consumers pay a price for a 
product. 
 
And the example I've used before with respect to this issue is 
that having the full life cycle costs of every product included in 
the product is a great tool for environmental management, 
because when I go to buy a tube of toothpaste, it's awfully hard 
for me to determine what all the pieces of the toothpaste are and 
whether there's an appropriate environmental management in 
each of the pieces and the cap and the tube and the box it's 
contained in. 
 
But if I know that each producer of a part of that stream has had 
to meet their own product stewardship guidelines, I know then 
that whatever product I buy, if it meets my needs as a consumer 
and they're all meeting the same environmental test, that I'm 
making the best decision for the environment and for me when I 
buy the product that has the right price for me. 
 
So the notion between products in the whole business of  

product stewardship is that if somebody is required to handle 
their product in its full life cycle, then the appropriate advice for 
doing that properly would be included in the price, and I as a 
consumer therefore bear that cost when I buy a product. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well let's get into something that is a little 
beyond the toothpaste life cycle and let's talk about oil and 
products like oil because there are a lot of people who 
inadvertently will drain their oil in a drain and it goes into the 
sewage and down the sewage and into somebody's lagoon, and 
usually an urban centre lagoon. And that could be oil. And that 
inadvertently happens because people will wash their driveways 
off and clean it off, and it could have antifreeze on it; could 
have oil on it. And that life cycle then takes on a life cycle of its 
own. 
 
And the consumer needs to be a little bit more aware of his 
responsibility in giving that back to the manufacturer in a way 
that is somewhat . . . or reasonably closely resembles what he 
took out of his vehicle or what he purchased. 
 
And so that's an important part of the whole life cycle and 
whether the manufacturers are responsible for that too. And I'd 
like to have you respond to that. 
 
The other thing that . . . Well you respond and then I'll ask 
another question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the remarks of 
the hon. member, and I agree with the issues the member is 
raising. 
 
As I said earlier in response to one of your colleagues, good 
environmental management needs to come from good 
understanding and a feeling of responsibility. And I think we've 
just made tremendous strides in the last few years with the 
public taking on the protection of the environment as a personal 
objective. 
 
Well in any polling that goes on, environment is never one of 
the top 20 any more, where it was 10 years ago. I don't think 
that indicates any diminishment of public interest in the 
environment; I think it indicates that the public has a personal 
feeling of responsibility to it and they believe that governments 
and industry have taken a great deal of responsibility in that 
regard. 
 
So what we have had is a great change in attitude with respect 
to what our role is, recognizing that an earth on which our 
children cannot live is of no benefit to any of us. Our children 
have often challenged us to change our beliefs and to change 
what we do. And I think while we all have a lot to learn yet, I 
think everybody has come to see the environment as an 
important goal in their personal lives. 
 
And so the questions of the spills and the accidental dumping of 
things into way-streams continues to be an issue of concern and 
we need to continue to work at that. And I can tell you that 
there are a number of groups doing that. There was a group of  



March 1, 1995 

 
558 

young environmentalists in my office this summer who were 
painting yellow fish on the drains on the roads and near the 
sidewalks in the city here and on the legislative grounds to 
indicate . . . to remind people that whatever goes down that 
drain ends up being something that a fish has to swim in and 
that could contaminate living systems. So there are many ways 
in which we need to continue to remind ourselves to be more 
and more careful. 
 
I know I was listening to David Suzuki recently talking about 
their own struggles as a family. I think they had made a 
commitment that they would not have more than one bag of 
garbage a month, or something, going out of their house, and 
that if they were only going for certain distances they would 
either walk or take a bike, and him being personally challenged 
by the inconvenience this caused in his life but recognizing that 
the goal was important in his own life and for the life of his 
children. 
 
So the development of attitudes that cause us each to look more 
stringently at each element of our own behaviour so that the 
environment is protected, is a continuing challenge to us all. 
And I suspect when you and I pass on to another life we will 
still be exercising a few habits that were not as responsible as 
they should be. But it is a challenge that both of us can continue 
to work on. 
 
But what we're trying to do with these sorts of strategies, with 
used oil, is at least to provide an opportunity for people who . . . 
for people to participate and to manage in a way that they feel 
to be sound. And we have a great distance to go. This is a first 
step on one product. 
 
We certainly have had an excellent record of success in 
Saskatchewan with SARCAN. I give credit to your government 
for that initiative in both its providing of employment for 
people with disabilities and for its effectiveness in recycling in 
Saskatchewan. It has grown to be an excellent tool, and we 
need to look at other initiatives. 
 
We need to look at what to do with tires and what to do with 
batteries. And certainly one of the great challenges in 
Saskatchewan and across Canada is packaging for groceries, 
overall, and we're meeting with grocery retailers and 
wholesalers to try to get everybody into that system. 
 
But we have other success stories. We have IPSCO in 
Saskatchewan, which is the greatest recycler, in terms of 
volume, of anybody in Saskatchewan — I think 135,000 tonnes 
of steel they recycle every year. 
 
And they have cooperated with tin recycling. Tin cans happen 
to be one of the little problems we haven't figured out how to 
deal with yet because the tin is a contaminant in steel and so 
just dumping it into a vat with other iron and steel materials is 
possible but only in limited quantities. So IPSCO has been a 
cooperator in trying to help community groups who have 
decided to recycle tin cans. 
 

But we, at the end of the day, need to work on every product we 
use. We need to work to minimize the packaging originally. We 
need to look for ways of reusing materials first of all before we 
recycle. If there's no way of reusing, we need to be able to 
recycle. 
 
And then we need to, at the end of the day, hope we can divert 
everything from the waste stream. At the end of the day, the 
ideal will be if every one of our waste products is a reusable 
product. And that we provide . . . at the end of the day, we need 
to do no landfilling and not use land in that extent. But that's a 
dream that we all aspire to which we need to work towards, but 
we will not achieve immediately. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
One of the things that leads me to ask these questions in this 
vein is that I live along one of those streams that has been used 
to flush out lagoons and different way of managing the effluent 
environment of urban centres. And so it has been drawn to my 
attention rather forcefully all my life. 
 
One of the things that really is of a concern and it concerns — it 
has nothing to do with politics — concerns about how we deal 
with those waste matters that enter into those holding areas that 
urban centres have, and how do we manage them? 
 
We have in Swift Current a two-tier lagoon system. They just 
built another one. And I'm not sure how many feet of sludge 
there is on the bottom containing all of these contaminants that 
we've just talked about that come from oil inadvertently going 
down the sewer, antifreeze going down the sewer, and a whole 
bunch of other detergents going into that holding area that will, 
in the long run, have to be cleaned up at some point in time. 
Like it is slowly building up over the years. 
 
And what has happened in that case is we have finally gotten to 
the place where we have an agreement with the city that will 
control that effluent spill. But we have lots of urban centres in 
this province and in other provinces who have no way of 
controlling that sort of problem. 
 
And I think about Calgary, I think about . . . if I take a look at 
the cities upstream from me along the South Saskatchewan 
River, we've got Calgary, we've got Lethbridge, we've got 
Medicine Hat. And that's only the small tip of the iceberg when 
you talk about all of the volumes of water that go down the 
river system. And in each of those cases the consumer is using a 
very cheap method of disposing or moving his problem to 
become a part of another man's problem. 
 
And when you talked about the fish around that drain in 
Wascana Park, that led me to think about what happened in the 
Swift Current Creek. For example, you have fish in the creek up 
to Swift Current, but you have no fish below the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
My friend, the member from Maple Creek, goes from his farm 
straight south to the Swift Current Creek and can go fishing 
there; while I live beside the creek — and I've lived there for 50  



March 1, 1995 

 
559 

years — and I can't fish. And that's not the problem, but the fish 
have the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's all in the wrist action. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Just for the member from Elphinstone . . . or 
the member from Regina here, Regina Churchill Downs, he 
may know something about computers but he knows nothing 
about fishing. And it's not how you put the bait on, it's how you 
wiggle the bait. 
 
Mr. Minister, those are the problems that we need to address. 
And when the consumer who is inadvertently letting those 
things come into the system, it's not that each one is a large 
amount, it's when you add them all together in one large area 
that it would cause a concern to individuals like myself and the 
rest of society. Because we are asked to carry the load for the 
environment and the misuse of environment by some other 
individual. And that's why I raise the concern from this oil 
perspective as a way of cleaning it up. 
 
You mentioned something about the rural area having 
disposable containers and places to take it. TransCanada 
Pipelines just redid a bunch of pipeline just north of my place 
about five miles. And in order for them to reach an agreement 
with the municipalities — and it was in two municipalities — 
they said that they would put oil on the road that went past farm 
sites. Now we've got oil on roads all over this province. Some 
of it's thicker and some of it's thinner. Some of it is for dust 
control and some of it is for driving on smooth roads. But there 
are limits as to what we can do with this oil. 
 
You mentioned dust control in potash mines. Well now they're 
starting to have dust control on roads and on grid roads. When 
is this going to be considered an environmental hazard if that 
same farmer asks to have it put down on his road. And if he 
went and put his own oil on the road, it would be an 
environmental problem. 
 
And I could give you at least five locations in the roads that I 
drive just getting to my ranch that that is what's happening. If 
the farmer went and did it, it would be considered a hazard to 
the environment. If TransCanada Pipelines comes along and the 
municipality consents to it, it becomes a way of controlling the 
environment. 
 
And so that double standard is what a lot of people are 
concerned about. And you need to be concerned about it as well 
because people will say, that's a licence for me to do anything I 
want with it. And I'm not condoning it; I'm just saying to you 
that that's a problem. And I'd like to have you respond to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to say I 
have an awful time learning how to use that fly rod as well, and 
I've never been able to catch a fish at home either. So even 
though others have gone to this dam that PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) built on my father's property in  

1937, caught provincial record trouts out of there, I just can't 
get one of those suckers out of there. So you and I both need to 
go to fishing school, I think. 
 
I want to say seriously that when there is an impact on water 
quality that would affect anything living in the water, this is a 
serious consideration for our fisheries branch, and they would 
immediately take it up with any polluting agency. 
 
And I know the creek that you speak of has been tested a 
number of times in recent years because of the fact that Swift 
Current had not yet upgraded their lagoon. I'd like to 
congratulate Swift Current and all of you around who've 
worked with them to achieve the upgrading, in upgrading the 
quality of the effluent before it's discharged. 
 
But I can say that during the times when we reluctantly granted 
permits for discharge from the lagoon when it was not as 
adequate as it is now, that testing was regularly done on the 
stream to make sure that there was no risk to the environment 
and to the public. And the reports that came to me suggested 
that the water quality remained good throughout those periods. 
So I think knowing that the lagoon is now being upgraded will 
give everybody a greater sense of comfort in that regard and I 
appreciate the issue being raised. 
 
With respect to . . . you mentioned sludges and things. There 
have been practices carried out over a number of years which 
we are now in the process of cleaning up the . . . To some 
extent, we continue to create collections of waste materials in 
landfills and we do have industrial landfill sites where materials 
are stored. And we will continue to, as a human society, until 
we find ideal solutions, create future challenges. Hopefully, 
having contained them now, we are in a process where we can 
begin to clean up things for the future. 
 
All we can say in that regard is as we . . . And this has been one 
of the areas where industry has been very cooperative. As 
they've revealed to our department their collection of sites that 
are contaminated from previous activity, and some of them run 
into the millions of dollars for clean up, they have worked out 
plans with us to deal with those very issues you raise about 
sludges they've dumped and pools they've created. And they are 
in the process of creating strategies for cleaning those up. And 
it is our intention to continue to work cooperatively with people 
who see their responsibilities in this regard. 
 
Now I forgot to note the last point you raised, so I will sit down 
and let you remind me of it, because I was going to respond but 
I've forgotten the question. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I think you did cover all of them, so maybe 
you forgot to forget the one you should've remembered at the 
beginning and then you would've . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oil on roads. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Oil on roads. You're right. Answer that one, 
and then I'll ask some different questions. 



March 1, 1995 

 
560 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Chairman, my deputy reminded me 
that it was the question of oil on roads. We do not allow 
contaminated motor oil, for example, to be used. There are 
some products that come from other purposes, where there are 
no contaminants, where some dust control is permitted. 
 
I can say that there are no uses for used oil that are available in 
industry that would not be available for the farmer. Farmers are 
not so much prohibited from doing what they wish with 
materials on their own land, except most of us are coming to 
acknowledge that when we go to sell our farms somebody is 
going to be concerned — mostly the bank or mortgage 
institution that's going to be providing a mortgage for the buyer 
— that there is an environmental cost associated with cleaning 
up something we've done in the past. 
 
I think most farmers have accepted the fact that they don't want 
to face a 10 or $20,000 bill for cleaning up a site some day in 
the future. And I think most farmers also have another view of 
the world that says if this is a good resource . . . I know I've 
used lots of used oil on the swather-knife, haying, and I imagine 
you've done it too. But if it is a resource that can be used for 
other things, that we should use it. And so I think farmers are 
motivated both by some sense of future liability, but also from a 
great sense of present responsibility. 
 
And so they are looking for ways of dealing with these 
products, and we are also looking for other creative ways and 
uses for used oil. I know there are furnaces that are licensed for 
the burning of used oil that can be sold in Saskatchewan. I 
know there are. The larger the pool of a reusable material, the 
greater the number of uses that will evolve from that as well. 
 
One of the great challenges and opportunities I see in the future 
is when we get into the used tire recycling. Because it's my 
sense that once you've collected enough tires and have bins full 
of crumbed rubber, then somebody will find a use for crumbed 
rubber. 
 
They already have to some extent. I've seen patio bricks; I've 
seen water trays for under eavestroughs; and curb stops and 
other highway materials built from used rubber, some given 
additional weight by using glass that's been recycled to give 
weight to the product. 
 
So there's sort of an exciting future in new resources which are 
reusable resources. And as we provide collection systems, and 
then these resources actually will take on value, and in a 
number of areas will end up paying for the collection system. 
 
I think one of the good examples I mentioned earlier is used 
paper. For years, people did it as the symbol of the thing to do: 
collect your papers and recycle them. For years they were 
collected, and often then dumped in a landfill sight because 
nobody knew what else to do with them. They couldn't put them 
anywhere. 
 
Well what's happened recently is that the price of pulp has gone 
up, and there is now a profit in recycling paper. And so the  

collection of that product is now something that we could all 
put even more effort into because I know that the paper is still 
an important material that goes into landfills. 
 
And so each of us, now that we know this is a product with 
economic value, can put more energy into taking it to a 
recycling centre where it can be reused at a profit for all of us 
and to create jobs for our economy. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In the oilfields, I have a constituent of mine 
who's in the process of supplying tanks for oilfield service rigs, 
for oilfield exploration. All of these tanks are being used now 
for holding all of the materials that come out of the ground. 
 
What I guess my question is: what are you doing with those that 
are still buried out there? Like I know that there's . . . farmers 
have complained to me, especially in the sand on the west side 
of my constituency, when some of these buried products start 
surfacing because the wind blew the top off the burial ground, 
there are a number of contaminants that kill cattle. And they've 
had some serious problems in that. 
 
And is there, first of all, an inventory of those environmentally 
serious problems? Is there any way of getting them not only 
cleaned up but identified, — I guess is a better way of putting it 
— and making that area of our environment safe as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — May I ask you a question, tell you a short 
story while you're preparing the answer, and then come back 
and answer that question? I wasn't clear whether the question is 
about regular drilling sites or whether it's service company sites 
or what. So if you can just clarify again, if I missed it, what 
particular reference you're making. 
 
The story I forgot to tell you as I was answering the previous 
question, when you talked about downstream impacts on other 
users of water, I had the opportunity to be in London, England 
this fall, speaking to an international conference of uranium 
users and producers, and took the opportunity to take a number 
of environmental side trips and met with Thames Water. 
 
Thames Water is an agency that does what you would expect; it 
manages the Thames River basin. From the source of the 
Thames to its leaving London, the water of the Thames is used 
eight times. I don't know how many miles that would be; it 
might be a hundred miles or maybe a little bit more, but it's plus 
or minus a bit. The city of London uses more than the total flow 
of the Thames itself, so water is used more than once on its way 
through London. 
 
And so you can see the importance of managing the quality of 
the water as it comes through these systems to make sure that 
the concerns that you were raising about human health and 
safety are properly addressed. 
 
We are blessed in Saskatchewan with a couple of significant 
river systems that allow us the freedom to dispose of wastes, 
and we are becoming more and more conscious of the need to 
do it more responsibly, as you describe. Even though  



March 1, 1995 

 
561 

sometimes a very small substance of a toxin is maybe diluted 
out in a great flow of the river, it ought not to be any comfort to 
our management that we haven't managed that product well. 
Because as you say, even small quantities will accumulate 
somewhere in a system downstream and we need to manage as 
well as we can. 
 
So just if you could clarify the source of the pollution you were 
mentioning in the previous question. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Yes, Mr. Minister, they come from disposal 
of toxic materials. And I don't know whether they were buried 
when the well was drilled or when the well was continually 
serviced. And so it becomes a problem in those areas where the 
dirt was cleared away, the toxic material was buried, dirt was 
place over top of it and the problem was supposed to have been 
eliminated. It really was just deferred. 
 
There are many of those kinds of situations in the south-west, as 
it relates more or less, I think, to those areas that are sometimes 
at risk because of blowing sand. And I know that this isn't to 
raise a whole lot of concern about it, but it's there; to begin to 
identify some of those places where this has happened. And 
your department should be able to access that information from 
all of the Energy and Mines information, so that individuals 
will be able to be held accountable for the actions taken at some 
point in time. 
 
And it doesn't matter whether it's from the drilling of the 
original well or servicing during that period of time, there are 
those elements there. And I was wondering whether you had 
had any concerns expressed on that point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Yes, thank you, through the chairman to 
you, for clarifying that question. I want to say first of all, the 
first line of responsibility with respect to the sites you describe 
is with Energy and Mines. And I could tell you that with my 
colleague, the member from The Battlefords who was 
previously the minister and with the member from Prince Albert 
now as the minister in charge, we are working cooperatively to 
try to come up with a common standard for the issues you raise. 
 
I know the surface rights associations who work through the 
Department of Justice have also raised the issue you raise as a 
concern. 
 
I want to spend just a minute talking about the concern because 
there certainly has been past practice for which someone needs 
to provide an answer. And again this is possibly in the context 
of the member who had spoken earlier, of his question about 
what happens when standards change or you become aware of a 
new truth one wasn't aware of before. 
 
The whole issue of contaminated site liability is one of the 
important transitional concerns that we have right now. As we 
have become aware of the damage that past practice has given 
us, we now have to find a way to deal with it. We have as a . . .  

we've prepared a discussion paper on contaminated site liability 
which outlines the procedures by which we would seek to 
provide redress for that. 
 
There are 13 principles in that paper, as I recall. At least the 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment source 
document had 13 principles, the first of which is, polluter pays. 
And we need to find the source of the pollutant even though 
there may be an unfairness in that the people may not have 
known it was damaging at the time. There is no one else to 
charge for that responsibility. 
 
And the last principle of which is joint and several liability, 
which is the one that is most troublesome for most people 
because that says if at none of the other 12 steps you've been 
able to find somebody you could provide the . . . who is 
responsible, then the last resort is that everybody that had 
anything to do with it has some responsibility in cleaning it up. 
 
That paper is out for discussion so that we can find the right 
answer. But contaminated site liability has often been described 
as how to share in the unfairness of dealing with something we 
didn't know was a problem before, and there is no better 
description for it I don't think. 
 
The fact is that the circumstances you describe exist, that one of 
the emerging concerns today is that as larger industrial 
companies have distanced themselves from the drilling 
exercise, there is often less of an ability to track a polluter. 
Because they often will be smaller companies that may have 
disappeared since contamination occurred. So there are 
problems associated with landowners. 
 
I think what this indicates is an important alert — and I think 
people are becoming aware of this — but an important alert for 
all landowners, that in the absence of somebody else taking 
responsibility, the landowner has it. And so I think landowners 
need to become conscious and we need to work with them in 
providing the best regulatory framework that protects them. But 
I think, as in all things, the notion of buyer beware, or in this 
case, the person on whose land oil is being drilled for, need to 
be aware that they need to protect themselves against that future 
liability as well, by ensuring that the work that is done by 
contractors with them is properly done and properly 
decommissioned. 
 
I know that they are getting excellent cooperation from the 
Department of Energy and Mines. I think it is a caution that all 
of us need to be conscious of, and that if there's anything we 
can do in changing the regulatory environment to make sure 
that's better, it's something we are certainly willing to do. 
 
So I say that the issue the member raises is a real issue. And as 
we struggle with past practice, we will be going through an era 
of cleaning up sites, and we'll try to be as cooperative as we can 
in helping find a way to a solution. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I'm very interested in that particular topic, as it relates  



March 1, 1995 

 
562 

very closely to my own constituency, because we have a 
number of orphan sites for oil locations around our area. 
 
Am I to understand that if there is a pollution site on a location, 
that if no one else can be identified as having been responsible, 
or be the owner of that, then the landowner, whoever holds the 
property surrounding that site, will be the one responsible for 
any clean-up that may result? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — That isn't the result of any particular 
policy. That I think is simply the way property rights and law 
exist in Canada, that you are responsible for the property you 
own; unless you can find somebody else responsible for a piece 
of liability you own, you own it. And that is an unfortunate 
truth. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Okay, let me 
play out this scenario for you. Company A approaches 
landowner and says, we want to drill an oil well on your land. 
The owner says, go away, I don't want to talk to you, not 
interested in your oil well. The oil company then turns around 
and goes to the Surface Rights Arbitration Board. The Surface 
Rights Arbitration Board says, Mr. Owner, we don't care 
whether you want that oil company there or not; they have a 
right to access their property, below yours, and we give them 
the right to come onto your land and drill an oil well. 
 
The property owner didn't want them there. He said no. The 
Surface Rights Board, a government body, says yes, drill there. 
Now who's responsible, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — This question is a good question to put 
into your little pack sack for when the Minister of Energy and 
Mines is answering questions. My sense is that there are 
regulatory regimes that protect the landowner in that situation. 
 
But again, I think the situations of which I've become aware 
where there may be a problem is where a drilling company may 
well recognize that they have a problem on the site and they 
may say to the landowner, look, if I'm going to clean that up it's 
going to cost me $10,000. Why don't I just make a deal with 
you and you clean it up? And the landowner may take that 
opportunity to receive some compensation, not being aware, 
fully, of what they may be buying in that circumstance. But it's 
a question that you might want to take up with my colleague, 
the Minister of Energy and Mines, when that opportunity arises. 
 
I think the regulatory regime is solid enough that companies are 
required to do clean-ups. But if I, the owner, take an action that 
may take that responsibility to me, then that . . . I may need to 
advise myself well before I take that sort of responsibility for 
myself. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, when it comes to the 
Surface Rights Board, indeed the Minister of Energy and Mines 
is the one responsible for that particular set of regulations. But 
we've moved beyond the Surface Rights Board. The well has 
already been drilled. They produced it for a year or five years, 
10 years, 20 years — whatever it might have been. It's changed  

hands four or five times and Joe Schmoe now owns it and Joe 
Schmoe doesn't exist any more — he's gone out of business. 
The orphan site is left sitting there and it's a contaminated site. 
 
The landowner didn't want it there in the first place. Your 
department comes along and says we have a hazardous 
substance here. We have a contaminated site. We don't see 
anybody else around here to make pay for this clean-up. You're 
it. You're responsible. 
 
So what recourse, Mr. Minister, does the landowner have in this 
case when he didn't want it there in the first place? And he had 
no recourse in the law to say, sorry I don't want it. He did 
everything he could to keep it out of there but other government 
regulations put it there. 
 
So now you have one government regulation says it's going to 
be there; another government regulation says that the landowner 
is going to have to clean it up when he didn't want it in the first 
place. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, while we can certainly talk to the 
Minister of Energy and Mines about this circumstance, that it's 
your department is the one at the end of the day that's going to 
tell the landowner that he has to pay the bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — No, I think this is, Mr. Chairman, this is 
the common misperception in that regard. These are really 
market forces at work. And there are government regulations in 
place, and my understanding is that there is a fund established 
within Energy and Mines — that's why I would like you to carry 
this discussion on with my colleague in Energy and Mines — 
that is there for abandoned sites. I'm just not sure whether it 
covers every circumstance that you describe. 
 
But at the end of the day, as I said to you before, the issue may 
arise where I as an owner, either by action or inaction, take on 
some of that liability, and that's then a market concern for me. 
Because that will in all likelihood, first come . . . If there isn't 
contamination happening to somebody or providing a risk to 
somebody, this will only come to light for the landowner when 
the landowner goes to sell the land, if that circumstance exists. 
 
And it won't be the Department of Environment at that day that 
will be the impediment to selling the land, it will be the 
mortgage holder or the purchaser who will say, I see 
contamination on this property that needs to be cleaned up. And 
so the issue as you describe it, there is provision within Energy 
and Mines for contaminated or for abandoned well sites. 
 
But I say, the risk is in owners taking responsibility for things. I 
may quote a recent example on a different front where the city 
of Prince Albert, a number of years ago, signed a contract for 
some property, taking ownership in the contract for 
contaminated materials on a site. At the end of the day the costs 
of cleaning that site up has been substantial for them, but they 
took that responsibility knowingly. 
 
Now the farmer in a circumstance where you described  



March 1, 1995 

 
563 

somebody ending up with contamination may have accepted 
responsibility for a fee or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member says it may not have. I think in the event where they 
may not have, that could be pursued through other regulatory 
measures. 
 
But my greater concern is where the landowner may have taken 
on the responsibility, not knowing the extent to which this 
could be a liability to them at a later time. 
 
But as I say, I would invite the member to carry on that 
discussion at greater length with my colleague. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, when these 
circumstances occur, a company might approach the landowner 
and say, for a fee we will turn over the clean-up to you. You 
now have a commercial arrangement in which both parties 
should be buyer beware. And so if the landowner accepts a fee 
to do a job, well if that job entails a greater extent than he had 
planned, then he's out the money. 
 
But what happens in a number of cases though, there is no such 
arrangement. The first time that the landowner knows that 
there's a problem is when the cheque doesn't come in the mail a 
year later for that surface lease. And so maybe he waits awhile, 
or he tries to find out where this company has gone to and why 
aren't they sending him his annual cheque for this particular site 
for which they are responsible. 
 
So at the end of the day, at some point in time, he approaches 
Energy and Mines and says, what's going on? I have a site out 
here that was owned by ABC, and I can't find them any more. 
Who's responsible for this? 
 
So Energy and Mines comes out and has a look at it and says, 
here's a contaminated site. Now if that happens, Mr. Minister, 
do they report it to your department? And if so, then what 
happens with that particular site? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — This area of concern is entirely within 
Energy and Mines. But I would invite the member opposite to 
possibly formally communicate with us, with respect to any 
particular review of present procedures. 
 
I know I've had people from various aspects of the industry 
comment to me about improvements that they think could be 
made. There was, I think at one time, a discussion between my 
department and Energy and Mines before I held this office, with 
respect to a different permitting structure for decommissioning 
of sites. 
 
If the member opposite has any ideas or knows of constituents 
who have some good ideas in this respect, I would appreciate 
those being forwarded because I think if there are still 
inadequacies or improvements that could be made to the 
regulatory framework or the law that stands, we'd be more than 
willing to consider them. 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: —I would ask the minister to introduce the officials 
who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It's 
my pleasure to introduce, to my right, our deputy minister, 
Conrad Hnatiuk; to the right back, Neil Yeates, our associate 
deputy minister; and Bob Wihlidal, director of support services, 
directly behind me. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your staff. I have a few questions I'd 
like to go over with you in the time that we have left. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, I would like to talk to you about 
travel. As you realize, you will be providing us with some, what 
we call, global questions sometime in March, and we appreciate 
that. But last year, however, several government departments 
did not provide the information regarding travel, and 
particularly ministerial travel. So I would like to start there 
today, Mr. Minister. 
 
Could you provide me with a list of your travels for the past 
year, how many staff accompanied you, the purpose of each 
trip, total cost of each trip, and what was accomplished. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Are you talking about out-of-province 
travel? 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you. I'm talking about all of your travel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. We'll send that over 
just momentarily, in the next minute or two. 
 
Mr. Britton: — While we're waiting for that information, Mr. 
Minister, would you inform us if there has been any staff 
changes in your office over the past year and what those 
changes were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Mr. Chairman, there have been no 
changes in my office over the past year. 
 
Mr. Britton: — You're saying there was no new positions 
filled. There was no vacancies and no reclassifications. Do I . . . 
Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — That is correct, yes. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Then, Mr. Minister, could I ask you about 
salaries. Could you tell me if there were any salary increases. 
What were the percentages of increases given, and what were 
the before and after salaries of each staff member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — If it's okay with the member, Mr.  



March 1, 1995 

 
564 

Chairman, we can give you the current salaries right now and 
by tomorrow make sure you have any changes, if that's okay. 
We'll make sure that that's delivered to your office tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, could you then at the same time indicate if you had 
any reclassifications in your staff, and if so, how many and 
what was the total cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I believe there were no reclassifications, 
but we'll include that in the information tomorrow, if that's 
okay. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'll take up a little 
more time in this a little later when I receive the answers. Could 
you give me a date when they might be here, the global 
questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Those are in your office tomorrow, if 
that's okay. I'm sorry, the global questions would be a couple of 
weeks, I'm advised. Is that okay? 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a few 
questions now regarding your quarterly statistical report dated 
September '94, your quarterly report. Under table 1 to 3, 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, cases by major reason 
assistance was granted. Could you clarify a few of the 
categories? And first the employment related — does this mean 
that assistance was granted because of a loss of job, or what 
does that relate to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — The numbers in the employment-related 
category referred to clients who may have lost their job or also 
to clients who are working but aren't making enough through, 
say, part-time work or maybe on minimum wage and with 
children, who aren't making enough to live on but they're 
getting partial assistance. Twenty-five per cent of all of our 
clients are actually working and require some sort of support in 
order to, I guess, give them enough to manage with the 
children. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Okay, so then I understand you to say that 
under the term, employment related, what we're saying here is 
this person has a job or is employed in some way but the 
income is not enough and that you assist that person or persons 
with a little extra help. Is that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the employment related, those are 
people who also may have, as I said earlier, may have lost their 
job or their UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) might 
have run out. You recall in the last year's federal budget there 
was a cut of seven weeks of benefits for Saskatchewan people 
in actual . . . in the number of weeks that they . . . and so some 
of those people would be on there whose benefits had run out. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'd like to know 
about the financial side. It says financial and then you have one 
listed as family/social. Could you explain those headings for 
me, please? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well the financial . . . it could be people 
who may be on UIC but not earning enough to make ends meet 
and qualify for a little bit more — they're counted as a case but 
they'll be getting some partial assistance only, because, as you 
know, we have to take all the income into account — or 
someone who is working and just isn't making enough. 
 
The family/social could be a variety of reasons. It could be a 
single-parent mom who's fleeing an abusive situation or who 
has three or four children. Or it could be, you know, some 
mental illness. I guess that relates more to the health aspect. The 
health, I guess that's more obvious. But the family/social could 
be related to the family circumstances at the time that prevent 
the person from pursuing employment. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Then I assume of course that under the heading 
health, that's pretty well self-explanatory. This person is not 
able to work. And so could you then outline for me, Mr. 
Minister, the levels of help that you give to folks who, because 
of their health or incapable of working, what assistance you 
have for them? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes. As you may recall, everybody who's 
on assistance has certain basic allowances based on, you know, 
individual, family size, and so on. If you're unemployable or 
disabled, then you have . . . in certain categories you get 
automatically additional money. And you may access additional 
money even yet because, as you know, it's a needs-based 
program and that is, the greater need you have the more you get 
for some allowances and the more allowances you can access, 
based on your need. 
 
But you always have to take into account sources of income to 
balance that, so sources of income have to be considered. So, 
for example, someone who's disabled would likely get about 
225 more, likely — automatically or approximately — than 
someone who isn't disabled, but could get up to 350 or so more, 
and maybe even more than that, based on the needs. 
 
So it depends on the needs as identified. And there's various 
methods of accountability to ensure that those are actually 
legitimate needs. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can I assume then 
that you take into consideration the cost of drugs in your 
evaluation of how much you give that person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, our responsibility in Social Services 
is to nominate clients for drug coverage. The drug coverage is 
actually provided by the Department of Health. So we have the 
authority with this arrangement with Health to make the 
nomination for health coverage, but the Department of Health 
actually pays the drugs. 
 
Mr. Britton: — So that wouldn't impact on your department 
financially? Those drugs then, when you identify, just for the 
sake of a better word, an excessive need for a person on drugs,  



March 1, 1995 

 
565 

when you move that into Health, the financial impact goes to 
the Health department too then? Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, that's right. We just make the 
nomination; the Department of Health covers all of the drugs. 
Yes. 
 
Mr. Britton: — And then the maximum that you would be 
giving wouldn't change, it would be in this 225 to 250 range for 
that person, and the drugs would be something separate and 
different. Well thanks for that answer. 
 
Now there's one called miscellaneous. Could we cover that a 
little bit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — These are ones that in a sense there's not 
a natural category for because they may be a variety of things, 
transient. There may be a fire or something happen, you know, 
some unforeseen circumstances, so it has a variety of categories 
that there would be no great numbers in any one of them. So 
they're linked again. I think that number is quite small, but those 
are some of the examples. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. I take from that that 
what you're saying is really pretty well what it says, that it's for 
those cases that the rules and regulations as you have them don't 
quite cover and that these people do need the assistance, and it's 
a category that you don't have a firm set of regulations for. Is 
that pretty well what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, no they fall within the rules because 
you can't get assistance unless you fall within the rules, but 
they're not clearly identified in the normal categories where, you 
know, where the higher numbers are employment related, 
financial, health, social. They're more unusual kinds of 
circumstances like transient aid which all provinces provide for 
example, or some sort of natural disaster. There's always 
something happening across the province in some area of the 
province that requires some response, and so it's those kinds of 
examples. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One other category 
that I'd like you to explain a little bit is . . . it's called other and 
unknown. What sort of things would these fall under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — It's my understanding, Mr. Chairman, 
that we're introducing a new coding system, and these may be 
people who have come through intake that aren't sort of 
designated into some other category at this point. And so the 
cases are not yet coded but presumably will be coded into one 
of these categories, and I guess the new system is going to take 
care of that so that that would be the explanation as best I can 
do at this point. 
 
Mr. Britton: — That would seem that could almost go under 
miscellaneous for the present time from what you're saying. All 
right. We'll maybe come back to some of this stuff as we get 
more or less into the estimates. Mr. Minister, could you provide 
us with the most recent updated figures on how many social  

assistance cases we have presently in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Just on your last point, the 
other/unknown, we provide assistance if the need is there, right 
away, and then we sort out just to sort out what category that 
goes in. You know, I hope that adds a little bit here. 
 
The number of cases we have, the latest statistics are for 
January '95, the latest official statistics: cases, 39,977. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Could you now then give me the number of 
individuals that are receiving assistance, as opposed to the total 
cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — The number of individuals is 81,908 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sorry? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What was the last number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Eighty-one thousand nine hundred and 
eight persons . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Total 
beneficiaries, yes. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could 
you then provide us with a recent breakdown of the 
demographics of these numbers? I'd like to know, for instance, 
how many of these individuals are under the age of 25 and 35. 
And I'd like to know how many seniors fall into that. Could you 
do that for me, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — If it's acceptable, Mr. Chairman, we will 
have that information in your package tomorrow . . . by the 
breakdowns, if that's okay. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I was 
reading in your quarterly statistical report on September '94. It 
appears that the largest number of cases by age and family 
structure is largely in the under-25 category; 5,952 cases are 
under the one-person cases. Do we have any information 
regarding how many of these young people have their grade 12 
certificate and how many, if any, have university classes or 
degrees, and how many have dropped out of high school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — We have a breakdown by education for 
these categories, and we'll make sure you get that by tomorrow 
as well. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to have 
had some of these things to work with. 
 
The family cases under 25, they total 4,970, according to your 
quarterly report. Now I assume that the majority of these would 
be single-parent homes. Could you verify that, whether it's 
single-parent homes or two-parent homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, I appreciate that you're willing to 
receive some of these tomorrow because we're not sure what 
questions you're going to ask, so we try and be as prepared as 
we can. 



March 1, 1995 

 
566 

But with regard to the January case-load breakdown — I think 
you're quoting from the September one — but with regard to the 
January one, the single per cent, the number who are single is 
54 per cent. The percentage where one parent is . . . 29.8 per 
cent of our clients are single parents; two parents, 12.2; and 
couples with no children, 4.0 per cent — no children. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
in British Columbia and other provinces, there are several 
programs under way to help young mothers to become 
independent and to get off the social assistance. What sorts of 
programs are presently being implemented in Saskatchewan, 
and could you maybe outline a few of those for us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Interestingly, we have B.C. (British 
Columbia) and some of the other provinces coming to us for 
some of our approaches because collectively across Canada 
we're trying to put our heads together to come up with the best 
approaches that are possible. 
 
In Saskatchewan, we've been using New Careers, as you'll be 
familiar with, to provide about 7,200 opportunities this year for 
education, training, skill development, employment options. We 
also have recently announced the Future Skills program which 
is designed to provide this kind of support and to support 
employers in the training of people who need to develop the 
skills needed to do the various jobs. And it's open to any 
training requirements that employers feel they need to hire 
young people. 
 
In addition, the program that the Minister for Education, 
Training and Employment announced a couple of weeks ago, 
the JobStart program, is designed specifically for young people 
on assistance to provide them employment options from 
whatever level they attain in school, whether that be grade 10 or 
grade 12 . . . to the job placement. And in addition to that, in 
this budget, you will note that I think about $2.1 million is 
designed to provide assistance to young people in the forestry 
area, to work specifically in the forestry area in northern 
Saskatchewan. And there will be about 2,500 opportunities for 
young people in the summer employment program. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could 
I take it then on this JobStart thing, you're going to give 
preference to those particularly young people who are on social 
welfare? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — That is correct, and I might say, Mr. 
Chairman, there are a number of other initiatives. I mentioned 
the major ones that are province wide. But we're funding 
several others. For example, one in Saskatoon that I was just up 
to the open house a couple of weeks ago where there are young 
aboriginal women on assistance who have a child, who are in a 
program that links them from where they are today to 
developing a plan, to develop skills, get the training, the 
education they need along with the child care support to access 
the job market, which is their best shot at becoming financially  

independent of social assistance and pulling themselves out of 
poverty. 
 
We have a number of those options, those initiatives around the 
province as well, just for people on assistance. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we 
know that other governments across Canada have been 
addressing the need for tighter controls on getting court ordered 
maintenance payment to the spouses and the children in need. 
 
And after all I guess not all acceptable . . . How shall I say this? 
Some people have children, that aren't really happy at having 
the children, and they pull out of the family. And then we have 
situations where they're ordered to make payments, 
maintenance payments, and they ignore them. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Minister, that often happens. And by and 
large the children suffer more than the adults do in these cases. 
Do you have an estimate in any way of how much money would 
be saved to your department, Social Services, if individual 
maintenance orders were forced to pay their maintenance to 
their families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, as you know, we have a 
maintenance enforcement program now in Saskatchewan. And 
in 1994-95, clients on assistance received or will receive by the 
end of this month 3.2 million in support payments directly from 
the non-custodial parent; plus, about another 1.9 million is 
being collected on their behalf by the maintenance 
enforcement's office and will be forwarded to the provincial 
Consolidated Fund. So that is about $5.1 million currently. 
 
In addition to that as you may recall, we added two new 
lawyers, through the child action plan this year, to legal aid and 
some support staff, a paralegal or two and, I think, a secretary to 
do nothing but to pursue maintenance. 
 
In addition to that, our Minister of Justice is working with the 
federal government and other provinces because we have been 
promoting a national maintenance program. And we believe 
that with people moving from province to province, that it's 
important that there be a nationally coordinated strategy. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's, you know, a 
fair chunk of cash — 5.1 million. Do you have any idea of how 
many single-parent families would no longer have to be on 
social welfare if all the ex-partners honoured their maintenance 
orders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Now that's very difficult . . . it's a good 
question, but it's very difficult to answer. But we believe that 
with the national child maintenance guidelines that were 
developed just, I believe, last month — this was discussed in 
the meeting in Victoria of all the ministers — that that will have 
a significant impact on the award levels and the consistency of 
application across the country and likely in Saskatchewan. And 
we'll be part of that. We anticipate that it'll make an important 
difference, but we just can't calculate at this point. 
 



March 1, 1995 

 
567 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
reason I asked the question, I think you and I have disagreed a 
few times on — probably every time — on the levels of what I 
call abuse to the system. And I think I've argued a bit with you 
that there are different levels of abuse in the system. 
 
And I think in all fairness to yourself and to your department 
and to the cost your department has to account for in the 
system, this is, in my estimation, a form of abuse of the welfare 
system, even though it may be in an indirect way because, as 
I've heard from you on more than one occasion, you can't walk 
away from these people, and I wouldn't ask you to. But at the 
same time, if these other people were living up to their 
responsibilities, you would have a little more . . . you would 
have more money in your pocket, so to speak, and maybe could 
do something extra for some of those folks that you and I have 
talked about, over and above the regular level. 
 
I think I've spoke to you in the context that as the minister, there 
may be times when you would use your authority in that 
capacity to go past what you may consider is the maximum 
under the regulations. And that is what I'm saying. Would you 
agree with me that this is in effect, although indirectly, a form 
of abuse to your system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I think, Mr. Chair, on this point we 
would agree. This is why we have a . . . We do agree on many 
things. 
 
This is why, as a condition of eligibility, it is expected that an 
individual on SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan), a woman 
on SAP, pursue maintenance. It is a requirement unless there is 
some reason, you know, physical abuse or something, where it 
isn't appropriate for the time being. And I think you would 
agree there's got to be some case work sensitivity on those 
occasions. So I agree with you. 
 
On the question of using my ministerial authority to grant more 
than people are eligible for, that becomes very tricky because 
presumably people have access to the same level of service and 
income and allowances across the province, and that that should 
be fair no matter where you are. And so those allowances are 
administered, we think, consistently across the province — we 
strive for that — which then makes it very difficult for a 
minister to say yes, but in this case I'm going to raise it a little 
bit more, but I won't in this case. 
 
I think we have to develop the policies and the guidelines and 
the rules and the regulations, and then let our professional staff, 
to the best of their ability, apply those across the province — if 
I understood your second point. 
 
Mr. Britton: — I appreciate what you're saying, Mr. Minister. 
But does the phrase extenuating circumstances mean anything 
to you? And I think this is what I'm talking about. And as far as 
your ministerial powers, I certainly am not suggesting that you 
step completely out of line, and I'm sure you don't. 
 
But I believe . . . then maybe I can put another question. Do  

you believe then, Mr. Minister, that in your portfolio you could 
approach your cabinet colleagues and ask maybe for another 
department or another regulations that gives you that power 
under extenuating circumstances? 
 
And when you used the word regulations and guidelines, I 
believe you answered your own question. Guidelines are 
guidelines only. And while there are probably some firm rules 
and regulations that you have to abide by, I suggest in the 
department that you are in, sir, it's a little different than 
building, say, a highway or something like that. We're talking 
about people's lives. We're talking a little bit about the children 
involved here. 
 
Children carry the scars for a long time if their childhood . . . 
I'm thinking in terms of a parent who can't really get out and 
work, but they have some children that maybe want to join the 
hockey team or maybe play ringette or volleyball or things like 
that, where a little extra money impacts on that childhood for 
the rest of their life. And if you need some assistance to 
approach your colleagues to get another little chunk of money 
for you to use your ministerial powers under extenuating 
circumstances, I would do whatever I could to help you with 
that. 
 
The other thing I'd like to know, are these numbers climbing? 
The people who are not living up to their maintenance orders, 
are they climbing from last year? Are they declining? Are we 
having any effect with the extra two people you have working 
for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the number of people are declining. 
The number of orders are increasing. So we believe that the 
new systems we've put in place, the new help, and the new 
focus with the new lawyers is working. And we'll keep you 
abreast of how that's going. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, that's 
certainly encouraging. I guess it proves to me and probably to 
yourself, that there's a lot of times you can't put down on a piece 
of paper the benefits of something like that. 
 
If you have these two extra people out there, then the offender, 
if you will, knows that you have the help that you need to get 
this done; so it's much the same as we suggested to you on the 
tip line. It's not only the money that you may recover, or in 
other words not pay out, but how many people do you deter. 
That's something you can't put down on a piece of paper. 
 
And I think something like this indicates that, when those folks 
out there who are not living up to the rules know that you have 
the manpower and the wherewithal to trace them down and 
demand they do that, the numbers then should slowly go down. 
 
I would like to point out to you, Mr. Minister, that provinces 
such as Manitoba have passed legislation providing more 
enforcement powers, such as suspending and refusing driver's 
licences and motor vehicle registrations; reporting delinquent 
payers to the credit bureau; and increasing the maximum jail  



March 1, 1995 

 
568 

term to 90 days from 30 days; and raising the maximum fine to 
$1,000 from 500 for wilfully avoiding payments; and 
introducing measures to seize assets owned by the payer and 
other people, such as jointly-held bank accounts and other 
assets; and accessing accumulated pension benefits, credits, 
before retirement pay-outs begin. 
 
And these are just a few examples, Mr. Minister, of what other 
people are doing to further enforce these maintenance payments 
to be made. Could you tell me, other than the two lawyers, what 
have you done to tighten up enforcement of the issue? What 
proposals have you brought forward? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well those suggestions you've made on 
maintenance payments, all the ideas that can collectively be put 
together across Canada by Manitoba and other governments 
have been done, and so those are some of the considerations to 
be considered in terms of a national strategy. 
 
Now I will certainly alert the Minister of Justice to the point 
you're raising today and it could be that he'll have a more up-to-
date response on some of the things that might be considered. 
But I think we're feeding into the national strategy. We're very 
much a part of that and obviously we'll want to endorse 
whatever we believe will be the most effective. 
 
But not to get into the discussion necessarily we had in question 
period today, but I think . . . but on the tips line I think what you 
have to . . . what I'd plead with you to consider is that we have 
two full pages outlining all of the strategies for accountability 
that we have in place in Saskatchewan. Now you have to take 
those in combination to say, well all in all we believe that 
Saskatchewan has a comprehensive approach to making sure 
that we are accountable. 
 
And we compare . . . what we can't do is take one idea and use 
that as the model to . . . as the be all and the end all to solve the 
problem. In Manitoba for example, they are nowhere near 
computerized like we are. They still in a sense, with due respect 
to Manitoba, are back in the Dark Ages in that they've got 
municipal social welfare by the city and provincial social 
welfare. They've got two systems that deliver social assistance 
that don't even interface. Now we don't have that situation in 
Saskatchewan. So we're miles ahead of them there. 
 
In Manitoba, Mr. Chairman, in Manitoba they have three 
verification workers. They've got three verification workers, and 
we have 31. Now I hope you give us some credit for that 
because we have 10 times as many, and those people are doing 
the verification before the cheque is prepared and goes out. So 
that prevents cheques going out where there may not be a 
legitimate need. In Manitoba, the cheque goes out, and then 
they have to try and recover the money. So we have, because of 
our system, we have a system that prevents cheques from going 
out and then not have to worry about collecting it back once it 
does, and we have 10 times as many verification workers. 
 

In Manitoba . . . we've done some analysis because we got the 
figures from the department there too. Like we're 
communicating on a monthly basis with every department, 
every counterpart in Canada, because we're trying to learn from 
each other. As you know, we have the computer matching, the 
four western provinces. We had the first matching with UIC, I 
believe, the first exchange with UIC where we could match 
there, long before Manitoba. 
 
I might say about Manitoba, their tips line gives them 350 calls 
a month. So far in the seven months, they've had 2,600 calls 
through the tip line, which works out to 325 per month. 
Through our network across Saskatchewan, we have about 500 
calls a month of people calling in to suggest that somebody 
might be cheating on welfare. We pursue every one of those. So 
we actually get 175 calls a month more than they do already. 
And we have all of these other systems that in fact provide 
accountability. As a matter of fact, in terms of our verification 
people, we have . . . our ratio is 1:13 for every thousand 
population. In Manitoba it's 1:19. 
 
So we have a better computer system than they do. We have 
more verification people. We have better interfaces than they 
do. And we have more tips from the public. So with regard to 
Manitoba's tip line, if you take their package, their 
accountability package, they're in deep, deep trouble relative to 
our accountability. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I think you and 
I will be going into the Manitoba-Saskatchewan numbers. As 
we have got them, they certainly don't jibe with yours. And we 
have them as of today. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But yours are wrong though. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Is that right? Oh well maybe I just won't 
bother. Would you come and sit here and help me out? 
 
We'll take that up, Mr. Minister, at a time when we can develop 
it. Your numbers don't coincide with what we got from them 
after question period even, to recheck what we're talking about. 
But as I say, that's for another day. 
 
Now you said you were at a meeting and all the ministers got 
together and talked about things. Now did you then not talk 
about what Manitoba's doing — those that I outlined to you that 
Manitoba has been doing? Just to pick Manitoba because 
they're close. You indicated that you're going to pass that on up 
to Justice. Does that mean that you hadn't heard of them before? 
 
And while you're on your feet, can you answer another question 
or so, because we're getting close . . . You're talking about 31 to 
3 in people looking for abuse; how does the Manitoba . . . and 
what's the Manitoba numbers? How many people are on welfare 
in Manitoba? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I don't have the total Manitoba numbers. 
I've got the Manitoba provincial numbers, but we don't have the 
Manitoba municipal numbers. But suffice it to say that — and  



March 1, 1995 

 
569 

this is a matter of public record — we have the second lowest 
dependency rate in all of Canada. In other words, you take our 
population and you take the number of beneficiaries on 
assistance, we have the second lowest rate in Canada, which is 
about . . . our rate, as of the end of January, our rate is 8.1 per 
cent. That is the second lowest in Canada. Manitoba is higher 
than that. 
 
The only province lower, the way the formula calculates it, is 
Alberta. But the difference in Alberta, and this is very 
important, Alberta has a little bit lower rate, but consider what 
they've done. They've driven 12,000 families back to reserves, 
who came into the cities because of poor housing and no jobs. 
They've been driven back to reserve. 
 
Now this is a matter of public record. They drove 7,000 out of 
the province, and they transferred 10,000 of their clients to 
another program, another dependency program where the public 
treasury is paying for it but they're not on social services. So 
even in the face of Alberta offloading like that, shoving the 
problem elsewhere, and manipulating the numbers, we are just 
marginally higher than them in terms of the dependency rate. 
 
Now that's not good enough, but we're working very hard. In 
Saskatchewan, from May '94 to the end of January, we had 
1,300 fewer cases on assistance. The regional offices have 
lower case-loads than they had a year ago. Now that's because 
the Partnership for Renewal is working, despite the UIC and 
the treaty offload. The numbers are going down. And they're 
way down for those who are employable. So it's a good news 
story. That is a good news story. 
 
Now the issue of: did I talk to my minister counterparts about 
the issue of Manitoba's tips line? We were talking about the 
meeting last month that the Justice ministers went to where they 
discussed the national guidelines for maintenance enforcement. 
When I met with the Social Service ministers, we weren't 
talking about fraud and abuse. What we're trying to do, as 
ministers, is get on with providing the supports that people need 
to access jobs, the training and employment they need. 
 
For the life of me — I have to say this with all respect — for the 
life of me, I can't figure out why you're so hung up on this. In 
the face of the fact that you're totally ignoring every single . . . 
you're ignoring the auditor's report . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . You can't find the auditor's report? Well we'll give you what 
the auditor says if you can't find it. 
 
You're ignoring all of these strategies that we're implementing 
to be accountable. Why won't you give us any credit for these 
things that we believe are more effective than what Manitoba's 
doing? 
 
Now your cheque pick-up scheme that you talked about, I mean 
I have the figures here. When you left office, when you left 
office, you were talking about what a good cheque pick-up 
scheme you had and you wanted to implement that across the 
province. Well in reality, we have some cheque pick-ups too, 
but we have cheque pick-ups where people have demonstrated  

that that's the only way we can provide them with their 
assistance. We don't do it across the board because why do you 
hold out for public display and for public condemnation 
everybody who happens to be on assistance? 
 
And that's what your preoccupation with dial-a-cheat is all 
about. Why on earth you, as the critic, continue to reinforce the 
negative stereotypes about low income, unemployed people and 
young people, baffles me. It's just mean-spirited; it's punitive. 
 
And we're more effective than Manitoba. I mean you could do 
any independent analysis and we're more accountable than 
Manitoba. But we're doing it to be accountable; we're not doing 
it to be punitive. And that is the difference. 
 
But we're more effective. Our error rate is very low. It is very 
low, yes it is. You're not operating from any basis in fact, I say 
with due respect. You just are not. You've provided me with no 
analysis. Here's two pages of guidelines of things we're doing to 
be accountable. What have you got to counteract that, to say it 
isn't accountable? We get more calls per month than Manitoba 
does through the tip line. I mean I'm baffled by your sort of 
Ralph Klein approach to low income people. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


