






















































March 16, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 16, 1995 

 

 
899 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people that have signed this petition are 
from the Limerick, Coronach, over into McCord, Mankota area 
of the constituency. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition 
prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Lancer, Abbey, Leader, Sceptre 
area, south-west Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to present 
petitions today sent in by Gibson International Carriers from 
Moose Jaw, and I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And as I said, these come from the Assiniboia, Woodrow, 
Gravelbourg, and then mostly Regina and Moose Jaw area, and 
I'm happy to table these on behalf of those folks today. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Select Committee on Driving Safety 
 

Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Hagel, Chair of the Select Committee 
on Driving Safety, presents a report which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
honour to present the members of the Legislative Assembly 
with the report of the all-party Select Committee on Driving 
Safety. 
 
Five months ago we were assigned the task of receiving public 
opinion and making recommendations on the driving and 
drinking counter-measures and the proposed highways and 
vehicles statutes amendments Act of 1994, the proposed 
regulatory changes and the paper entitled “Probationary Licence 
Program for New Drivers” and other matters related to driving 
safety. Today we present 49 recommendations and a report 
upon which consensus was reached on every single 
recommendation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
on the committee are all proud of our province, but there are 
some things in Saskatchewan about which we are not proud. 
 
In recent years on average we have been losing one teenager on 
Saskatchewan roads every 10 days. In recent years we have 
been losing three people on average every two weeks in a crash 
involving a drinking driver. Forty to 50 per cent of our deaths 
on the road every year are in crashes that involve a drinking 
driver. Unfortunately when it comes to impaired driving, our 
record is among the worst in the nation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the committee heard from over 200 people at 
public hearings in 16 communities, met with over 3,000 
students at 19 high schools, received over 100 written briefs, 
and received nearly 7,000 responses to its questionnaires. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan told us loud and clear that 
something has to be done to reduce the loss of lives and make 
our roads safer, and we agree. The committee recommends that 
we get tough and sensible in dealing with impaired driving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for over 20 years the blood alcohol content that 
triggered a roadside suspension for drivers in Saskatchewan has 
been .06 per cent. Many people, including many teenagers, told  



March 16, 1995 

 
900 

us that the safest blood alcohol tolerance for drivers is zero. 
And they're right. 
 
The committee recommends a coordinated advertising 
campaign promoting the safety of zero blood alcohol content. 
However, we recognize that there is a difference between a 
worthy goal and an enforceable limit which can be consistently 
applied and over which there will be a penalty imposed by 
provincial law. 
 
The committee recommends that Saskatchewan's blood alcohol 
tolerance should be reduced to .04 per cent for all drivers, 
giving us the lowest blood alcohol tolerance in the nation. 
 
We recommend that licence suspensions for impaired driving 
should be increased, giving Saskatchewan the toughest licence 
suspension legislation in Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in a section I call wellness on the highway, 
the committee recommends the most comprehensive and 
constructive remedial requirements for impaired drivers 
anywhere in North America. 
 
Conviction for impaired driving should be considered a 
potential symptom of alcohol dependency and an assessment 
should be required of every convicted impaired driver. If 
addicted, treatment should be required, and if not, completion 
of a driving without impairment course should be required 
before getting back the driver's licence. Successful completion 
of the proper remedial activity should make the driver safer and 
lead to a reduction of the licence suspension. 
 
To reinforce longer suspensions, Mr. Speaker, the committee 
recommends that those who continue to drive after having had 
their driving privileges suspended should have the vehicle they 
are driving impounded, as is the case in Manitoba and Alberta. 
 
We also recommend that there should be a quick and fair appeal 
mechanism available. 
 
To reduce the loss of life involving new drivers, the committee 
recommends that Saskatchewan join every other province in 
Canada and introduce a probationary licence for new drivers, 
which is based on the successful model used in Saskatoon for 
the past several years. 
 
We also make recommendations which reinforce the role of 
driver education to train new drivers to be safe drivers and 
which reinforce the value of designated-driver programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee believes our recommendations, in 
combination, will go a long way towards reducing the number 
of lives lost on the roads of our province and make significant 
progress towards the national commitment to reduce traffic 
fatalities by 25 per cent over the next five years. 
 
The committee would also like to acknowledge the high level of 
interest and input we received from Saskatchewan teens. They 
left us feeling confident that the future of our province is  

in good hands. Responsibility and fairness are embedded 
solidly in the hearts and minds of Saskatchewan's teenagers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I extend the committee's thanks for the very 
professional assistance provided by Legislative Assembly staff, 
from the Clerk's office and from Hansard. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues on the 
committee who serve in all three political parties. They worked 
gruelling hours with diligence and with the best interest of the 
people of Saskatchewan always in mind. It was an honour and 
pleasure to work with the members who consistently applied 
themselves to achieve our objective and who worked together 
well in the spirit of true parliamentarians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge the individual and collective 
efforts of my colleagues — the hon. member from Maple 
Creek, the hon. member for Regina North West, the hon. 
member for the Saltcoats, the hon. member from Meadow Lake, 
and the hon. member for Kinistino, and the hon. member for 
Saskatoon River Heights, and particularly the Vice-Chair of the 
committee, the hon. member for Souris-Cannington. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the passing of the resolution, the committee 
ceases to exist, and in my view they have been an excellent 
committee for sure. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member 
for Souris-Cannington, that the report of the Select Committee 
on Driving Safety be concurred in. I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased 
today to be able to second the motion moved by the member 
from Moose Jaw Palliser. 
 
Our caucus supports the basic principles presented in this 
report. The public and the committee spent a significant amount 
of time arriving at these conclusions. Mr. Speaker, it's true that 
it took a great deal of cooperation to arrive at the 
recommendations brought forward today. 
 
In many cases, it also took several hours of debate on each 
point and much compromising from all sides. Although at 
times, Mr. Speaker, the debates were quite intense, the 
recommendations contained in this report are brought forward 
in the spirit of cooperation. 
 
Having said that, I hope that the section in the report referred to 
as wellness on the highway is much more successful than the 
government's attempt at wellness in health care, which has 
proven to be quite unsuccessful, especially in the rural areas. 
 
However, measures such as two-year probationary licences for 
new drivers and longer suspensions for those caught driving 
after having their licence suspended will surely improve the 
safety conditions on Saskatchewan's roads. 
 



March 16, 1995 

 
901 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend groups such as SADD 
 Students Against Drinking and Driving  who have 
organized themselves and worked effortlessly for years to 
toughen the laws regarding drinking and driving. Throughout 
the year, and especially around grad night, we hear of teens who 
have lost their lives due to having drinks at parties and climbing 
behind the wheel of a vehicle. 
 
Organizations like SADD, MADD (Mothers Against Drinking 
Drivers), SCARED (Saskatchewan Citizens Advocating 
Responsible Educated Drivers), groups of concerned parents 
and school officials have done their part by providing dry grads 
which have proven to be successful. As well, their lobbying 
efforts shine through in the recommendations in this report 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, alcohol has been a problem for mankind as long 
as the process of fermentation and distillation have existed. In 
this country the great Prohibition experiment failed, and the 
results since its repeal have not been much better. There is still 
far too much violence within homes, partly caused by alcohol, 
far too much alcohol abuse passed on from generation to 
generation. 
 
But it is not only within the homes that the abuse takes place. 
Mr. Speaker, alcohol is still regarded by crime and health 
authorities as creating more victims than drugs, and 
unfortunately in the case of drinking and driving, more often 
than not the victims are innocent bystanders — other travellers 
on our roads and highways — not the offenders. All too often 
the victims are our youth. 
 
The other important issue in this report deals with education. A 
number of fatalities are a result of inexperience or lack of 
knowledge on driving and road conditions. We support the 
recommendations to provide opportunities for new drivers to 
gain additional experience before receiving a regular driver's 
licence. 
 
The educational opportunities for all new drivers will be 
enhanced by requiring participation in drivers' education 
without regard to whether or not the new driver is part of our 
high school education system. 
 
By this, Mr. Speaker, I mean that individuals who have had no 
driving experience, regardless of age or origin, will be required 
to partake in the drivers' education classes as well as meet the 
probationary licence requirements. This provides for new 
business opportunities throughout the province for driver 
education institutions. 
 
The one concern, Mr. Speaker, that I have with these 
recommendations will be the necessity to build a larger 
bureaucracy to deal with addiction assessments and 
impoundment of vehicles. This is an area in which the public 
and the opposition will have to be especially vigilant to ensure 
that abuses do not occur. 
 
We believe there are many good points within these  

recommendations that will enhance the safety of the public. Mr. 
Speaker, losing just one life a year due to drinking and driving 
is too many. It is unacceptable. 
 
Safety for Saskatchewan families must always be at the 
forefront of the agenda of all elected officials. And I am proud 
to say that this report will help make strides towards this goal. 
 
I would like to thank the staff of the legislature for their 
excellent support during our committee work, and also like to 
thank the other committee members for their cooperation and 
their dedication towards the safety of the public on the 
highways. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to second the motion made 
by the member from Moose Jaw Palliser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
an honour to rise today to endorse the recommendations in the 
report to the Select Committee on Driving Safety. As a member 
of the committee, I too wish to acknowledge the non-partisan 
teamwork and dedication to serving the interests of all 
Saskatchewan people which I observed and was part of. 
 
As the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, Chair of the 
committee, has so very concisely and ably outlined the major 
recommendations of the report, I would like to just make a few 
comments on behalf of the third party caucus. 
 
As Education critic, I was impressed by the role of teachers and 
driver educators in preparing Saskatchewan youth for a lifetime 
of driving. In their presentations, they gave us many good 
reasons why driver education is critically important for the 
successful implementation of the full range of the committee's 
recommendations. Prevention is the best medicine for the 
factors leading to Saskatchewan's poor record in crashes and 
fatalities associated with impaired and unsafe driving. That is 
one of the reasons the report recommends mandatory driver 
training for all new drivers. 
 
I was also very impressed with the knowledge, commitment, 
and the provincial and national network of the Students Against 
Drunk Driving. Not only did they make well-conceived 
presentations in many different communities, but they 
monitored and updated their presentations through those 
networks while the committee travelled. They are an excellent 
role model, not only for teens but for all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee's recommendations on reduced 
blood alcohol content levels resulting in administrative 
suspensions will send the message that alcohol consumption 
and driving don't mix, as we work towards future 
implementation of a zero tolerance level. 
 
The recommendations concerning probationary licences, 
mandatory assessment, longer suspensions, and impoundment 
of vehicles, are critical in reducing the traffic fatalities and  



March 16, 1995 

 
902 

injuries on Saskatchewan's highways. 
 
I too would like to thank the other members of the committee 
and the members of the legislative staff who assisted in the 
putting together of this report. 
 
And in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to concur in the 
tabling of the report of the Select Committee on Driving Safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a member of the 
Select Committee on Driving Safety, I would like to take this 
opportunity to table my report. This is not a dissenting report, 
Mr. Speaker, but a collection of alternatives on some of the 
issues that one member of the select committee believes would 
better serve the interests of the general public than the position 
taken by the committee. 
 
The proposals made by the committee could lead to the 
development of a very large, very expensive bureaucracy. The 
proposals include potential cases of conflict of interest between 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and the Highway 
Traffic Board versus the general public. In addition, some of the 
technical points, i.e., the .04 blood alcohol content, were also 
not what the committee heard the general public asking for. 
 
My report is based on 64 pages of personal notes and the 
volumes of material presented by those who attended meetings, 
mailed in briefs, and many studies and statistical volumes. 
 
Most people appreciated the opportunity to dialogue directly 
with MLAs on this issue. Unfortunately, only four one-
thousandths of the population were included, with many 
counted more than once because several people attended more 
than one meeting. This issue was mostly preconcluded as 
acceptable in general principle through tours and interviews 
conducted across the province over the past two years by 
departmental officials. 
 
Most people refer to this as a motherhood issue. It was clear 
from the outset that no government in their right mind would 
table a 22-page set of amendments to the driving laws and then 
spend close to $100,000 on a public relations road show unless 
they had preplanned changes that would legitimatize the 
process and give the impression that people had been consulted. 
 
Many are asking, would this money not have been better spent 
on a tour consulting the general public on more controversial 
issues such as health care or the labour laws. There must never 
be, Mr. Speaker, a complete dead-end law. Those who have no 
hope of regaining privileges have nothing to lose and will do 
anything, leaving incarceration as the only alternative. Judges in 
our society and in our system must have the final say. 
 
I feel that the committee basically rubber-stamped a process 
that had been preconcluded by government officials. I did enjoy 
the tour and found it personally educational, having the 
opportunity to see and visit much of the province, some of  

which I had not seen before. The officials and staff are to be 
complimented on a very professional job well done. 
 
In conclusion I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that a 
discretionary law becomes a discriminatory law, and wellness 
on the highways is certainly a political stretch. 
 
I observed four areas of concern. Number one, I believe that the 
high cost to taxpayers will be prohibitive. 
 
Number two, I believe that there is a conflict of interest 
between SGI, the Highway Traffic Board, versus the general 
public inherently built into these recommendations. 
 
And number three, I believe that the large bureaucracy that will 
be established will become nothing but a home for NDP (New 
Democratic Party) political friends. 
 
Number four, I believe that significant changes to rural society 
and cultural realities will occur. I foresee the death of the hotel 
industry in rural Saskatchewan, with hotels becoming nothing 
but common gaming houses. 
 
I enjoyed the company of all who were on the tour, Mr. 
Speaker. We certainly have a better understanding of one 
another. If those of us who were on the tour become better 
parliamentarians for the effort extended, then that alone perhaps 
can justify the exercise. I will table this now. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly 
a guest sitting in the west gallery. His name is Jim Poitras. He 
was born and raised in Moose Jaw. He makes his home now in 
Victoria. 
 
I first met Jim when he was commissioned to do work for the 
First Nations Gallery at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. Jim's 
work can be found in galleries and collections across Canada 
and United States and Australia and some Asian countries. And 
we're very proud that Jim comes back and sees us once in a 
while, and I would like to say welcome, Jim, and ask the 
members of the Assembly to welcome you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you two guests who are 
seated in your gallery, and introducing through you to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly. I'll ask them to stand as I 
introduce each of them. 
 
First of all, I'd like to introduce Mr. Jason Dubois. Mr. Dubois 
is the provincial president of the Students Against Drinking and 
Driving and has been president of SADD since 1993. He's a  



March 16, 1995 

 
903 

pre-administration student at the University of Regina and was 
1994 Saskatchewan junior citizen of the year. 
 
Many members will recognize that in looking at the report that 
his organization was an active participant in speaking to the 
Select Committee on Driving Safety, and he's here representing 
many other teens from around the province. He also serves 
currently as the youth representative on Saskatchewan's council 
on children — so, Mr. Jason Dubois. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel:  The other person I'd like to introduce, Mr. 
Speaker, to the members of the Assembly is Mr. Dave Abbey. 
Mr. Abbey served as the research officer for the Select 
Committee on Driving Safety. He was seconded to the 
committee from his position as manager of legislation and 
safety for the traffic safety branch of the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Those of us who served on the committee were neither 
surprised and in fact quite enjoyed that he was recently 
acknowledged by the Saskatchewan Safety Council as 
Saskatchewan's number one safety zealot. We were very 
pleased to have him working together with us in support of the 
Select Committee on Driving Safety — Mr. Dave Abbey. 
 
Welcome to both of these gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 
to you and through you to the Assembly, two constituents and 
friends of mine from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. In the west 
gallery are seated Tom Crush and Joe Holden, and they are in 
this week for hearings, and we wish them success and hope that 
they have a good trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Moose Jaw Palliser in welcoming 
Jason Dubois and the members of the SADD group here today. 
They followed us around just about every committee hearing if 
not every one of them, and I think it's appropriate that they 
should be in the Assembly today, and also like to officially 
recognize Mr. Dave Abbey as the number one safety zealot with 
the Safety Council and Department of Highways. I would like 
everyone to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Neilburg Cellular Service Launch 
 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
announce today that community of Neilburg and its surrounding 
area have joined SaskTel Mobility cellular  

network. SaskTel Mobility has the province's largest cellular 
network and is expanding to Neilburg to better serve its 
customers. Cellular service is a remarkable communications 
tool. The convenience and sense of security it provides have 
revolutionized people's ability to keep in touch with one 
another. 
 
Residents and travellers in the Neilburg area will use this tool to 
meet their communication needs at home, at work, and on the 
road. Nearly 85 per cent of Saskatchewan residents live within 
cellular coverage areas. That number will grow in 1995 as 
SaskTel Mobility moves forward with its ambitious expansion 
of cellular service in this province. Since the company's origin, 
it has grown to become the fourth largest member of Mobility 
Canada, an alliance of the country's 11 leading cellular 
providers. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I welcome the 
residents of Neilburg to SaskTel Mobility cellular service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ituna and Grayson Schools Celebrate Education Week 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge two 
schools in south-eastern Saskatchewan that are doing their part 
to help celebrate Education Week. Activities which have 
already been held at Ituna School this week include a slide 
presentation, motivational media presentation, a grandparents' 
tea, and a science fair, with prizes being awarded to the best 
display and the best project. Today there is an opportunity for 
the parents to get involved during the parent open house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Grayson School is heavily involved in Education 
Week activities as well. On Monday students from grades 5 and 
6 visited the Science Centre and the IMAX theatre in Regina. 
Perhaps one day these students will be able to see the film 
about the Tyrannosaurus-rex skeleton at Eastend, at the IMAX 
theatre of course. That exciting project was recently announced 
by the province. The film should be available for the public to 
see by the middle of 1996. 
 
Yesterday grade 7 and 9 students at Grayson School paid a visit 
to the old and new elevators in Waldron, and today there is a 
kids' convention which includes ice-cream making, bread 
baking, and wheat weaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to congratulate both of these schools for 
coming up with unique and inspirational ways of participating 
in Education Week activities. They are definitely making 
tomorrow come true. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kamsack Students Chosen for Cadet Honour Band 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — During Education Week we should remind 
ourselves that our children learn much more at our schools than 
the three R's, important as they are. They also have the  



March 16, 1995 

 
904 

opportunity to practise the arts, to gain practical skills, and in 
some cases, to become proficient music makers. 
 
Three students from Kamsack are examples of the last group. 
Bobbi Hunko, Angela McElroy, and Trisha McElroy have been 
selected as members of the 1995 prairie region cadet honour 
band. They learned from Kamsack Comprehensive Institute 
music teacher Dave Wenner, and they now take their skills to a 
larger group which will perform for larger audiences. 
 
These three members of the Kamsack air cadet squadron will 
join 90 other sea, army, and air cadets from across the Prairies 
to form the cadet honour band. This band will perform a 
musical celebration in honour of the Navy League of Canada's 
100th anniversary. 
 
It will play concerts in Edmonton on April 3, in Saskatoon 
April 5, and in Winnipeg on April 7. The concert will also 
consist of traditional military music as well as some classical, 
popular, and jazz selections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a wonderful opportunity for these students, 
an opportunity all the more appropriate because they earned it 
by learning their instruments, by practising, by attending 
rehearsals, and by dedication. Mr. Speaker, hard work is fun 
and it pays off. 
 
My congratulations to Bobbi, Angela, and Trisha. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Week Activities 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like many other 
schools around the province, the schools in the school divisions 
in my area of the province are celebrating Education Week with 
a wide variety of events. 
 
First, to remind us that education does not end at grade 12 or 
age 18, the Southeast Regional College will have an open house 
in which its post-secondary course offerings will be showcased. 
Also the college will make a presentation on literacy to remind 
us that it is never too late to learn or to learn more. 
 
The public and separate schools in Weyburn have a tremendous 
variety of offerings — everything from lunch-time theatre to 
field hockey and line dancing. The schools in Prairie View are 
hosting kids' conventions, guest speakers from AIDS Regina, 
and open houses in which parents are actively participating in 
learning activities. 
 
Radville School Division had trustee tours, science fairs, open 
houses, a medieval dinner. And today everybody in the Radville 
School Division will be seeing a performance by Saskatchewan 
Express. 
 
Whether it be reading displays, science projects, Irish music,  

health and wellness seminars, or Easter egg painting, these 
special events during this special week all serve one purpose, 
and that is to show us that learning is not only important, but 
can be fun. 
 
Congratulations to our students, educators, trustees, and parents 
on maintaining excellence and enthusiasm in our schools — as 
the Education Week theme states, making tomorrow come true. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Week in North-east Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Education Week is in full speed and neither a recess bell nor the 
end of the school day can stop the many activities planned. 
 
As one of the members from north-east Saskatchewan, I'm 
proud to report on some of the activities in that area. For 
example, Mr. Speaker, the Ridgedale School will host a 
community convention on Friday. All day students and parents 
can learn about native dance, Easter egg painting, computers, 
wildlife conservation, and hunter safety — to name just a few. 
 
Sylvania School will sponsor a "partners in learning" 
convention for parents and students, as well as a science fair. 
Zenon Park School will have a career day for K to 12 and a 
drama presentation by the high school. 
 
The Dag Hammarskjold School in Tisdale has some exciting 
events planned. All week, grade 1 students will be reading to 
kindergarten classes, a wellness coordinator will speak to 
students, and various classes will visit the local co-op to learn 
about buying groceries — something I notice a few of our 
MLAs wish that they could take part in. 
 
There are other unique events in Tisdale, including a public 
meeting of the town council at the composite high school. The 
Tisdale Public School will have an open house, a book fair, and 
square dancing. Tisdale teachers are active in initiatives dealing 
with curriculum and the changing classroom environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is only part of a list of the activities that are 
taking place in the north-east. And I want to commend all the 
students, the parents, the staff, and division officials in and 
around Tisdale for their contribution to Education Week. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Tire Technician Challenge 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon once again 
proves its excellence. On March 12, mechanics from all over 
Saskatchewan gave up their Sunday afternoon to compete in the 
Canadian Tire technician challenge at the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology)  



March 16, 1995 

 
905 

institute in Saskatoon. Each team was given seven vehicles with 
different automotive problems. They had to isolate the problem 
and fix each vehicle within 20 minutes. 
 
They were given instructions just as if a customer had come in 
with a problem. You know the kind of instructions, Mr. 
Speaker, quote: It makes a funny gurgling noise; or the 
thingumajig just doesn't work any more. End quote. 
 
The competitors were all journeyman mechanics. Prior to the 
practical competition they also had to write an exam. For the 
second year in a row, the winning team was from the Canadian 
Tire Store in Circle Park Mall in my riding of Saskatoon 
Wildwood. They won a trip to the Indy car race in Vancouver at 
the end of August. Not only did the Circle Park Mall Canadian 
Tire Store win the competition, Myles Sarich from their 
automotive service department scored highest in the written 
exam. 
 
I congratulate them all. 
 
Their service manager, Don Funk, assistant service manager 
Rob Stonehouse, and Canadian Tire Circle Park store owner Ian 
Van Norman, obviously provide great guidance and great 
opportunities for their staff to excel in automotive service. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
afternoon I want to put my attention to the minister responsible 
for gambling. 
 
Madam Minister, you and your gambling partners appear to be 
moving at maximum speed to establish a chain of Las Vegas-
style casinos around the province, while the trains in 
Saskatchewan have ground to a halt. 
 
The chief of the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) told SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) delegates that casino sites are being fast-tracked 
and that at least one casino is going to be opened by fall or as 
early as this summer. 
 
While this is going on, Madam Minister, at least one segment of 
society is booming — and that is the attendance at Gamblers 
Anonymous meetings. Two years ago, Gamblers Anonymous 
was a small circle, meeting once a week with about five 
members. Now, according to the Star-Phoenix, this group holds 
three meetings a week with 75 people attempting to control 
their gambling addiction. 
 
Madam Minister, don't you think this should be a warning bell? 
Don't you think you had better take a look at your entire gaming 
expansion policy and its effect on Saskatchewan  

families before you allow your gambling partners to go on fast 
track? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member for his 
question, giving me a chance to get up and answer. 
 
You may have noticed in the paper a couple days ago that a 
Liberal opposition member in Alberta endorsed the 
Saskatchewan policy because at least we were taking steps to 
deal with issues related to gaming and on-reserve/off-reserve 
issues. And he felt that we were doing well in setting up 
revenue-sharing arrangements that made people benefit equally 
from gaming proceeds. 
 
Regarding your question on fast-tracking feasibility, we have 
agreed with the federation to a six- to eight-month period for 
negotiation, after which approvals would be made. And we 
certainly don't, either one of us — despite the fact that much 
work is going on in the meantime — intend to veer off that 
agreement. 
 
Your final question, about increased use of the program . . . I 
think any traffic officer would tell you that when you have 
increased traffic enforcement you catch more people in the net 
because you have an increased ability to respond. So I would 
say that our increased ability to respond is providing an 
opportunity for people with difficulties to come forward. And I 
think it's a good thing that the programs are in place. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, it would be a better thing if 
those programs were not needed, and they're needed because of 
your initiative, Mr. Premier. And it's also interesting to note, 
Mr. Speaker, that they are now approving of the policy of Mr. 
Klein in Alberta. 
 
But, Madam Minister, let me tell you what your slot machines 
are actually doing to Saskatchewan people. And please listen 
now, and listen carefully. Yesterday a 40-year-old Kindersley 
man pleaded guilty to a charge of theft after admitting that he 
stole over $11,000 from St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Church to 
feed his gambling addiction. He stole over $11,000 from a 
church. 
 
This man's lawyer, Madam Minister, lashed out at you, saying 
you really have to question how many lives have to be 
destroyed. Madam Minister, that's a good question. Why don't 
you answer that question for the Assembly this afternoon. How 
many lives have to be destroyed before you will recognize the 
problem? How many lives have to be destroyed before you 
realize the error and the folly of your ways? Madam Minister, it 
is you and your Premier that are being held directly responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 16, 1995 

 
906 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for his question. 
Mr. Speaker, I would have to ask whether you would suggest 
that we would then ban alcohol and ban cigarettes because 
people do not necessarily make the best decisions in regard to 
using them. 
 
I might mention that we're the only province in Canada that has 
an education and prevention program at the high school level 
and are putting the largest amount of funds into prevention and 
education programs. And I think it's important that we take a 
proactive approach to dealing with these problems. We could 
ignore them; we could pretend they don't exist; and we could do 
a lot of things. 
 
But we are not like Mr. Klein in Alberta. We deal with them, 
and we control and regulate, and we deal with the problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this simply isn't good enough. 
Somebody on that side of the House has to take responsibility 
for this kind of misery. And I say it's the member for 
Riversdale, the Premier of this province, that should take 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Premier, the gentleman from Kindersley had never been to 
Las Vegas, had bought very few lottery tickets in his life, but as 
soon as you placed slot machines all over the place, as he said, I 
got a high from it. Those machines are like the crack cocaine of 
gambling. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you have any idea what you're doing to people 
across this province, or do you care? Mr. Premier, it's time you 
stood and responded to the consequences of your actions 
instead of spewing your condescending political rhetoric all the 
time. Mr. Premier, if this gentlemen were standing in this 
Assembly today, what would you say to that man? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition 
for his question. I would have to say that I have a great deal of 
empathy for this gentleman, and I find it unfortunate that he had 
such a difficult learning experience here with the decisions that 
he made regarding this. 
 
But the fact is, I find it a bit unusual. If any of you are familiar 
with AA (Alcoholics Anonymous), the first step in recovery 
when you are involved in AA is to admit that you have a 
problem, and I'm not sure why the first step in gaming addiction 
is to admit that the government has a problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, you 
say he has a difficult learning experience. Gambling has 
destroyed his life; that's what it's done to him and his family. It 
has nothing to do with any learning experience. 
 

Not only are your slot machines taking donations away from 
charities and church groups, these organizations are now being 
robbed by gambling addicts to feed their habit, Madam 
Minister. 
 
And in response to this, you, Madam Minister, have the gall to 
blame churches and charities for the expansion of gambling in 
Saskatchewan. You were the one who said — and the Premier 
was the one who said, incidentally — if it's no to gambling and 
gambling is bad, it should be no to bingos or no to charities; it 
should also be no to the children's wish foundation. 
 
Well as the Star-Phoenix said, and I quote: What pathetic, self-
serving sophistry for Romanow to lump church basement 
bingos and charity raffles with big casinos and VLTs. End 
quote. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you slow down this fast track? Will you stop 
your gluttonous money grab long enough to talk to the people 
that you are destroying the lives of all across this province, to 
listen to them, to hear what they have to say about the problems 
you have created for them, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I appreciate the member's question, and 
I'm sure you'll join me in writing to Mr. Klein, suggesting that 
he take some control over his gaming policy. 
 
Again I would have to take it back to the issue of there are some 
things which develop in society, and I really think that our best 
approach is to deal with them. 
 
And I'll remind you again of alcohol abuse in this society. We 
have transition houses, shelters, family service bureaus, many 
services set up. I have not heard you once ask that we repeal the 
liquor laws in this province. We have drinking and driving 
legislation on the books. One of your own members gets up and 
expresses reservation on dealing with this problem of drinking 
and driving. 
 
Under your administration there was a 2,500 per cent increase 
in privatized bingo, large-scale gaming. And you were the ones 
that directly robbed the charities and the small halls of their 
community-scale bingos at that time. So I don't really 
understand your point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, yesterday the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities delegates 
unanimously passed three separate resolutions opposing Liberal 
gun laws. Two of the three resolutions called on the province to 
take specific action on this matter. Not just talk about gun laws, 
but take real action and do something. 
 



March 16, 1995 

 
907 

Mr. Minister, is your government going to continue to ignore 
SARM and the Saskatchewan gun owners by continuing to do 
nothing. When will you start taking legislative action to protect 
gun owners, like SARM is recommending? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it is generally agreed by at least the official opposition and 
the government in this Assembly that this law should not be 
passed. I think it's only a question of what would be effective in 
trying to oppose it. 
 
It strikes me that one thing that might be effective is if we could 
ever get a clear statement out of the members of the third party 
on what the gun law should say. Your position is clear. Our 
position is clear. What is not clear to anyone is where the 
Leader of the Third Party stands on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
what the public would like out of you is a clear statement on 
what you're going to do. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the resolutions passed at SARM called for 
the province to gain control of registration. That's exactly what 
the private members' Bill I introduced last week is designed to 
do. Yet you oppose that Bill, Mr. Minister, because your party 
is ideologically opposed to property rights. 
 
A second resolution calls on the government to invoke the 
notwithstanding clause of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
and create a made-in-Saskatchewan gun law, a solution first 
suggested by the Leader of the Opposition several months ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, later today I will introduce a Bill that does exactly 
what SARM is asking for — use the notwithstanding clause to 
protect the rights of owners of firearms in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Minister, will you support this Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I say again to members opposite that 
I think the official opposition and the government agrees that 
the cost of this Bill is all out of proportion to any benefit which 
might be derived from it. And I think that's generally agreed. It 
is simply a question of what might be effective in opposing it. 
 
And I think it is also agreed by almost the entire legal 
community, there's no effective legal mechanism or legislative 
mechanism which we can take. The most effective thing we can 
do is to make representations to the federal government. Only 
the power of public opinion is going to stop them. 
 
We have . . . I say, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly passed the 
motion providing for an all-party delegation to make a 
presentation to Ottawa. Perhaps if we could ever catch the third 
party in a quiet moment and get them to join with us, perhaps  

we might be able to get the standing committee to come to 
Saskatchewan. I think that would be useful if they actually 
came here and heard us here. 
 
That's the kind of thing we need — a united stand by all parties 
in this House, and not one of the parties in this House 
desperately hopping around, back and forth, trying to avoid the 
issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, we agree that we're 
opposed to the federal Liberal legislation. The difference being 
we're prepared to try and do something about it, and you are 
not. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked the legislative legal counsel and Law 
Clerk for a constitutional opinion on this Bill because you were 
quoting that the last Bill I presented would not be 
constitutional. And I have his response here, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote: 
 
 The Constitution Act, 1982 did not repeal, rather, it 

effectively continued the Act of 1867 as a part of the 
Constitution of Canada, thus the exclusive authority for 
the provincial legislature to enact laws with respect to 
“property and civil rights” is preserved, and extends to 
the subject Bill respecting property rights in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
He goes on to say that because the Bill makes an expressed 
declaration, that it operates notwithstanding the charter, it is 
constitutional in every aspect. This Bill is constitutional in 
every aspect, Mr. Minister, according to the legal counsel of 
this legislature. 
 
Mr. Minister, while your government has used the law as an 
excuse to do nothing, we the opposition have used that law to 
develop solutions. Mr. Minister, will you do what SARM and 
responsible owners are requesting? Will you take action and 
support the two private members' Bills I've introduced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, illustrative of our 
problem in presenting a united front to the federal government 
on gun control were the votes of a couple of days ago on 
Tuesday on the Crow rate. We had three votes during the day. 
Finally caught the member from Shaunavon napping and got 
him in the House and got a vote. But it took four votes to 
actually catch them in the House. 
 
If we could ever get the members of the third party napping 
again, if we could ever get them in here for a vote, if we could 
present a united front to the federal government, that is by far 
and away the most effective thing we could do. And we look 
forward to all parties of this House joining us in this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 16, 1995 

 
908 

Health Board Deficits 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
today's Leader-Post the Health minister promised to release all 
district health board budgets for '93-94. And I'll quote from the 
article: but the minister said he first needs to have a little 
analysis done. 
 
It is very disturbing that the current fiscal year is coming to an 
end in just two short weeks and the minister hasn't even 
analysed the financial statements from '93-94, especially when 
he stated in this House that he was working closely with these 
boards in the formulation of their financial affairs. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. Explain to the House 
today: how did you develop the 1995 budget for your 
department if you have not yet finalized the financial status of 
health district boards from '93-94? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is becoming almost a 
daily routine for myself that I have to come into the legislature 
and explain to the people of Saskatchewan the 
misrepresentation of facts that come from that member and the 
Liberal caucus. This is becoming a daily assignment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I made that commitment yesterday and those 
figures will be released. 
 
The analysis that's being done is to prevent the kind of 
misinformation that you've been tabling and spreading in the 
public and, if I may say, faxing all over the province, talking 
about deficits that do not exist when the analysis is done. In fact 
the deficit that the Liberal leader said was over a hundred 
thousand dollars in fact becomes a surplus of $400,000 if the 
Liberal caucus could read a financial statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I make that commitment to this House and to the 
people. Those figures will be made public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously, Mr. 
Minister, you're not in control of your own department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to table three more district health 
board financial statements that show projected or planned — 
planned — deficits for the 1994-95 fiscal year. The law states 
that any projected deficits must have the approval of the 
minister. We just keep seeing pieces of information dribbling 
out. 
 
Mr. Minister, by law you must approve all these deficits, so will 
you not now just release how many district health boards will 
be in a deficit situation this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to be  

in Battleford this morning. I arrived back to my office and I find 
yet another communication from yet another health district 
complaining about the antics of the Liberal caucus trying to 
misinform the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me quote again from a memo that had to go to 
every staff person in the Midwest Health District because of the 
mischief these people are playing there. It says in this memo to 
all staff: it is quite evident that those responsible for the release 
of this information were wanting — wanting — to create a 
smokescreen. 
 
Why would they do that, Mr. Speaker? It's only for their own 
political advantage. And then I read today, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Star-Phoenix, the Leader of the Liberal Party suggesting that 
the province of Saskatchewan is receiving more money for 
health, education, and social services. 
 
The member, the leader, the one who would be premier, doesn't 
understand the difference between equalization payments and 
payments to social, health, and education. Mr. Speaker, the cuts 
coming from Ottawa are drastic, Mr. Speaker, and the Liberal 
leader should not confuse the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
they're your own documents and you can't even answer to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your government has stated that it is going to 
introduce balanced budget legislation which has not yet been 
seen in this House. But this legislation is a must to ensure the 
fiscal security of our province. 
 
And the government has implemented legislation that is 
supposed to stop deficit budgets in district health boards. But 
we currently have 16 examples of districts that have 
government approval to create deficits. So how can you expect 
the people of Saskatchewan to take your assurances of deficit 
legislation serious when you don't take your own deficit 
legislation serious? 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. What assurances will 
the people of Saskatchewan have if and when we see your 
government's balanced budget legislation that will not allow for 
these deferred deficits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me make one or two 
points. 
 
The members opposite in the Liberal caucus do not seem to 
understand that in a financial statement it will show capital, it 
will show depreciation, it will show operations. Mr. Speaker, if 
you take some of the numbers that the member and his leader 
have been putting all over the province and separate out 
depreciations and capital issues, you will find that 10 out of 11 
that they say have a deficit in fact have an operating surplus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are deficits. No one is hiding from that fact.  



March 16, 1995 

 
909 

There are deficits in some health districts, deficits that have 
been inherited from institutional deficits, deficits that are 
related to one-time severance, and so on, Mr. Speaker. Our 
projections would show that the deficit picture this year — and 
it's only a projection because the fiscal year end is not yet here 
— our projections would show that the entire amount will be 
less than 1 per cent, Mr. Speaker, less than 1 per cent of all the 
funding to districts. 
 
We're concerned about that, Mr. Speaker, and we're working 
with each and every district in developing management plans to 
be sure that each of our health districts are in a surplus, or 
balanced situation, because we want medicare and we will 
guarantee that medicare is sustainable for our people well into 
the next century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Smoking Legislation 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is as well to the Minister of Health. The other day, Mr. 
Minister, I asked your government why it is not proceeding with 
Bill 68, the anti-smoking legislation introduced last year. A 
number of organizations have come to us asking — and they've 
probably written you, Mr. Minister — asking why you aren't 
proceeding with this. 
 
It seems to me your government has indicated that they're going 
to let the federal Liberal government do it. And yet, Mr. 
Minister, what have we seen the federal government doing? 
Why don't you take responsibility, your responsibility on this 
provincial matter, and respond to the organizations out there 
asking why you will not reintroduce Bill 68 and show 
leadership at this time? Will you proceed with this Act, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I sincerely thank the 
member for his question because he touches on an issue that is 
extremely important, extremely important to the health status of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, the federal government 
did in fact change legislation and regulation around the sale of 
tobacco products to minors about a year ago, essentially raising 
the age of sale to the age 18 is the major change. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what has sincerely disappointed us and 
people across Saskatchewan is that they have not followed 
through with enforcement mechanisms. There are only two, Mr. 
Speaker, only two officers of enforcement in the province of 
Saskatchewan. For our House to move now to even toughen 
those regulations without proper enforcement measures in place 
seems to me to bit of an academic exercise. 
 
So in this calendar year we are working with the federal 
government to build into our province the enforcement  

mechanisms that we know can be effective when we look at 
changes in regulation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, the Saskatchewan Lung Association says that it is no 
coincidence that Saskatchewan has both the weakest provincial 
legislation in this area and the highest rates of smoking among 
young people in Canada. They call your rationale for 
abandoning questionable and they say your government needs 
to show its fair share of leadership. 
 
Even SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) is condemning your government's decision to 
withdraw this legislation. And I quote from one of their 
recommendations: 
 
 Thus, the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations supports strong provincial legislation 
restricting tobacco sales to minors that goes beyond the 
minimum standard set by federal legislation. 

 
Mr. Minister, earlier today we heard your government has 
shown absolutely no leadership on the problem of gambling 
addiction. Will you show some leadership on this issue, Mr. 
Minister, instead of passing the buck to the Liberal 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me assure the member 
there is no sense of passing the buck. Legislation and regulation 
are one very important and significant part of dealing with the 
issue of smoking, particularly among young people. That's 
certain. 
 
But let me say that is certainly not the only tool, and that's not 
the only reasonable means to travel in trying to achieve goals 
here. And in fact we are working diligently and fast-forward in 
some of these other areas. 
 
We've initiated a brand-new educational campaign, particularly 
among the very young students in our province. Only last week, 
a whole package of information and helps to retailers who have 
to deal with this over the counter on a daily basis, to assist them 
in their work . . . because we know the retailers share our goals 
in this regard. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the member, as I've said to 
many of the organizations to which he refers, we are concerned 
about this issue, we are continuing to look at the possibility of 
legislation, we want to put in legislation that can be enforced 
across our province, and therefore we're working on 
enforcement mechanisms. Meanwhile, the federal law raising 
the age of sale to 18 does apply in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 16, 1995 

 
910 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act respecting the Property Rights of the 
People of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill respecting the Property Rights of the People of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Personal Report Ruled Out of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Before orders of the day, I wish to 
make a Speaker's statement on what happened in the report that 
was brought forward today in the legislature. 
 
In the debate on the report of the Driving Safety Committee 
earlier today, the member for Maple Creek sought to table his 
own report, separate from that of the committee. 
 
While the member has the right to express whatever views he 
wishes with respect to the committee report, it is a long-
standing practice that a member of a committee may not table a 
minority report or a personal report in the House. 
 
In this regard I refer members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary 
Rules & Forms, paragraph 870, page 240, as follows: 
 
 (1) It is the opinion of the committee, as a committee, 

not that of the individual members, which is required by 
the House, and, failing unanimity, the conclusions 
agreed to by the majority are the conclusions of the 
committee. 

 
 (2) It is the custom to include the opinions of dissenting 

members in a committee report. No separate minority 
report may be tabled in the House. 

 
I also refer members to a ruling of the Chair of this Assembly, 
May 29, 1986, where an attempt to table a personal report was 
ruled out of order, as not authorized by the committee. 
 
I also refer members to a ruling of this Assembly on May 22, 
1980, where a minority report was not allowed to be attached to 
the report of the committee. 
 
I therefore find that the document requested to be tabled cannot 
be received. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What's your point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, the statement that you 
concluded cannot be tabled . . . I understand that as a member I 
can table whatever I feel should be tabled as an individual 
report or statement or whatever, and thus become part of the 
record, even though that record . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Speaker's statement cannot be 
challenged or questioned by the member. No comments will be 
received. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Renaud that Bill No. 22 — An Act to 
establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation and 
to enact a Consequential Amendment be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to rise in this Assembly and address 
Bill No. 22, An Act to establish the Transportation Partnerships 
Corporation and to enact a Consequential Amendment. 
 
Yes, the Government House Leader indicated that this certainly 
is a good Bill. Well, Mr. Minister, I think there are . . . or, Mr. 
Speaker, there are a number of points we'd like to bring out 
about this Bill that, in our minds, indicate that this Bill is not 
actually the good Bill that the Government House Leader is 
indicating it is, and that there are some questions and concerns 
that need to be raised. In fact it would seem to me this Bill sort 
of reminds me of the recent political scandal involving the NDP 
government of British Columbia. And let me refresh your 
memories. 
 
The case, which I'm sure the members will be familiar with, is 
that of a cabinet minister who is under investigation, except 
instead of stepping down, they just made him minister without 
portfolio so that he could continue to draw a minister's salary 
and perks. I am sure that all members would agree that such a 
policy is shocking in its sheer corruptness. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, in our minds, seeks to create a 
Crown corporation without portfolio. The question comes up 
time and time again as we examine this Bill. What does this 
proposed corporation do? What is the purpose of this 
corporation? What is the reason for Bill No. 22 being brought 
before this Assembly? 
 
The inevitable conclusion that any fair-minded person must  



March 16, 1995 

 
911 

time and time again come to is — nothing. This Crown 
corporation will do nothing that is not already being done. 
 
Will this corporation build roads? No. The department will 
continue to do that — the Department of Highways, that has 
already been given the responsibility for road construction in 
this province, will indeed continue to build roads. Not this 
corporation that this government is building up. Will this 
corporation partner with the federal government on 
infrastructure projects? No. The feds have already withdrawn 
their commitment to this proposal. 
 
These are the two ideas, Mr. Speaker, on which this Crown was 
originally premissed and announced, and they are both hollow 
and empty. After the federal government pulled out of this 
program, the minister's department appeared anxious to slap 
together hastily some sort of rationale that would allow this 
corporation to go ahead. 
 
Consequently, Mr. Speaker, they cooked up this idea that there 
were all these other groups just lining up to donate money to 
the government to build roads, and for some reason we needed 
a whole new agency to collect that money. I'm sure, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Premier or the Minister of Highways would have 
presented this Bill to the SARM delegates yesterday, he would 
have been scoffed at and laughed out of the hall, because we 
already have a program in place. 
 
SARM knows what rationale they use in building roads. They 
know what the Department of Highways’ rationale is. They 
would begin to ask what is the reason for another Crown 
corporation. 
 
If I'm not mistaken there already is a system in place to collect 
money for building roads. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it's called 
taxes, and everyone in this province knows how familiar the 
members opposite are with that concept. 
 
In fact every time we look around us we see, well on one hand 
the Minister of Finance says no, no new taxes, the people of 
Saskatchewan are telling us they are being taxed to death. Every 
time they turn around they find another form of taxation that is 
hitting them direct in the pocketbook, such as we've seen with 
increases in SaskTel rates, such as we're seeing with increasing 
SaskPower rates and SaskEnergy rates to the point that we have 
Crown corporations bringing in millions of dollars in profits 
and the people of Saskatchewan doling it out, and where is the 
money disappearing? 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, this government has yet to show this 
House that there really are all these groups anxious to 
contribute to road building. And the member from Lloydminster 
is hollering from her seat telling us that we know where the 
money should be going and where it should be spent. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that we don't have the time 
to get into the real debate as to the total deficit. But again here, 
Mr. Speaker, there are many areas and many questions that 
should be raised. And if the members are so concerned about  

deficit reduction, then why are they even bringing forward a 
Bill that entertains the notion of bringing forward and creating 
another Crown corporation that becomes a cost to the taxpayers 
and doesn't do anything to address the debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the government has yet to show this 
House that there really are all these groups anxious to 
contribute to road building. Even if they did exist, the 
government has failed to explain why exactly they need an 
entirely separate agency to make funding arrangements with 
these groups. Don't government ministers in their own right 
enter into contracts and deals with groups and businesses 
around the province all the time? And I believe over the last 
few weeks we've been hearing of different projects and 
investment opportunities and employment opportunities that 
this government has entered into. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's quite obvious that they do enter into 
arrangements with other groups, and they don't need another 
corporation. The only thing this Bill and this corporation does 
is, I believe, waste money. It wastes money not only in 
establishing the Crown, renting office space and so forth, but it 
also of courses wastes money with the ongoing costs of board 
members and other staff of the corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot help but wonder, as other members have, 
that this may in fact be the entire rationale for this corporation. 
What does it do? It creates six new board positions. And I 
wonder who those positions would be for? Would they be for 
just the average person, the taxpayer across this province? Or 
are they indeed going to be just six new positions that the NDP 
will fill with their own political people, their own . . . just 
another patronage position for this government to present or to 
fill with their own faithful members who have supported them 
through the years. 
 
I know the Premier likes to point out how a lot of people are 
NDP supporters because so many voted for them. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that doesn't mean you have to try to invent patronage 
positions for all of them. 
 
This is kind of an inflationary fiscal policy; if you need more 
money, print some more. If you run out of board positions for 
your party faithful, just cook up more positions by inventing 
another do-nothing Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister practically said as much right here in 
the House. To quote from his second reading speech: the 
corporation will mean direct economic benefits to 
Saskatchewan with new jobs. 
 
(1445) 
 
Since, as we have already seen, Mr. Speaker, this corporation 
does nothing that the Department of Highways isn't already, 
obviously the minister must be talking about the board positions 
he is creating. If the government wants to deny that this Crown 
was kept around only for its patronage value, then I defy the 
government to explain its reason for being. 



March 16, 1995 

 
912 

This agency represents the very worst kind of government 
waste, duplication and red tape the government claims that it is 
opposed to, and we hear about that on a daily basis. The 
citizens of this province do not need two departments of 
Highways. They do not need two sets of Highways bureaucrats 
to give them the run around when they have a complaint or a 
concern. They do not need to be run around to two different 
offices when they want to see a road built or repaired. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, people just want to deal directly with an 
individual who has the responsibility to make those decisions. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that individual and that 
responsibility is with the Minister of Highways, and I don't 
believe we need another Crown corporation for the Minister of 
Highways to have to try and work through or the red tape before 
people indeed get to his bureaucrats in his office. Can the 
minister tell me honestly that this will not happen if this Bill is 
passed? 
 
Already, Mr. Speaker, when people look to the government on 
economic development matters, they have to find their way 
through a maze of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation), SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation), the Department of Economic 
Development, the new trade Authority, initiatives through the 
Department of Agriculture, direct participation of the Crown 
Investment Corporation, and so on and so on. It would seem to 
me, Mr. Speaker, that that is already a large enough maze, we 
don't need to add anything more to it. 
 
It is unlikely that any one person in the bureaucracy will be able 
to tell an interested businessman what all programs and 
initiatives he is eligible for, and I already run into that problem, 
Mr. Speaker. When you're looking for information on programs 
that are out there, most people are not able to, in the 
departments, are not able to give me a direct answer without 
going and doing some research to see what is available. So I 
believe that's just another problem that may arise because of 
this piece of legislation and this creation of this new Crown. 
 
If we allow the government to pass this legislation, the simple 
democratic act of voicing concerns about the roads could 
become just as complicated. Maybe, Mr. Speaker, this is yet 
another motive for the governments, find new ways to pass the 
buck long enough to confuse the populace into complacency. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that's a pretty cheap tactic on the 
government's part and I can promise that it will not work. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, the populace in general are seeing 
through many of the initiatives and many of the problems and 
the programs that the government is putting in front of them 
that just complicate the process of dealing with government and 
dealing with departments and in fact, dealing with ministers. 
 
One final observation about this Bill I would like to share with 
you, Mr. Speaker, is this: I expect that this Crown, like most 
others, will have a union-only tendering policy. Now we've 
already had debate in this Assembly regarding that policy. I'm 
sure, Mr. Speaker, before this session is over we will have more  

debate. And, Mr. Speaker, it's being brought to our attention on 
a daily basis that many people are very concerned with The 
Labour Standards Act and the regulations that are being brought 
forward on a daily basis. 
 
In light, Mr. Speaker, of the recent CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation) tendering policy announcement, this possibility 
becomes even more disturbing. Apparently it wasn't enough for 
the unions to get 75 per cent of the jobs related to Crown 
construction. Now they will also get 100 per cent of the jobs 
relating to highways construction. Maybe, Mr. Speaker, when 
the government talks about new partnerships with the private 
sector through this Bill or when the minister talks about new 
partnerships with the private sector through this Bill, he is 
talking about the labour end of the private sector, the unionized 
employees throughout this province. 
 
To repeat, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely and positively no 
reason for this Bill to be before this House. Its original rationale 
has disappeared. The new rationale is clearly a sham, and this 
Bill will do nothing that it claims it will do. Far from saving 
money, Mr. Speaker, it will cost taxpayers more. Far from 
taking away from the debt, it will add to the debt. Far from 
encouraging road construction, it will confuse and complicate 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does nothing but expand the minister's 
little empire, create some board positions, and duplicates the 
work of other departments. I would therefore call on the 
minister to withdraw the Bill. I would call on the Government 
House Leader to withdraw this Bill, pull it from the Table, and 
let's get on with useful legislation that is here before the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the number of the concerns I have 
raised, because of the number of the questions we have with the 
Bill, and because our opposition is preparing some amendments 
to this Bill and we need some time to confer with the Law Clerk 
and legal counsel regarding some of the amendments so that 
they are appropriate and we'd be able to apply them fairly and 
honestly, I believe it's very important that we take a moment to 
sit back and review the Bill. And therefore I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 8 — An Act 
to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. Protection Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to say a few 
things about the Bill No. 8, an Act to repeal the NewGrade 
Energy Protection Act. 
 
The essence of my comments, Mr. Speaker, will be that Bill 90 
should have never been introduced and passed, and now they're  



March 16, 1995 

 
913 

bringing in an Act to repeal Bill 90. And in part, it has to do 
with the . . . now become the degree of arrogance of the NDP 
administration. 
 
From its beginning, in terms of its recent term, it seems like the 
NDP's approach is to take whatever credit they can for 
economic projects that were started or initiated by somebody 
else. They have attempted to launder some projects, gone 
through an awful lot of political gyrations to make them look a 
little bit different than when they took them on, and what 
they've done is caused a great deal of resentment in the business 
community. And it's not unlike, Mr. Speaker, the problems they 
faced when they came in here in the 1970s and nationalized 
industries. And it really upset an awful lot of the investment 
community. 
 
And today as you look back on the nationalization of those 
industries, it was a terrible mistake. It was a costly mistake not 
only in terms of economics and finances for the province of 
Saskatchewan, but the bigger mistake was associated with the 
fact that people didn't trust the governments of Saskatchewan, 
particularly the NDP, so they wouldn't invest in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we saw investments in other jurisdictions. And despite all its 
efforts, the NDP government of the 1970s couldn't get 
investments to come in here. They couldn't build upgraders, for 
example; they couldn't build fertilizer plants; they couldn't build 
paper mills; they couldn't build pulp mills; they couldn't build 
combinations of packing plants. It just wasn't on. And in good 
part — and we know now because we've seen the flip-flop of 
the NDP recently — is that because of the terribly bad taste they 
left in business people's mouths about investing in 
Saskatchewan. Well don't invest there because the NDP might 
win and they might nationalize you. 
 
But as a result, even the local co-ops wouldn't invest to a large 
extent, or the Wheat Pools or others, because of this fear. 
You're better to put your money some place else. So we saw 
fertilizer plants expanding in other jurisdictions. We saw other 
economic activity taking place where the raw materials would 
go out of Saskatchewan into the U.S. (United States) or into 
Alberta. We'd process the goods, bring it back here. The kids 
would leave, go to work in Alberta, go to work in the United 
States. And so we exported children, we exported raw 
commodities, and we imported the value added commodity. 
 
Well we learned that lesson, and the public of Saskatchewan 
learned that lesson, and the NDP is beginning to learn it. But 
the difficult part for Saskatchewan people is as the NDP learn 
it, they have to go through these gyrations of trying to pretend 
it's something else. And that's what we see here with Bill 8. 
 
They brought in Bill 90 and they passed it so in fact they could 
have a hammer over the heads of Federated Co-op, and that's 
not fair. It's not good business, it's not honest, it doesn't deal 
with people with integrity. The refinery has been there for years 
and years and there's a big advantage to building an upgrader 
with a refinery and with Saskatchewan people, as opposed to 
anybody else. 

They could never get it done themselves, so once it's done and 
once it's finished, they have to go bring in this very difficult, 
quite frankly ugly legislation and impose it on co-op members 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and put them through this 
terrible period. Because what happened? The co-op members 
and the Conservative government together cooperated with the 
federal government to build Canada's first upgrader. 
 
And it was interesting; we did it in downtown Regina, beside a 
refinery that saves $700 million if you're going to build an 
upgrader anyway. So it's the logical place to put it. And the 
NDP could never get it done with the co-op and they do record 
in history that it was responsible in part for their loss of the '86 
election. 
 
And now, after they got back into power in '91, they said oh, we 
got to redo this. And we're not going to sit down and negotiate 
honourably at the table; we're going to force it through like they 
did with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program); like they've 
done with Saskatchewan Pension; as they've done with judges; 
as they've done with others. We'll just be as arrogant as we can 
be and just run roughshod over people's views and the 
reputation of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it's perfectly consistent with the nationalization, Mr. 
Speaker. They had no hesitation in defending nationalization 
here which you would just take over businesses. And what do 
we see here with this Bill? This Bill is finally backing up and 
saying, well we really didn't need to do that. 
 
But they did it. They did it. And the consequences of this, and 
we'll see in other projects, is that it leaves a terribly bad taste in 
the mouths of people, and the co-op members resent it today. 
They're extremely upset with this. They said we can sit down 
and negotiate. This was a good deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to touch on a combination of reasons why it is such 
a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. First of all, the 
people of our province saved in the neighbourhood of $700 
million building an upgrader in Saskatchewan tied to an 
existing refinery. Now we have one refinery in the province of 
Saskatchewan that processes heavy oil into gasoline and diesel 
fuel, and that's the refinery here. Built years and years ago by 
grass roots people and co-op movement so that we could have 
some power over the energy business. And if we put an 
upgrader with that refinery, we automatically save $700 million. 
Now that's already here. 
 
Secondly, it helps support that refinery, which is an economic 
ace for the province of Saskatchewan. It shores up that refinery. 
It gives it work to do. It provides it with a source of synthetic 
crude so that we can make our own gasoline and diesel fuel, 
and don't rely on Alberta or other jurisdictions. 
 
Co-op members knew that; we knew that. But for whatever 
reason, the NDP couldn't get it done. And once it is done, they 
seemed to miss that point and they completely overlooked it. 



March 16, 1995 

 
914 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, that upgrader takes 50,000 barrels a day 
of heavy crude and medium crude and it processes it. That's 
50,000 barrels a day out of the ground in Saskatchewan that 
wouldn't have a market here. We would be subject or 
vulnerable to coke industries or United States heavy oil market 
which has much less profit in it for us, and certainly at times, 
than using synthetic crude. 
 
In other words, we have much more market power over 50,000 
barrels a day if we have an upgrader in place. And the NDP just 
didn't seem to understand that. That 50,000 barrels a day, plus 
an additional upgrader  I might add that's 50,000 barrels a 
day -- generates something like 25 million barrels a year that is 
now coming out of the ground in the province of Saskatchewan 
and going through upgraders which are profitable. 
 
(1500) 
 
The Bi-Provincial upgrader is profitable and the refinery here is 
profitable and the oil patch is profitable and the jobs there and 
the royalties are profitable. In other words, the Minister of 
Finance stood here the other day and said, the two upgraders 
contribute in the neighbourhood of $100 million a year value 
added to the province of Saskatchewan. And that information 
came from his deputy who was sitting beside him. 
 
And the NDP came into power and they say, well we'll have to 
bring in Bill 90 which means that we can just take over the 
upgrader. Well it's a terrible legacy and attitude to leave to the 
people of Saskatchewan for the rest of the country to look at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 50,000 barrels a day can generate something like 
$35 million a year or nearly $100,000 a day directly — directly 
— to the Consolidated Fund. That kind of money comes from 
building an upgrader in Saskatchewan with the co-op 
movement, next to a refinery that is profitable — and very 
profitable. 
 
On top of this, Mr. Speaker, we see the fact that the economic 
activity associated with building an upgrader here has spin-offs 
in relation to education. And the education and the timing and 
the learning and the research associated with upgrading is 
extremely important. No place in Canada will we find more 
information being learned about upgrading and running an 
upgrader than right here in the city of Regina with the upgrader 
that we have here — NewGrade upgrader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the interesting point is that if you go back and try 
to find out if the NDP had calculated any of these benefits, 
there is no evidence of that. The benefits of refining; the 
benefits of the jobs associated with building an upgrader; the 
benefits of supplying 50,000 barrels of oil to the refinery, the 
upgrader, and then to the refinery, the benefits of the royalty 
structure that comes into the province of Saskatchewan. 
Because if we look at something like 25 million barrels a day 
. . . a year, pardon me . . . that are coming into the province as a 
result of upgraders, there is tremendous benefit to the province 
of Saskatchewan, way more than the losses associated in 
starting up a brand-new upgrader. 

And there are losses in starting it up. And there were losses in 
the Bi-Provincial upgrader in starting it up. And there are losses 
starting up a packing plant and all kinds of other businesses. 
 
But there's nowhere do we see documented evidence where the 
NDP has even taken it into consideration. They brought in Bill 
90 that said these other things don't count. We will run 
roughshod over the co-op members, roughshod over the co-op 
movement. They threatened co-op members. They disregarded 
their feelings. They disregarded contracts. They disregarded the 
opposition. They voted in this legislature, come hell or high 
water, to make sure that they would have the capacity to 
completely run and control the NewGrade upgrader. 
 
And as a result, we saw a terrible taste left in the mouths of 
people who worked very hard to build the upgrader. And 
secondly, no recognition of the contribution that the co-op 
movement had made, and the Government of Canada and the 
people of Saskatchewan, in building Canada's first upgrader 
here in the province of Saskatchewan . . . in terms of royalties, 
in terms of jobs, in terms of value added, in terms of 
strengthening the refinery, strengthening the co-op movement 
— none of them. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I say this goes right back to the very 
arrogant attitude of nationalizing companies. It's like the NDP 
never get over that. They have to have that arrogant attitude that 
says we will retroactively change legislation. We will 
retroactively break contracts. We will retroactively not invite 
you in here. We will take over companies. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they failed to negotiate. They took heavy-
handed tactics and condemned the co-op, condemned the 
previous government that put the package together, said it was 
the worst deal ever. And we know that's not the case. 
 
The co-op members in good faith built the upgrader. And the 
people of Saskatchewan and the previous government in good 
faith built the upgrader. And the Government of Canada 
contributed to build that upgrader. And now we have two of the 
most valuable upgrading capacities anywhere in Canada, the 
two newest. The finest pieces of research are going to have 
ongoing laboratories to understand how upgrading works and 
contribute hundreds of millions of dollars to the coffers of the 
people of Saskatchewan well above the costs — well above the 
costs. And that's well known now. 
 
And so we see Bill No. 8 saying they're going to back away 
from that Draconian measure of taking over the co-op 
movement as far as the upgrader capacity is concerned. And I 
find it very unfortunate and frankly somewhat pathetic that 
they'd have to be that Draconian in dealing with the co-op 
movement in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They passed Bill 90 to give them control over the upgrader. 
They didn't proclaim it, but they passed it. They held it over the 
FCL's (Federated Co-operatives Ltd.) head like a big club and 
then invited them back to the bargaining table, just like they did 
the potash industry when they nationalized it. 



March 16, 1995 

 
915 

The deal was signed and arrangements have been made to deal 
with the debt problems of the project, and under duress, people 
made decisions. What is not positive is the method by which 
this deal was struck. It's reminiscent of other deals done in this 
legislature that I wouldn't endorse, and I certainly can give you 
lots of evidence, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP wouldn't endorse 
when they were in opposition. They wouldn't endorse 
retroactive legislation. They wouldn't endorse high-handed 
activities like that. They said the government has no mandate to 
do that. The government had no mandate to offer shares in 
things like Energy. 
 
So how would you have the mandate to retroactively change 
deals, take over deals, and do that? You were not elected to do 
that. But once you're in power, typically the NDP go back and 
they respond the same way — nationalize the industry, take it 
over, bully them about, bring in legislation. It doesn't matter 
what the opposition says. Just make sure that the high-handed 
nature of the NDP is apparent. Well if anyone stands in the 
NDP's way, you just pull out the big club and say, nationalize, 
take over, just like Bill 90. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP should spend a lot of time 
thinking about Bill 8. Bill 8 is an admission that they were 
wrong. Bill 8 is like saying, which was better for the potash 
industry — nationalizing it or privatizing it? 
 
And the whole world now knows that privatizing the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan has made eminent economic 
sense. Shares have gone from $18 to almost $60 a share. 
Tremendous. And the people of Saskatchewan had every option 
to participate. The Government of Saskatchewan has made 
money. The people are making money. It's a worldwide 
corporation. It's doubled in size — no question. 
 
And now the NDP says, we favour privatization. They're 
encouraging the privatization of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 
They are now going to be in favour of privatization. They're 
going to be in favour of — what is it next, Mr. Speaker? — 
multinationals. 
 
They should have a Bill here associated with Bill 8 that repeals 
all their old sayings. They're in favour of free trade. Maybe they 
should have a Bill that says, we now repent on free trade; we 
believe that free trade is a good idea all over the world. 
 
They now believe evidently, Mr. Speaker, in harmonization. In 
fact they'll even do better than harmonization. Rather than 
harmonize with Cargill, they'll even give them money outright 
to match the harmonized amount. That's what it is — 
harmonization with the PST (provincial sales tax). You can take 
that back. If you manufacture and process in Saskatchewan, you 
can get it back. They should have a Bill here to repeal all of 
their sayings about harmonization. 
 
And they need a Bill to repent with respect to privatization. 
Because they've introduced a Bill here to privatize the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Now if I had initiated that, it would 
have been just terrible; or if anybody else on this side of the  

House had done it, it would have been terrible. But if the NDP 
want to do it, it's okay. 
 
Well I just want to point out that Bill 8 is typical of what the 
NDP are going through. They have to squirm through it and 
they have to wiggle their way around it and they have to back 
out of it. But we see over and over again that when it comes to 
reality, they're finally facing the music. Free trade's a good idea. 
Harmonization's a good idea. Megaprojects that were 
announced today, Mr. Speaker . . . Isn't a $250 million uranium 
project kind of a megaproject? It's kind of big, and they were 
against that. 
 
And today they should have a Bill here saying, oh it's okay. 
Megaprojects are okay. Here's Bill no 8(b) and 8(c) and 8(d) 
and 8(e). We've changed our minds. 
 
They're for multinationals; Cargill is okay. Imagine writing a 
huge, privately owned company — this is a socialist doing this 
— a cheque for $4 million cash. How does that go over in some 
of your more partisan local meetings? Cargill gets $4 million of 
the taxpayers' money right in their pocket if they'll just build a 
canola plant here. 
 
I mean isn't this unbelievable that NDPers and socialists and the 
CCFers (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) would be 
taking taxpayers' money and saying, well we're going to give it 
to Cargill, a multinational. Unbelievable. I mean you should 
have a Bill in here that repents and says it's okay to do this now. 
 
And you're in favour of oil companies. My gosh, we can invite 
oil companies in. I think it's fair to say that Tommy Douglas, 
Allan Blakeney, and many, many other NDP, let alone leaders, 
beat on oil companies for years, and now it's okay. Come on in. 
 
Well, and particularly with respect to uranium, it's unbelievable 
that not so long ago we couldn't even have the NDP in favour of 
mining and now they're even encouraging the Atomic Energy 
Corporation of Canada, after we brought it in here, to cooperate 
and to build and to do research. 
 
Well that isn't really to mention them all, but if you look at the 
combination of things that the NDP are trying to take credit for, 
the combinations of things that they're repenting on, what you 
have here is a typical example in Bill 8. And I would just like to 
say that there was no reason for Bill 8. There's no reason for 
Bill 90. I guess that's why we have to have Bill 8, but Bill 8 
shouldn't be seen in isolation. 
 
Bill No. 8 is an admission by the NDP that they made all kinds 
of mistakes over the past 25 or 40 years, not encouraging 
people to invest in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
retroactive legislation, retroactive legislation, Mr. Speaker, that 
takes away the power of arrangements and signed contracts is 
just unacceptable today. It leaves a bad taste in people's mouths 
and I criticize, honestly criticize, the NDP for Bill 90 and for 
coming forward . . . having to come forward with something 
that repealed it because they never even had the courage to 
proclaim it. And thank goodness, thank goodness, because on  



March 16, 1995 

 
916 

so many other things they've had to change their mind. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I would stand the Bill because I think that maybe 
some other people who would like to speak on it. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 6 — An Act 
to amend The Crop Insurance Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm going to, at the 
end of my remarks, have this Bill move into the committee 
stage. Just for the record I think there's some things that the 
minister should be aware of on this particular Bill that we will 
be asking questions about in committee because I think they are 
pertinent. 
 
We've already identified in earlier speeches, that by taking away 
the order in council provisions and funding of Crop Insurance 
and allowing the minister to move money directly out of the 
Department of Agriculture, that I honestly believe that there 
will be less accountability because the ability of members of the 
House to follow the flow of money during the course of the 
budget year will be hampered that way. 
 
On the other hand, I suspect that the provisions will allow the 
department or the Crop Insurance Corporation to settle producer 
accounts quicker than they have in the past. Because when they 
had to wait for order in councils to come through, oftentimes 
producers — particularly in the area of wildlife damage — 
sometimes waited months before they had the opportunity to get 
their bill settled up. 
 
As I said in my earlier comments, the minister should be 
prepared to answer questions vis-a-vis the board of directors. 
We have 12 individuals that are paid per diems to sit on the 
board of directors of Crop Insurance, and it seems now that 
their input into the monetary decisions of Crop Insurance will 
not matter much because the minister can simply do whatever 
he wishes out of department land. 
 
(1515) 
 
And the final issue that I think needs to be addressed in 
committee is that once this initiative takes place, it would be 
much easier for the government to move the Crop Insurance 
Corporation out of Melville, Saskatchewan, back into Regina; 
that they would not have to have all of those employees in 
Melville. That by the minister being able to redirect funding, 
they could easily change the location of that particular Crop 
Insurance Corporation. And then we would see the minister's 
ability with his funding being changed to begin, for instance, 
placing a lot of his political friends more easily into the Crop 
Insurance Corporation. 
 

So those are all issues that will have to be addressed in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, and I think that's the appropriate place 
to do it. So I would move that we go there now. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 7 — An Act 
to amend The Apiaries Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also with this 
particular Bill, the information that's coming back from the 
various interest groups associated with both honey- and 
leafcutter bee production in the province, I think those 
questions can now be posed to the minister in committee stage, 
and I believe that's the appropriate place to handle it. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed with item 1, perhaps we 
might ask the minister to re-introduce the officials who have 
joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right is 
Con Hnatiuk, the deputy minister of Social Services. Behind 
Con, Neil Yeates, our associate deputy minister. Directly 
behind me, Bob Wihlidal, the director of budget branch, and 
Phil Walsh, our director of income security. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and officials. I first of all would like to visit with you 
about the Bill 33. 
 
Mr. Minister, on March 8 the official opposition introduced a 
very important Bill called An Act respecting the Donation of 
Food. And before introducing this legislation, Mr. Minister, our 
office spoke to several members of the food industry including 
hotels and caterers, feeding programs and facilities like the 
Regina food bank and the Saskatchewan food bank, Chili for 
Children, REACH (Regina Education and Action on Child 
Hunger Inc.), and many others. And all were very supportive 
and excited about this good Samaritan legislation. 
 
Will your government be supporting this Bill, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much for that question. I 
think as I've tried to indicate to the hon. member is that we  



March 16, 1995 

 
917 

appreciate the — very much — the idea. We have reviewed the 
Bill. In fact we look favourably upon it; we intend, I believe, to 
support it. 
 
We are looking at the . . . we've been looking at the fact that 
that Bill will provide protection from a civil point of view, but 
there are also some public health . . . We're reviewing it from 
the point of view of The Public Health Act  is also an Act in 
which there could be some liabilities. 
 
But we have checked as well with the food banks, and I know 
you appreciate that we — it's not that we didn't trust your 
judgement — we have to do that as well and got a favourable 
response. And we've also been in touch with other provinces 
and it's helped in some provinces more than others. 
 
But certainly overall I think we feel positive about the Bill. And 
I think the important thing is of course we need to continue 
with strategies that deal with the medium- and long-term 
solutions, the causes of poverty, which I think are important to 
address simultaneously. And we believe we're doing that. 
 
But with regard to the Bill itself, at this point we're looking very 
favourably upon it and I think in the next two or three days we'll 
be in a position to hopefully move that along. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate the fact that you are taking a closer look at the 
legislation; however, I believe that time is of an essence. I'd like 
to bring your attention at an article at the beginning of March, 
and that states: Saskatoon food bank is down to its last crumbs. 
Down to only one day's food supply, Mr. Minister. Hungry 
families need food and members of the food industry are ready 
and willing to get into this program. And all this has to happen; 
all you have to do, Mr. Minister, is help us pass this Bill, a 
speedy passage of Bill 33. 
 
The Bill was patterned after legislation already in effect in five 
other provinces, and as a matter of fact, Mr. Minister, in 50 
states; this Bill was patterned after other Bills that are working. 
In fact, Mr. Minister, Bill 33 is worded exactly like Bill 170, 
which is an Act respecting the donation of food passed in 
Ontario, passed by the Ontario legislation last June. Not a word 
has been changed; not a word has been deleted from the Ontario 
Bill. And I have a copy — I'm sure you have too — but I have a 
copy, if you don't, of the legislation if you'd like to have one. 
 
The success of this legislation in the province of Ontario, Mr. 
Minister, has been overwhelming. It's working well. And I don't 
like to sound unsympathetic but, Mr. Minister, you've already 
seen the positive effects of this Bill. We've provided you the 
statistics two weeks ago. 
 
Given all these facts, Mr. Minister, what possible objections 
can you have to passing this Bill now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well sorry, I maybe didn't make myself 
clear. What I was trying to say is that we're just clarifying to 
make sure that it's consistent with The Public Health Act in  

Saskatchewan. I appreciate what you're saying about the Bill as 
directly lifted from Ontario, but their public health Act may not 
be the same as ours. 
 
And so we're just trying to . . . if we can strengthen it fine, but 
we don't see holding it up. And as I tried to say, in the next day 
or two I'm hoping that I could be in a position to . . . And you'll 
be the first to know. I'll come and see you to try and move this 
along. So I'm not sure what else to say. 
 
But again, we appreciate the fact that you have come forth with 
an idea rather than just being critical. And that's refreshing 
relative to just criticism we're getting from your colleagues to 
your left there. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well, Mr. Minister, I pointed out to you that 
the Saskatoon food bank is down to their last crumbs. So when 
you say a day or two, that's a long time if you're hungry. And 
I'm not so sure it should take a day or two to check out the food 
Act. 
 
I want to quote to you a letter, quote from a letter, Mr. Minister. 
And this is a letter written to Mr. Dalton McGuinty. And he's 
the MPP (Member of the Provincial Parliament) from Queen's 
Park responsible for the good Samaritan legislation in Ontario. 
 
And the letter is from Second Harvest food recovery program in 
Ontario. And it states, I quote: 
 
 Since June, when your Bill, The Donation of Food Act, 

became law in Ontario, Second Harvest has seen a 
significant increase in interest and support from 
potential food donors. Having the good Samaritan 
legislation in place strengthens our position when 
soliciting for donations and removes any concern of a 
liability issue. 

 
 We will be picking up food of a higher nutritional 

quality as well as seeing an increase in the quantity 
donated. It would be great to see good Samaritan 
legislation implemented country-wide. 

 
For the record, another letter from the food bank in Ontario . . . 
Ottawa, pardon me, states: 
 
 Through good Samaritan legislation, we have now 

acquired a supply of liquid milk that was previously not 
available. We have also been contacted by Hershey 
Canada and have already received seven pallets of food, 
due directly to this law. 

 
 In addition, our prepared and perishable food retrievable 

program, city harvest, has grown dramatically. 
 
 I would like to thank you once again for the work you 

put into this legislation. It has, and will, continue to 
make a difference in the lives of thousands of people 
throughout Ontario who must rely on food banks every 
month. 



March 16, 1995 

 
918 

Mr. Minister, we have many, many more letters just like this 
one. And I would like to see all three parties, all three parties 
stand in the House here and support this Bill. They did that in 
Ontario, and I'm sure we can do that here. We have at different 
times supported things that we all agree is beneficial. 
 
Could you please offer a specific date, very soon, that you will 
let this legislation go through the House? And remember, two 
or three days is a long time if you're hungry. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm encouraged to 
see the member from Wilkie, who spent nine and a half years in 
government, a government that didn't even acknowledge until 
1990 when your minister of Family . . . in fact in 1990 he said 
poverty didn't exist, that the reason that kids are not eating is 
because their parents don't spend enough time going for a walk 
with them around Wascana river or Wascana Creek here. So 
finally he acknowledged about 1991 that poverty existed. 
 
If you're so interested in the poverty issue, it baffles me as to 
why you didn't support the child development and nutrition 
programs. You voted against that last year, and I fully contend 
you'll vote against that this year out of the child action plan, as 
did the Liberals. That's an initiative out of the child action plan, 
$1 million for school lunch programs, 47 programs, I believe, 
around the province. You voted against that. 
 
A couple of days ago in this House, the Liberals ducked out 
because they didn't have the courage to stand up for working 
people. And this is the hypocrisy of your position, so at least be 
consistent. Your leader wanted to reverse the decision of a Bill 
that would give part-time benefits to part-time working people. 
I can tell you that 25, 26, 27 per cent of the people on social 
assistance today are working. They're not getting enough to live 
on. 
 
And then one day you get up, and you try and bring in a Bill 
that will take away part-time benefits for part-time employees. 
And then the next day you get up and say, can't you speed up 
the Bill to deal with hungry children; two or three days is a long 
time. And then you vote against the child action plan which 
gives . . . 
 
We provide all kinds of supports. I spent an hour and a half at 
the Regina food bank last Thursday with Mr. Bloos and the 
board, and we went over the potential for building in additional 
services there to support people, give people the tools so that 
they don't have to rely on the food bank. So we're trying to find 
ways to empower people to lift themselves out of poverty, and 
we need your support. 
 
Now we've also checked with other provinces, and we know 
that that's made a difference in some provinces. It hasn't made a 
big difference in other provinces. And if it makes any 
difference, that's great. But don't think that by bringing this Bill 
in that that is your contribution to charity — which is what it is 
— that is your contribution to dealing with poverty in  

Saskatchewan. 
 
Poverty worsened in the 1980s. We didn't have one food bank 
when you came to power. When you left power, we had 10 food 
banks. Think about that. Because you didn't provide funding to 
social programs, to income security programs . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You've got 80,000 on welfare. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well the member from . . . my good 
friend from Morse says 80,000 on welfare. Well I ask you to 
consider why there are increased numbers of people on welfare. 
Are you denying the fact . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No jobs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Could I ask you, what do you mean no 
jobs? Are you denying the fact  you're an objective, fair 
person  are you denying the fact that the treaty Indian offload 
has cost this province $41 million this year in new money? Are 
you denying that? That's an offload, the federal offload. 
 
The UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) cuts from the 
federal Liberals last February, where the federal Liberals cut 
benefits to unemployed people on UIC, cut benefits by seven 
weeks. All claims north of Davidson — seven weeks they cut 
benefits. That cost us $17 million this year. And then the 
federal Liberals froze the Canada Assistance Plan on us, so 
they're not even reimbursing us 50 per cent on those offloads. 
 
So if you're going to say 80,000 people, beneficiaries, you've 
got to be fair about it. Because we can document the numbers 
that contributed to that. We didn't play the games like your 
Alberta counterparts did. We didn't drive 7,000 people to other 
provinces by reducing benefits. We didn't drive 12,000 families 
back to reserves where there was poor housing, fewer 
educational opportunities, and no jobs. We didn't do that. And 
we also didn't transfer 10,000 clients over to another 
dependency program and then brag about the welfare rates 
being low. 
 
But even when you take what Alberta's done and you take our 
total case-load and dependency rate, at 7.8 or 9 per cent it's the 
second lowest in Canada. It's not good enough, but it's the 
second lowest in Canada. 
 
And you can't credibly say — you and your Liberal friend — 
you can't credibly say, create some jobs. There's been about 
1,500 jobs announced in the last week alone. And if you're 
going to be fair, you'll have to acknowledge — if you're going 
to be fair about it, because you get the monthly bulletin of the 
social assistance case-load numbers — that from, say, May of 
1994 to the end of January 1995 the case-load reduction was 
about 1,300 clients, or 27, 2,800 beneficiaries, even in the face 
of the offloads. 
 
So we're making progress despite the federal offloads. And you 
wait till next year and the year after. And I hope when our 
friend from Regina North West gets up, she'll be able to tell me,  



March 16, 1995 

 
919 

tell us here, what she said to the Prime Minister yesterday to 
lessen the impact of . . . you think poverty's high now in 
Canada, it's nothing like it's going to be — given the absence of 
a federal job strategy — it's nothing like it's going to be when 
the federal government offloads another $120 million to this 
province. 
 
And by the way, while I'm at it, I can't believe that the Prime 
Minister of Canada, where we've committed ourselves to 
eliminating poverty, would boycott the Copenhagen conference, 
which is an absolute disgrace. But that's what he has done. And 
basically said that Canada's not concerned about poor people in 
Canada and of course worldwide. 
 
So I told you at the outset that in the next day or two I would be 
able to give you a positive indication. I don't know what else I 
can say. If you're really concerned about poverty, and I know 
you're a sincere person, please vote for the child development 
and nutrition program which is in this budget in the child action 
plan, which this year will be 6.2 million in total? — $6.2 
million, the large bulk of that directed towards unemployed and 
low income people. If you're really going to be consistent, vote 
for those kinds of things and not against them. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I was 
kind of glad to see you finally address the question towards the 
last of your sermon there. You forget . . . you also forget a few 
things. 
 
It was your government, when you were in opposition, told us 
that you were going to eliminate food banks. Now you talk 
about how many is there there now as compared to when you 
became government. You were going to eliminate the need. 
You were going to eliminate poverty. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also talked about welfare people out of work 
and so on. Well I don't think we're talking about the same group 
of people. We'll get into the welfare side of it, I suppose, before 
we're done, but I'm asking you about this Bill. And it don't seem 
to me like you're interested in fast-tracking this Bill. But your 
government will fast-track a casino in order to get people 
stealing from their employers to gamble, but you won't fast-
track something that has a bearing on children. 
 
And you talk about food banks and you talk about the great and 
wonderful things you had done. Let me ask you, let me ask you: 
if you've done such a great and wonderful job and you criticize 
me for criticizing you — and I guess that's fair — but why do 
you have so many people needing the food banks if you're 
doing such a wonderful job? They shouldn't be there. 
 
Why should there be 83,000 people asking for help if your job 
creation is as wonderful as you try to pretend it is? The logic is 
not there. The facts don't add up. And I know you'll tell me 
what happened in Alberta. You choose to mention Alberta 
when it's favourable to your story. But when it's not favourable, 
then you ignore them. They created 83,000 jobs. Now if you'd 
created 80,000 jobs, you wouldn't have had these people on 
welfare; you wouldn't have had the need for the food banks. 

Now we can suppose and we can talk about things, but the 
reality is that there are food banks running out of food. And I 
pointed out to you — I have a couple of the letters that I'm 
prepared to send over if you don't have them, and I'm sure you 
do — where people all across this country agree that this is a 
good Bill. And I don't accept that it's going to take a lot of days 
to get your assurance on this thing. That's all we're asking. Can 
we get you to give us a date? Will you tell us when you'll let us 
put this Bill through the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member starts out 
by saying, look, you're avoiding the question; just speak to the 
Bill. And then he brings in all kinds of side issues, brings in all 
kinds of side issues about gaming and Alberta and creating 
jobs, and so on. But then wants me to confine my remarks to 
the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman, our commitment was and is to eliminate the 
need for food banks. We continue to make that commitment to 
you, and to — more importantly, I suppose — to people of 
Saskatchewan, low income people. But you have to realize too 
that you have left this province in deep, deep trouble. When we 
took office — well you smile — when we took office, we had 
the highest per capita deficit in Canada. The highest per capita 
deficit in Canada. Now we've turned that around in three and a 
half years and balanced the budget. 
 
I hope that you at least see that sustaining a balanced budget 
and getting the financial house in order is something that . . . I 
know it's not something you were familiar with in your term, 
but it's something that you would view as being related to 
improving the economy. 
 
As a result of improving the finances of the province, we've 
also set out a plan to tackle your debt. It's going to be a long-
term proposition, but we've set out to do that as well. 
 
On top of that, the Partnership for Renewal is creating jobs at a 
rate that is nothing less than a miracle. And you know you're 
not tackling that any more in question period because since 
StatsCanada revised their figures, you and the Liberals are not 
even addressing this, because on the jobs issue you don't have 
any credibility. 
 
You gave away billions and billions of dollars of assets in this 
province, and then you still left a $16 billion debt. And then 
you're not willing to acknowledge the incredible offloads that 
occurred under the Mulroney government that have continued 
under the Chrétien government that have an impact on the 
Saskatchewan budget and our ability or inability to enhance 
some programs. And we would love to. 
 
Now there were no food banks in this province before you came 
to power. I know you will acknowledge that. When you left 
there were 10 food banks, and they were well entrenched 
because you did not put money into social programs in the 
1980s; I know that and you know that. Low income people fell 
further and further behind. I can tell you that from '91 to '92, 
we've gone from having . . . the last official stats available, I  



March 16, 1995 

 
920 

think, in Saskatchewan, the number of children in poverty was 
21.9. We've actually stayed about the same — not good enough 
but we stayed about the same. Now that's '93-94. I'm sure the 
picture when those results come out, we will have done much 
better. 
 
But in Alberta, the child poverty rate has worsened by 5 per 
cent, while we've remained the same. Now you like to draw on 
Alberta selectively, and Alberta has lost ground on the child 
poverty front. We have moved up. Relative to other provinces, 
we've moved up two notches. Alberta has now the second 
highest family poverty rate in Canada. Can you believe that? 
Alberta has the second highest rate of family poverty in Canada 
— the model that you believe is the outstanding model, the 
second highest family poverty rate in Canada, with all of their 
resources and wealth. 
 
I have here an article from the Leader-Post which you would 
have seen yesterday, and the headline is: "Food banks growing 
in Alberta." And I quote; it says: 
 
 People are turning to Alberta food banks at twice the 

pace (at twice the pace) as people in other parts of the 
country, says the former head of a national food bank 
association. 

 
Someone who has a national sense of what's happening on food 
banks. And then he goes on to say: 
 
 " . . . the number of people who use the food bank is 

proportional to the amount of cuts (that have happened) 
. . . at the provincial welfare level." 

 
And then he goes on to say, and I'm just about finished here, he 
says: 
 
 "They're (the people are) looking with great anxiety 

toward the welfare model that's being brought down in 
Alberta. They're very anxious that it will catch on, and 
it's the kind of disease we don't want." 

 
(1545) 
 
So Alberta has the second lowest rate of child poverty in all of 
Canada and that's a model that you like. They have cut tens of 
millions of dollars and you admitted yourself — if I understood 
what you said in your throne speech; I was reading this just 
yesterday — that you like the way Alberta has tackled the 
deficit. But 75 per cent of the Alberta deficit has been on the 
backs of low income people. 
 
And Manitoba alone, another Tory government, cut $10 million 
this year alone, cut $10 million alone this year from shelter aids. 
That is the Tory approach, which is going to mean that people 
are going to have to take food money for shelter in Manitoba. 
So that's what our neighbouring provinces are doing, our two 
Tory neighbouring provinces are doing. 
 
So we're in a situation where Alberta, the second highest rate of  

family poverty in Canada, second only to Newfoundland if you 
can believe that. And that's the model you like. 
 
Well that's not the model that we accept. And I want to share 
with you, because I know you get the labour force report, July 
of 1995, that total employment is up 9,000 over this February 
over last February — total employment is up 9,000. 
 
Now surely you would acknowledge that those figures are true 
and that that's a good sign for unemployed, people who aren't 
working and people who hope to be working. So I would 
suggest that that didn't happen by accident, that the Partnership 
For Renewal strategy is working. 
 
In fact last night out at a function with the home builders, I 
talked to 10 or 20 people who made it very clear to me that the 
fact that the province has got the financial house in order here 
and has got such a partnership in economic development and 
has given small business people a tax break, that that bodes well 
for the economic future of the province. And they're very 
confident. 
 
Now I mean those are external people saying that. We continue 
to have the second lowest unemployment rate in Canada. I 
know you would acknowledge that because that's public 
information. As well from the labour force report in February, 
you will note that for young people ages 15 to 24 we posted a 
6,000-person increase over this time of last year. And the 
unemployment rate dropped 1.6 points for young people in that 
category. 
 
Now that's not good enough because there is still unemployed 
people, but that is progress. And again, I hope if you're really 
concerned about low income people, as I said before, you and 
your Liberal friends will support the child action plan which 
directs more money to hungry children. And also you will 
support the programs like Future Skills and JobStart which is 
designed to support young people in becoming employed. 
 
And you will support our day care initiatives. And if the 
Liberals will give us a little help instead of ducking votes, they 
will take the opportunity to talk to their federal counterparts 
about what they believe is going to be the impact, the impact of 
a hundred . . . Well the member from Shaunavon laughs about 
this but the point is that isn't he concerned? First of all isn't he 
concerned about the cutting of the Crow or the impact on 
farmers there? And the impact on all of Saskatchewan, I might 
say. He's laughing about this. 
 
And secondly, isn't he concerned as a Saskatchewan citizen, 
and isn't he concerned about 115 . . . $20 million dollar cut, as 
he smiles, to the health, education, and social services, of 
federal offload? I mean isn't he concerned about that? That'll 
have devastating consequences for this province. And you 
know, at least if he's not going to stick up for Saskatchewan and 
Ralph Goodale is not going to stick up for Saskatchewan, at 
least Warren Allmand is sticking up for people you purport to 
be concerned about today. 
 



March 16, 1995 

 
921 

And Allmand says, and I quote from yesterday's Leader-Post I 
believe, he says that he will not: "back a budget that breaks 
election promises and betrays party traditions . . ." That's what 
he's saying about the Liberal, the federal Liberal budget that's 
going to offload another $120 million onto this province. 
 
Now I would doubt very much if the member from Shaunavon 
or Regina North West talked to the Prime Minister last night 
about the impact of those offloads to the province of 
Saskatchewan. But at least Warren Allmand is doing that. And 
he goes on to say further, he says topping the list of his dislikes 
is "slashing funding to provinces". He's sticking up for 
provinces; why don't you from Shaunavon, Mr. Member? 
 
And he says: "slashing funding to provinces for higher 
education, welfare and health care and roll(ing) all the money 
into a single block . . ." And he says: "When that bill comes 
before us, I'll be voting against that. 
 
At least Warren Allmand is sticking up for the provinces; I don't 
know why the member from Shaunavon and the member from 
Regina North West aren't, as they sit there laughing from their 
seats. This is not a funny issue. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize. My 
attention was diverted. Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You were 
talking about side issues. Well you sure . . . if that wasn't going 
into a lot of side issues, I've never seen it. I'll try to be more 
specific. The question I asked was what were you going to do 
about Bill 33. And I can't remember elaborating too much on 
that except to suggest to you that it's been accepted in many 
other places. 
 
Now you went into the debt, which seems to be a favourite 
backup. You don't remember to tell the folks that you left $6 
billion yourself when we took over government in '81, that there 
was $6 billion in the Crowns. That was yours, but you don't tell 
it. So all the debt has to be Grant Devine's, the Devine 
government, which is fine. 
 
You talk about jobs. Well, Mr. Minister, if you do have any 
new jobs since last January, where else is there to go? You can't 
go anywhere but up. You've chased everybody out of the 
province that wants to work because there isn't any. So naturally 
your unemployment figures are low because there's nobody left 
but old folks and people that don't want to work which you put 
on to welfare. 
 
You talked about . . . you also got into Alberta, and you talked 
about how they balanced the budget. Well I can tell you, sir, in 
Saskatchewan when you balanced the budget, you laid on 
$4,800 a year on a family of four. That sure didn't happen in 
Alberta. 
 
Mr. Minister, I fear of asking you another question because I'm 
not too sure where you'll get to in the rest of the afternoon. 
However I'm going to defer to the member of the third party 
who wants to ask you a few questions, and she has another 
commitment, so I will defer to her for now, and you and I can  

visit later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I'd like a brief response. Just a very, very 
brief response just to say that I don't know what else to say to 
the member. I said that in the next day or two I'd get back to 
you. That's a direct answer to your question, but I can't let two 
things go past. 
 
Get the notion out of your head that people are still leaving 
Saskatchewan because that is not true. People are not leaving 
Saskatchewan. Look at the last six, seven quarters. People are 
moving in. So I mean get that straight at least and don't 
perpetuate that. People left in the '80s. As has been said in this 
House, I think by the Minister of Health yesterday, this is the 
'90s now and all kinds of things have changed. 
 
Secondly, you say about Saskatchewan . . . I hope you read 
tomorrow what you said. You said that there's nothing left to 
Saskatchewan except old folks, people who don't want to work, 
and those on welfare. Is that your assessment of what's left in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
That's about it. You offend, you offend the 445,000 people who 
are working in Saskatchewan when you say things like that. 
And you should be ashamed of yourself. You're saying all that's 
left of Saskatchewan is old folks, those who don't want to work, 
and welfare people. And I mean I'm very sad to hear you say 
that and I hope you didn't mean it that way. 
 
But to answer your question, the next day or two, I told you I'd 
get back and you'll be the first to know. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to your officials on behalf of the third party caucus. 
 
Mr. Minister, when government departments began the process 
of budget preparation last fall, you must have had some 
direction from the Department of Finance on how to go about 
planning your budgets for this year. Could you tell me, please, 
what those directions from the Department of Finance were, 
including what the spending areas were that you were instructed 
to look for spending cuts or efficiencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well first of all, let me say that I 
welcome the question from the hon. member. 
 
First of all, let me say that we did not have any directions from 
the Department of Finance to say here's your cuts and then you 
make your decisions. That's not how the budgeting process 
works. 
 
We go to the Department of Finance and my colleagues here 
with a plan as to how we can support low income people, how 
we can strengthen the services for those who are the most 
vulnerable, and how we can partnership with communities to 
make sure that the infrastructure of income security and the 
links with education and training and skills development 
programs and health care . . . those are all interrelated. And one 
of our major strategies — which incidentally you continue to  



March 16, 1995 

 
922 

vote against — is the child action plan. 
 
And we go in an integrated fashion like that. And then we 
negotiate around . . . I can tell you that my budget isn't cut this 
year. Well you would know that from reading the budget. So 
unlike the federal Liberals, where Mr. Axworthy can't negotiate 
. . . he can negotiate with me one day but not the next, and we 
reached some agreements one day and not the next. He doesn't 
know where he stands because he doesn't know what his budget 
cuts are; we don't plan that way. 
 
We take forth a plan which we believe is comprehensive, and 
then we negotiate around that, and that's how we did our budget 
planning based on a set of priorities. And we're very proud of 
the fact that we're continuing to balance the budget in this 
province and develop a debt reduction plan, and that we've also 
been able to marginally, marginally enhance supports for low 
income working people and people who aren't able to work. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for your 
answer, Mr. Minister. In speaking about the federal 
government, I wondered if you would please table the federal-
provincial funding agreements that you have signed in the past 
year, or agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I wonder if you could clarify what 
agreements you're talking about, please. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — The question I'm asking is: how much 
money comes from the federal government that goes into your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, that's approximately 43 per cent of 
all the departmental expenditures come from the federal 
government, which I might add continues to shrink. But this 
year it will be approximately 40 per cent, 43 per cent. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Could you tell me what areas that 43 per 
cent — and the amount that the 43 per cent is — what areas that 
money is spent in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes. That money goes . . . About 200 
million goes towards social assistance, child welfare services, 
community living for persons with disabilities, and some grants 
to some non-government organizations. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could I have a 
detailed listing of the amounts that go to those various 
programs? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we'll compile that and send it over 
to you when it's available, if that's okay. For this year, this 
current year. Okay. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, have you initiated 
any new suggestions or program applications to the federal 
government? And if so, what are they? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, we've had discussions with the 
federal government with regard to the need and desirability for 
child care improvements or child care. And from the federal 
perspective, of course, the promise is in the red book on child 
care. 
 
Secondly, we've had discussions with the federal government 
and with our provincial counterparts about maintaining an 
important federal role in the national standards of social 
programs. 
 
Thirdly, we've had discussions — very detailed discussions — 
with them with regard to the redesigning of the social welfare 
system, the social network, if you will, to ensure that there are 
supports for . . . employment supports for low income people. 
And we were a little more optimistic in the past than we are 
now that in fact there will be the ability to continue to some 
fruitful conclusion here. 
 
We're hopeful. We're going to continue to press to do that. But 
it doesn't take a rocket scientist to know that if you're going to 
cut $120 million from this social envelope, that this is going to 
be problematic, to put it mildly, for not only Saskatchewan but 
for many other provinces. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Minister, you just mentioned that you 
had renewed optimism. On what basis do you have renewed 
optimism that this will be positive for the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I want to clarify. I didn't say I was 
optimistic; I said I was optimistic prior to the federal budget. 
Now I'm not very optimistic. And the reason I'm not as 
optimistic of course . . . I'm talking about the 120 million that is 
going to be lost. And again I hope and plead with you that you 
will share what you said to the Prime Minister last night about 
this being devastating -- devastating for health, education, and 
social services in this province. 
 
But I'm not optimistic as well because the young offenders’ cost 
sharing has not been increased since 1989, and I don't see that 
happening now, given the federal budget. So in the face of 
increased pressures on young offenders, there's been no 
increase in their sharing since 1989. We understand there will 
be a decrease there in that cost sharing, as well as the similar 
decrease in legal aid. And of course in the face of the $52 
million offload on UIC (Unemployment Insurance 
Commission) and with INAC (Indian and Northern Affairs 
Canada) and the fact that the capping, the cost sharing is now at 
43 per cent rather than 50, it's pretty hard to be optimistic about 
any partnership with the federal government that we'll be able 
to help people. 
 
We're going to have to just keep pressing. And we badly need 
your support to talk to your federal counterparts. Your leader, 
who sits in front of you, can distance herself all she wants from 
the federal budget, which she tried to do . . . the federal 
government, which she tried to do last night. But Saskatchewan 
people will remember that this Liberal here is the same Liberal 
that's in Ottawa. A Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. 



March 16, 1995 

 
923 

A Liberal is a Liberal. And I doubt that you did talk to the 
Prime Minister about the impact, the impact of the continued 
federal offloads. For the life of me, I can't imagine why you're 
not concerned about that. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have some other 
questions for you, and I'd like to come back to that later. 
 
In terms of salaries, the Estimates document shows that 68.1 
million will be spent for salaries in your department, as opposed 
to 64.2 million last year. The total number of full-time 
equivalents for this year goes from . . . is nineteen hundred 
thirty-nine point eight compared with eighteen hundred ninety-
five point three last year. Can you tell me what the reasons are 
for this increase of 44.5 full-time equivalents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, the positions you refer to, 27.5 into 
three adolescent treatment group homes — that's for the 
increase there, an expanded service — three adolescent 
treatment group homes that we've developed in the province. 
And 18 full-time equivalents towards young offender custody 
facilities at Dales House . . . and Dales House. 
 
So that is what I was talking about earlier. The pressures are on 
the young offenders' program. The increased staffing relates to 
that. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Before we leave the matter of salaries, 
could you tell me if any of the following persons are employed 
by your department? And if yes, provide me with complete 
details on when you hired them, their salary, and their job 
description: Allan Barss, Susan Bates, Fred Bird, Paul Faris, 
Nina Francis, Yvonne Grey, Tom Halpenny, Michaela Keet, 
Ethel Korol, Sharon Lyons, Carol Marynook, Ian McCuaig, 
Debi McEwen, Stewart McPartlin, Andy Prebushewski, Janis 
Stocks, Elaine Torrie, Wendy Ward, Gail Wartman, Tim 
Whelan, Virginia Wilkinson, Taisha Wingerchuk. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well if you could send a list over, we'll 
check it out. I can't answer that right now. So if you could send 
it over, we'll take a look at it and get back to you on that. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, how 
many people are involved in the communications function in 
your department? What are their salaries and position titles and 
descriptions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes. There are four . . . Are you going to 
send me the list of the people that you mentioned earlier? Okay. 
There are four people in that area in sort of the public 
education, communication and program supports, and 
awareness. So in a sense four in that . . . unit are we calling it? 
In that unit. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — And what are their salaries, position titles, 
and job descriptions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes. We'll send it over with the rest of 
the information if that's okay? 

Mrs. Bergman: — Sure, that's fine. Mr. Minister, Has your 
department done any work with Phoenix Advertising in the 
1994-95 fiscal year to the end of December, say. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes we have. The cost has been 
approximately $50,000 for placing ads across Canada for 
competitions. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Were those the only projects they did was 
the advertising for jobs? And what was the entire cost of each 
project, and any other details you can provide regarding the 
work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — This will be covered in the standard 
questions that are sent over. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, what are all of the 
fees for licences, inspections, and other things like that that 
form sources of revenue for your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — My officials can't think of any that there 
may be. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Could you tell me . . . there are no fees or 
licences at all that apply to your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I'm not sure how to answer that. We have 
no licence fees of any kind in the department in terms of our 
revenue. We have some fee for services — for adoption service 
for example. If you're looking for the source of all the revenue, 
we'll send that over and you can take a look at it. 
 
I'm not sure exactly what you're getting at. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — That other things that there are fees paid 
for, adoption services is one. Are there any other services that 
the fees are paid for by the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — That is the only one we can think of, but 
we will send you a complete list of all our revenue sources and 
it would include those fees so . . . as well as the, sort of, the 
federal sources; as well as the federal sources. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's all the 
questions I have for now. I'll have some more for you at a later 
time. Thank you and thank your officials. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, what 
I want to do right now is I want to go through some questions 
that we got from constituents that comes under our "Mr. 
Premier" program. But these are related to your department and 
I would just like to ask them questions, and you can either 
answer them or not at your . . . If you'd rather we went to the 
Premier, well, okay. 
 
First question, Mr. Minister, comes from Kathy Sigstad from 
Zealandia and her question is, I want to know why my  



March 16, 1995 

 
924 

government stole our family allowance cheques. I made a 
choice — and a good one — to stay home with my children and 
be a wife and mother, and let someone else have a job outside 
the home. I don't expect my government to pay me for that, but 
the little bit of family allowance and child tax credit was very 
helpful to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much and thanks for that 
question from Kathy Sigstad, I believe you said. Actually the 
family allowance before it was eliminated was deducted as a 
source of income for as long as I can remember, including when 
you were in government. And this has since been converted to 
the federal child tax credit benefit which then is provided where 
appropriate, to low income families. So it actually was taken by 
the federal Conservative government under Mr. Mulroney. 
 
But I think that we're trying as best we can to provide supports 
to families. But that was a federal decision, that conversion. I'll 
be happy to meet with you to talk further about how that works, 
if you like. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. The questions, as you realize, don't come from me and 
we'll be forwarding the replies to the constituents. 
 
This question comes from Randy Thompson from 
Lloydminster. And Randy wants to know why social assistance 
recipients are not held more accountable for the hard-earned tax 
dollars we provide: I am aware of cases where clients have been 
allowed to withdraw, without valid reason, from programs 
designed to promote independence and there have been no 
repercussions to their continuing eligibility for benefits. It 
disturbs me that clients are allowed to manipulate social 
workers and thereby allowing welfare to become a lifestyle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I'd like to thank Mr. Thompson for that 
question and I would suggest if Mr. Thompson has a specific 
case or cases, would like to refer those to me, I'd be happy to 
look into them. 
 
I think though it's important to say that we believe — and we're 
open to ideas — we believe that we have clear expectations of 
people on assistance with regard to pursuing employment, 
education, and training opportunities. 
 
In fact, if you look at the eight . . . I think if you look at the 11 
offices we have throughout the province is the number of case-
loads are down in eight of those. And the number of cases are 
down substantially, particularly in the areas of employable 
clients, which I think is a reflection of the number of jobs that 
are being created in the province. And you and I have had this 
discussion before. 
 
I would also be happy to send Mr. Thompson a copy of the 
accountability measures that we have in place to try and ensure 
that we spend taxpayers' money as wisely as we can. And we 
believe that with the Provincial Auditor being by and large 
satisfied with our control measures that while we may always 
be able to make improvements, that we're doing a pretty good  

job. But if there's a specific case or cases, I'd be happy to look 
into them. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. This question comes from Sharon Brown and she's 
from Prince Albert. She says, I want to know why the system 
makes it so easy for young people to get welfare. Any regular 
family discipline problem they have and don't agree with, they 
go to the Welfare department wanting to get a place of their 
own. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, I thank Sharon Brown for that 
question. When young people, particularly under the age of 18, 
come to us to seek assistance, obviously we expect that the first 
avenue to explore or re-explore is with their own families. And 
we believe that that is a family obligation, to the ability of a 
family to do that. 
 
I might point out to Sharon, that the number of 16- and 17-year-
olds on assistance today is actually lower than it, I think, has 
been in five or six years. And so we believe that our efforts 
around greater supports to families, the initiatives through the 
child action plan and so on are making a positive impact at 
keeping families together and supporting families to support 
their own children. 
 
And there are a number of other things one could say, but we 
believe that we're exploring connections with your own family, 
staying in school and providing opportunities for yourself, and 
trying to take steps to secure the future that young people have. 
And I might add, as I said earlier, the incredible progress in 
reducing the unemployment rate amongst young people under 
25 over the last year I think has had a positive impact as well. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This next question 
comes from Donna Strang, and she's from Qu'Appelle. And 
Donna wants to know, what is going to be done to make child 
maintenance payments more fair to the children and parents 
who desperately need them? By taxing these payments you take 
away the little money we do receive and then wonder why our 
social programs are so severely used. As well, how long will it 
take for these changes to be made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, thank Donna — I believe — for that 
question. We believe that any support to this area is welcome, 
and our Justice minister is working with other Justice ministers 
and the national government to develop a national program for 
child support guidelines. 
 
And we also of course have added additional staff to legal aid 
over the last year, and we believe that there is important 
progress made on maintenance enforcement that has meant 
more money going to the mother with children and also has in 
fact resulted in some savings in the social assistance budget. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This next question 
comes from Holly Hordenchuk. And I apologize to everyone 
concerned if I mispronounced that name. She's from Assiniboia. 
And she wants to know if you intend to support the decision to  



March 16, 1995 

 
925 

allow single mothers to have child support payments tax 
exempt. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Of course the issue of taxation is before 
the courts, as you know. This is, in a sense, the area of federal 
responsibility. This is why our Justice minister is working with 
other Justice ministers across the country. You can't deal with 
tax treatment without dealing with the level of awards. So we're 
continuing to participate with our counterparts — the Justice 
minister is — and we hope this results in the satisfactory and 
fair conclusion for all those involved. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
supplementary to that. If Holly was to receive support 
payments, if they were tax exempt, would the welfare 
department consider that as income in her own situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, as you will know, that the social 
assistance program is basically a program of last resort. And the 
former minister from Rosthern, this has not changed since he 
was the minister. And basically if the award is high enough, if 
the maintenance order is high enough, the person may not need 
to be on assistance. 
 
Basically people are obligated to pursue all avenues of support, 
to become as independent as possible financially. And so if 
there are some people who get a sufficient maintenance award, 
that they . . . they're not on assistance at all. And those who are 
on assistance and get maintenance, that is part of the other 
income that they generate, and if there's an insufficiency in 
terms of their needs and their income, then they are 
supplemented by social assistance, which is the intent of the 
program. That's been the historical practice of that program. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate your answer. I wanted to develop that with you, as 
much for Holly's sake as mine, because that's something that 
she would probably want to take into consideration if this 
happens. And I appreciate what you said. 
 
This question, Mr. Minister, comes from L. Conners, from 
Archerwill. And he's asking . . . or she is asking, when will 
welfare cease to exist for young teens — young men and 
women who are able to work? I better read that . . . it's not quite 
the way it . . . 
 
When will welfare cease to exist for young teens — young 
women and men who are able to work. If they have no jobs, 
make the parents responsible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I thank Mr. and Mrs. Conners for 
the question. 
 
Well I would say that parents are responsible for their children, 
their teenage children. And of course there are fewer 16- and 
17-year-olds, as examples, on assistance today than there were 
in the past, and that's a steady but positive trend. 
 
The numbers are decreasing, and we believe this is why it's  

important to have good, long-term economic developments to 
create employment opportunities, which we've been very 
successful at, particularly over the last year, and why programs 
such as Future Skills and JobStart, which are particularly 
directed — JobStart — to young people to get them into the 
labour force is a very important initiative in this budget. 
 
And we look forward to the day where families will be strong 
enough, all families will be strong enough to support all of their 
members, and to where young people will have job 
opportunities as soon as they leave the school system. And 
we're working very hard with communities, small-business 
people, to make that happen. And the signs are very positive, so 
I'm optimistic about the future in that regard. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I heard you give the figures a while ago about the 
percentage of young people on welfare, and I appreciate that. 
 
Subsequent to that question, can I ask you, do you have a 
criteria that you follow? How do you check out whether this 
young person that just got in a bit of a tiff with their parents and 
left? Do they have to be out of the home for a certain length of 
time? Do you check the circumstances? And if the parents are 
financially able to look after their children, do you take that into 
consideration? Or in other words, can a parent be wealthy and 
still have a child on welfare? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, well I'll just repeat again, that 
families are responsible for their own children, and that 
eligibility for benefits for SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) 
clients, including 16- and 17-year-olds, require them to pursue 
opportunities within their capabilities. And that's a clear 
expectation. I think that's on the first page of the social 
assistance handbook. 
 
It also, if the young people happen to be 16 and 17, keeping in 
mind the numbers are going down, it requires that they maintain 
regular attendance in school. And there are times though, there 
are times — and we make this through contact with the parents, 
through our professional judgement — that family breakdown 
or rejection has occurred and we need to make sure through the 
Canada Assistance Plan that those in need are protected. 
 
And so we have in Saskatoon a fairly exciting project whereby 
young persons who are 16 and 17, their entry into the 
department is through one single entry point. In other words, 
they can't come in to get a service through different entry points 
in the department. So there's a focal point on 16- and 17-year-
olds which may very well be why the numbers are going down, 
because we feel we've got a good handle on this and that we're 
better able to make sure we support families to take on the 
responsibility and to have the capacity to do that. In fact we're 
looking at expanding this very successful project across the 
entire province. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand from  



March 16, 1995 

 
926 

what you said that in the range of 16 to 17 . . . what is the 
youngest age that a teenager can get a welfare cheque in their 
own name? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — The youngest age would be 16, and that 
happens very, very, very rarely. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we covered 
whether the parents who have the responsibility for their 
children and I'm not so sure I heard you say whether you looked 
at the ability of the parents to look after their children before 
you issued welfare help to them. But what can you do in a case 
like that? I mean is there limitations? And if so, what are the 
limitations for your department in that circumstance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, because the premiss is that parents 
are responsible for their children, so that is the first area that we 
try and pursue. And so it's done through contacting the family, 
through discussing the situation with them, making our own 
judgement and assessment as to whether there is some potential 
jeopardy for the child or the young person with regard to the 
possibility of abuse or that the young person could be in some 
danger. And then things like supervised room and board might 
be considered. 
 
But the goal is always in any aspect of the department to re-
integrate and to strengthen and support families and make sure 
they get the services that they may require. So again this single 
entry point we believe allows us to sort of make sure that we 
stay on top of that so we've got consistency across the region 
and hopefully then across the province. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
Then I take it that you don't really have a system of checking the 
ability of the parents to look after their own. And that as long as 
. . . If there's a danger of that child, that young person, being 
abused or something at home and you want to take it out of that 
circumstance, I guess I can accept that. 
 
But I think what I'm trying to get in my mind, as to how you 
operate . . . let's just . . . for the sake of the debate here . . . 
family who were very wealthy and their 16-year-old left home 
simply because they just didn't like the duties of carrying out 
the garbage or making their own bed. Is there a way that you 
would then make that family responsible for their own 
children? Or do you just pick up . . . or does that person get the 
social services even though their family are wealthy? 
 
Do you have a system . . . I'm not trying to put you on the spot. 
I'm trying to get the feeling myself as to why we see incidents 
where we believe that parents are comfortable, and yet they 
have children on welfare. And we've seen it. I'm not about to 
suggest that there wasn't a problem other than parental 
discipline. And I'm just wondering, how do we handle such a 
thing as that? Do you have any leeway in finding out the 
income of that family and their ability to look after their 
children? 
 
I hope you can get through that. That's what I'm trying to figure  

out. And I'll come back to it later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well specifically in the case as you 
described it, that young person would be denied assistance. And 
we deny many young people assistance. The system, or the feel 
for the system we're using, usually these cases or these family 
situations are fairly complex and there's been a history of some 
tension and some struggling. They're not usually just sort of 
straightforward. 
 
Some young person is mad because they — he or she — 
disagrees they've got to take out the garbage and runs to get 
assistance. There will be no cases like that where we would 
issue cheques. We don't issue cheques. The first thing we do is 
contact the family and to see what the situation is from the 
point of view of the parent or parents. And then, I mean, we 
have professional staff to make professional decisions about the 
ability of the family to function and manage with that person 
there. 
 
In terms of the well-to-do people, there is an expectation that 
people are responsible, families are responsible, for their 
children. If the family income is not sufficient, then they have 
the opportunity to apply, including with that person, and the 
family as a whole has to qualify. 
 
So basically we would deny the example that you referred to. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have one more 
question along this line, and I'm asking them as much for my 
own benefit as others. 
 
And as you say, there's probably situations where we think that 
the parents are well off and they have the responsibility to look 
after their children, and maybe if we were in your position and 
could find out some of the reasons, maybe there is justification 
for that to happen. 
 
The other question along this line I'd like to ask is, if the parents 
are on welfare and the young teenager becomes 16 and they 
decide that they don't like to live at home, and you would put 
that 16-year-old on a welfare assistance, would that 16-year-old 
be able to stay at home with the parents and draw a separate or 
different assistance cheque? Or would they have to be living on 
their own somewhere away from the parents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — No, the same applies whether you're on 
or off assistance; parents are responsible for the children. And 
so that young person would be at home with the family because 
the family is responsible. 
 
You know I appreciate your interest in this area. I would be 
happy to get across to you one of our application forms so you 
could see the things that are required. You have to list your 
income and your assets and all of your . . . the various requests. 
You sign a declaration verifying that the information is true. 
And then we have ways to try and ensure that that's the 
information, that the information that is there is accurate in 
terms of some of the verification that we've had previous  



March 16, 1995 

 
927 

discussions about. So that's kind of the process. And maybe if 
you saw the application form, that would help you see the 
process and the assessment that we go through. 
 
But in your case example, parents are responsible for the 
children, whether they're on or off assistance. A lot of people 
come on assistance, and they go off assistance, you know. 
There's a good movement through the system because people 
temporarily need to be on assistance, but they also move on to 
employment, training, and education programs as well. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We'll maybe just 
leave that for a little while. 
 
Here's a question comes from Murray Randolph from 
Aberdeen. And, Mr. Minister, this is a little different kind of a 
question. And it says, from Murray Randolph: what does the 
government plan on doing to help blind people beat prejudice 
and become employed in a rewarding job and become 
financially independent and not have to depend on the 
insufficient funds from welfare for a condition that cannot be 
helped? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Certainly that's a very good question. 
And I'll start my response by saying that we would be very 
happy to have someone sit down with Mr. Randolph if he 
would like to. Certainly we believe that disabled people have 
very important rights in terms of the opportunities for 
education, training, and employment. 
 
I know when I met with the council on the disabled last week, 
we went over some of these very issues. And I was pleased that 
— in fact I haven't even told the deputy minister this — but I 
was pleased that the council was very complimentary towards 
the Department of Social Services and the government in 
general in terms of the sensitivity and supports to disabled 
people. And they felt very, very positive about that, and we 
need to continue to build on that. And we were exploring ways 
in which we could work more closely together. 
 
As to specific programs for people who might be sight 
handicapped, I can't say there was something specific other than 
the opportunities to have some special needs considerations. 
 
The issue of beating prejudice and discrimination is a very 
important point. And I think that through better education and 
awareness, it's incumbent on all of us in government and in our 
communities to work hard to make sure that we have a society 
that is understanding, promotes tolerance and sensitivity to all 
of our members. 
 
And I think through the action plan for children we're trying to, 
as government, as many departments of government, to work 
with communities to strengthen families, to strengthen 
communities, to ensure that we all feel a sense of collective 
responsibility for the well-being of everyone. 
 
So if Mr. Randolph would like, we would be very happy to 
have someone sit down with him on his specific situation. 

(1645) 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. 
And we will pass that information on to Mr. Randolph. And 
what I'll try and do is I'll try and find out the actual address for 
him and send that over to your office. 
 
And I think I agree with you — a lot of times we are guilty of 
prejudice. And I think sometimes it's innocent in that we don't 
stop and realize that this person is . . . or that is handicapped. 
We walk by and don't acknowledge the fact that some people 
have had some tough luck. 
 
And I agree with you that we have to take a broader outlook and 
try to get these people into society in a meaningful position 
where they can feel good about themselves. I have no problem 
with that, and I certainly appreciate your response on this. 
 
The next question, Mr. Minister, that I have, comes from 
Marlus Kulas from Regina, and it's quite lengthy. So I'll go 
through it fairly slow so you can pick it up. 
 
And Marlus, M-a-r-l-u-s K-u-l-a-s, Marlus Kulas: I want to 
know why the changes to the post-adoption services didn't go 
far enough. Why should an adoptee or birth parent have to pay 
Social Services $300 for a copy of birth registration, when 
anyone else can go to the Department of Vital Statistics and get 
a copy for $20? This is very discriminatory. I am an adult 
adoptee, but I can't get a copy without birth-parent consent. I 
have been told by Social Services that my biological mother is 
dead. They won't even tell me where she is buried. We were 
hoping for more openness. 
 
Did I go too fast? If I did, I'll go through it again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, I appreciate very much this example 
from Marlus and I'm sorry to hear about her personal situation. 
Again we would be very pleased to have someone meet with 
her and I think . . . I know we would do that in a very sensitive 
fashion. 
 
Certainly the fee is not just for registration. There are other 
services that are provided for that. I think that the important 
thing to remember is that fee can be waived and often is 
waived. We certainly would not deny people access to the 
information like that and would be most willing to waive it if 
necessary. 
 
With regard to the post-adoption services, the recently 
announced strategy not going far enough, I think what we were 
trying to do is to balance the needs of everyone involved. And I 
by and large I think, would say that about 90 to 95 per cent of 
the feedback that I've had from the people who are primarily 
involved, that is the adoption parents, the birth moms, and the 
adult adoptive children, by and large they're very satisfied with 
this. 
 
But there are some who feel we didn't quite go far enough. And 
I might say there were some who felt we went a little bit too far. 



March 16, 1995 

 
928 

So what we're striving for is a matter of balance, and we went 
through a very extensive public consultations to make sure that 
we did have a balance because this is a very delicate matter. 
And it's a very complex issue and an issue where those people 
involved have a lot of strong feelings. 
 
So we believe that we're on the right track and would be happy 
to meet with Marlus as well to talk a little more about what we 
were trying to accomplish in our more open strategy. She 
wanted us to be more open and I think she would probably 
agree that it is more open than it was before. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I'm glad to hear that you do waive the fee because I 
had heard you in a previous exchange with the third party that 
you didn't have any other fees. And so when I saw this, I was a 
little concerned. And I do think you're on the right track in 
opening it up. Maybe it will take a little while, but I think I 
agree with you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, my colleague has a few questions on adoption 
while we're at it, so I will defer to him. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I believe 
it's two or three weeks ago I brought a question to your office, 
and I don't recall receiving a response or getting . . . a request 
that came by a mother in the Kipling area who had written me 
about her daughter, trying to find out where her daughter is that 
she gave up for adoption. I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you'd 
have any information regarding that. The name of the lady was 
Francis Emro from the Kipling area who had called me. And 
I'm wondering if you'd recall that. I sent a letter across to your 
office, and if there'd be any information that you might have 
regarding that request. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, I apologize. I remember that 
discussion with you, and I'll have to follow up because typically 
we are back within about 10 or 12 days in terms of response. If 
you've not heard, we get a lot of these, and I just don't 
remember the specifics. But I'd be very happy to look into that 
as soon as we leave here and get back to you tomorrow with 
some sort of progress report on that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, another 
concern was raised and brought to my attention and it's 
regarding a situation where a child has been adopted out but I 
believe the family still have the ability to have some contact, 
although they have lost contact recently. And I guess the 
question that was raised, is there a possibility of a family being 
able to have their child over, and in this case I think they're 
asking for the child to be with them or spend some time with 
them during the Easter break. 
 
Now I'm not sure all the details on it. I'll have to get some more 
information on it and get back to you. But it sounds to me like 
they do have contact with the child and there's some concerns 
as to whether the child is really being cared for properly in their 
adopted home, concerns that possibly the child is now being . . . 
or they're being given less of an opportunity to meet with the  

child or have opportunities to have the child in their home; 
come and visit them. 
 
And I'm wondering what takes place in these circumstances 
where a person is basically . . . I'm not exactly sure if it's a total 
adoption or they're put as a ward or put into  I forget the term 
I'm looking for -- another situation where they're . . . a foster 
home I believe is what I'm looking for — a foster situation. 
 
And I'm wondering how individuals . . . whether the individuals 
when a child is placed in the foster home, if that child has the 
ability, or if Social Services grants the ability for that child to 
spend time with the parents, and whether Social Services takes 
the time to make sure that that foster home isn't interfering with 
or restricting opportunities to visit with that child. 
 
And like I say, I don't want to be too specific as far as bringing 
a name forward, but I'm wondering if you could give me an idea 
about how Social Services handles a situation or circumstances 
such as this. And I'll try to get more specific information with 
you and bring it to you privately. But I'm just wondering what 
the process is where a child is in a foster home and the foster 
parents and there is opportunities for the child to visit with the 
natural parents and if they become restrictive. What's the policy 
of Social Services regarding this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I would be happy when you get the 
specifics to sit down with you and sort of go through that. But if 
I understand your question, it's a child who is in a foster home 
where the natural parents still are the guardians but they're 
officially in care of the department, but in the foster home. 
Those arrangements would be done through . . . First of all, the 
child would be in care due to a court sanction and the visiting 
rights and privileges would be done through agreement between 
the parties involved, facilitated and worked out with the support 
I think of the departmental social worker. I'm not sure what to 
say beyond that. That's sort of the typical process and usually 
it's by agreement. Then there's Easter visits and that sort of 
thing. But with regard to adoptions or a specific case, I'd be 
very happy to chat with you about it. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


