






















































March 28, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 28, 1995 

 

 
1177 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
to present today for the people of Carnduff, Gainsborough, and 
Carievale areas. 
 
The petition prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm pleased to present this today. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
have the opportunity to present petitions on behalf of the people 
from the Gull Lake, Tompkins, and some from the Regina area. 
 
I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate funding dedicated toward the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 42 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Economic Development: 

(1) has the minister contacted the federal government 
regarding the recently announced closures of all prairie 
agricultural employment service offices; (2) what action 
has been taken by the Economic Development minister 
to ensure agricultural employment service offices in 
Saskatchewan remain viable; (3) provide copies of any 
proposal and other correspondence between the 
Economic Development minister and the federal 
government on this issue; (4) the number of jobs that 
will be lost in Saskatchewan as a result of the closure of 
these offices. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to introduce 
to you and through you to other members of the House, friends 
of mine who farm in the Birsay-Lucky Lake area, very near 
Luck Lake, the wonderful sanctuary there for wildlife — John 
and Lindy Buhr. 
 
John and Lindy, as I said, are farmers in the area. They are very 
active participants in the community and the church and the 
Kinsmen and are generally one of the group of people that make 
Saskatchewan the wonderful place it is. I'd like you to join me 
in welcoming John and Lindy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, a guest in our legislature today in the 
east gallery. His name is Mr. Dennis Barnett. He was the mayor 
of St. Walburg for over 12 years, very instrumental in working 
on the Rural Health Coalition, and has fought for many, many 
years for tax fairness in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I'd be most appreciative if everyone would warmly welcome 
Dennis to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Presentation of TISASK Awards 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There is a 
business in my riding which has received recognitions for its 
contribution to the tourism industry. This past weekend the 
Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan, known as 
TISASK, held its annual awards ceremony in Regina. The 
Yorkton This Week and Enterprise was recognized as a media  



March 28, 1995 

 
1178 

organization which best increased awareness of tourism in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to congratulate the staff of this local newspaper for 
informing the public about the importance of tourism, an 
industry which means $900 million to the province annually 
and accounts for about 38,000 full- and part-time jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of the other winners included the Eastend community 
tourism authority, for promoting Scotty as a tourism attraction. 
The Saskatchewan Science Centre and the Kramer IMAX 
Theatre in Regina won an award for business marketing. Crown 
Life was recognized for supporting the province's tourism 
industry and the Grey Cup bid committee was honoured for its 
work in bringing the Grey Cup to Regina in 1995. In addition, 
Lianne Gusway of the Turgeon Hostel in Regina won the 
president's award of merit. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to all the winners and to all of 
the people who make Saskatchewan's tourism industry a huge 
success. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Esterhazy Writer Wins Award 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to congratulate a professional woman from Esterhazy in my 
constituency who has recently won an award for excellence  
Linda Ungar, a freelance writer who won gold in the press 
editorial category for her article called, "To my community." 
The article was published in the January, 1994 issue of Farm 
Woman magazine. 
 
Ms. Ungar owns her own communications company, 
specializing in freelance writing and advertising. This award 
obviously indicates that she knows her profession, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She has used her expertise over the past four years to build 
awareness in rural Saskatchewan on the issue of family 
violence. 
 
One such project was a video called Fear on the Farm, 
produced by Birdsong productions of Regina. Another is the 
article for which she has just won her award. The subject of her 
article then is as important and timely as her technical ability in 
writing it. 
 
As she said, the article was a way for her to talk to all rural 
communities on behalf of abused rural women who sometimes 
feel that they are alienated and misunderstood by their friends 
and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly we have discussed this problem 
and acted in a way we believe will alleviate it, but it is women 
like Linda Ungar who equally help people understand and 
resolve this lingering blight on our society. 
 

Congratulations to Linda Ungar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Stampeders Win Hockey Championship 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. Beat, thrashed, pummelled, 
topped, pounded, slaughtered, decimated — Mr. Speaker, you 
probably think I'm about to describe some 15th century war, but 
I'm not. I'm practising to be a sports reporter, and that's just 
some of the adjectives that have been used to describe the 
Meadow Lake Stampeders this past year and what they've done 
to their opposition. This past Sunday evening was no exception. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake Stampeders hockey team are 
again provincial champions. With regrets to the member for 
Humboldt, the Stampeders defeated the Watrous Winterhawks 
4 to 2 to win the SAHA (Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey 
Association) senior B provincial title. The Stampeders won the 
best of three series, two games to nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am told that Stampeders' goalie Rick Dallyn 
made several gargantuan — that's reporter talk for big — saves 
at critical points of the second and third periods of Sunday's 
game to help the Stampeders win the title. 
 
With only about six minutes left in the game, Watrous got a 
goal to narrow the score to 3 to 2. In a last-ditch effort, the 
Winterhawks pulled their goalie in the final minute, but couldn't 
score on Dallyn. Old soft hands — that's hockey talk — Joe 
McKay scored two goals for the Stampeders, and Shane Buchta 
and Brent Ross added singles. 
 
Congratulations to the Meadow Lake Stampeders hockey 
players, coaches, and staff, for winning the provincial title. It's 
our first at this level in 25 years and I know the entire 
community is proud of their accomplishment. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Official Opening of the Consulate General of Kazakhstan 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say a 
few words about the official opening of the consulate general of 
Kazakhstan in Canada. 
 
It was my pleasure to have been invited to participate in the 
official opening today. Unfortunately my duties here prevented 
me from travelling to Toronto for this event. However, I've had 
the pleasure of travelling to Kazakhstan and visiting with 
members of parliament, principal cabinet secretary, and also 
being in their parliament. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the country of Kazakhstan is very young. It 
declared independence December 16, 1991 and became an 
independent state when the Soviet Union dissolved on 
December 26, 1991. 
 



March 28, 1995 

 
1179 

Mr. Nazarbayev was elected president at that time, and in 
legislative elections held March 7, '94 his party won a sweeping 
victory. My family and I were pleased to host President 
Nazarbayev at our ranch when he was in Saskatchewan at the 
invitation of the former premier, the member from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that Kazakhstan, which was twinned 
with Saskatchewan on November 30, 1989, has a presence in 
Canada and that this country will continue to forge its ties, both 
economic and social, within Canada and its provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thorrablot Celebration in Wynyard 
 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let me try 
out a couple of words on you. The first one is easy: thorrablot. 
The second one is vatnabyggd. 
 
Anyway, last Saturday in the town of Wynyard, which I can 
pronounce, I was happy to attend the annual thorrablot 
celebration, this celebration presented by the Icelandic Club of 
Saskatchewan. And even if I can't pronounce it, I and everyone 
else in attendance had a good time. 
 
Thorrablot, Mr. Speaker, is the Icelandic spring festival. 
January 27 is the first day of the ancient Icelandic month of 
Thorri, the month in Iceland when the sun reappears over the 
horizon, which is certainly a great cause for celebration. 
 
Traditionally, March has become the time for Saskatchewan 
Icelanders, and Icelander Wannabees, to hold this traditional 
celebration. 
 
As a mark of how effective this celebration is, we can note that 
the weekend festival was followed by a great amount of snow 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of us are aware, I think, that a large number 
of Icelanders immigrated to Manitoba around the turn of the 
century following massive earthquakes on the island. And we 
also know that they and their descendants have made a valuable 
contribution to the cultural mosaic of Saskatchewan. We are 
not, perhaps, so aware of the Saskatchewan Icelandic 
community as others, represented by this happy celebration in 
Wynyard with the traditional food and song. 
 
I was happy to be present, and I look forward to attending next 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Council of Women 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I was 
privileged to attend the 100th annual meeting of the Regina 
Council of Women. The council is a federation of organizations 
composed of women, or men and women, whose aim is to serve 
as a medium of communication and to promote the application  

of the golden rule to society, custom, and law. An aim, I would 
hope, that all members of this Assembly share with the council. 
 
The council was founded by Lady Ishbel Aberdeen, wife of 
then Governor General of Canada, on October 15, 1895. Since 
then, Mr. Speaker, the work of the council has been a good 
reflection of the concerns and campaigns of Saskatchewan 
society. 
 
In the beginning, for instance, in a more rigid time, the council 
supported rescue homes for unfortunate girls, and pensions for 
widowed mothers. They formed the first cottage hospital, 
among other worthy causes. 
 
Later, again reflecting the time, it advocated raising the 
minimum wage, increasing support for seniors' programs, and 
most recently, supported the World War I Memorial Project. 
 
Today, they're interested in, among other issues, child support, 
immigration policy, sustainable energy. There's obviously a 
common thread here continued for its hundred years and that 
goes directly back to its stated purpose of making the golden 
rule applicable in the real world. 
 
The Regina Council of Women has worked, and worked 
effectively, to ensure that we all do unto others as we would 
them do unto us. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce my daughter who is sitting in the 
west gallery, and her friend, Beth Guisteau. My daughter is in 
town getting her teeth fixed and I know the cheque she carries 
is pretty big. And I just want to remind her, leave my keys when 
you leave town, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests as 
well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of this Assembly, three gentlemen 
who have joined us and sitting in your gallery. Mr. Murray 
Newman, Mr. Ralph Tanner, who are councillors for the 
community of Moosomin, and Mr. Bob Wilson, the 
administrator. They're in the city to not only observe the 
proceedings but looking forward to meeting with the Minister 
of Highways. And now the Minister of Highways knows who  



March 28, 1995 

 
1180 

his guests will be at 4 p.m. 
 
I'd like the members to join me in welcoming our guests today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — May I also have leave to introduce 
guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I will be brief. The gentlemen just 
introduced were people that I knew when I lived in Moosomin. 
I was going to say how long ago it is; I think I'll just reserve that 
comment. Some years ago I lived in Moosomin, I knew and 
worked with these people, and they are indeed a credit to their 
community. I want to join my colleague from Moosomin in 
welcoming them here to the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Crow Benefit Pay-out 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the 
opposition caucus would once again like to present questions 
on behalf of members of the public to the Assembly. As you 
know, Mr. Speaker, we send the government's answers to the 
people who sent in the questions, and we've started to get some 
feedback from these individuals. 
 
Mrs. Joan M. Williamson from Pambrun, Saskatchewan, says: 
thank you for presenting the questions which I had submitted. I 
think this is a valuable service for the residents of 
Saskatchewan. This is very typical, Mr. Speaker, of the kind of 
response that we get from individuals. 
 
My question today is from Ervin Kvisle of Regina. And he says: 
Mr. Premier, I want to know, since the Saskatchewan 
government has large land holdings under the former land bank, 
what will be done about the one-time pay-out to end the Crow 
benefit which is to be paid to the landowners? Will the money 
go to the General Revenue Fund, or to the producer, or will it 
go to reduce deficits as done in the past budget with the GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program) pay-out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite probably should be directing his 
question to his colleague sitting to the left of him. 
 
We don't know yet; we haven't had a final decision from the 
federal government as to how they're going to pay out this 
money. They're saying — the last I heard is before Mr. Goodale 
left for South America — is that, well, they're still considering 
it. They think they're going to pay it to the landowner. 
 
As the member pointed out, we are in the same position as 
thousands of thousands of other farmers in this province who  

have leases. Over 30 per cent of the land is leased and certainly 
a very, very small portion of that is what is Crown land. We are 
in the bind of trying to determine what we're going to do with a 
pay-out we're not sure we're going to get yet, and we will 
certainly reduce our rents or make offers to have people pass 
that money through with a purchase offer as soon as we find out 
what we're getting out of this tangled mess. Certainly we will 
have to do something on a temporary basis, as will all other 
producers in this province, if we don't get some answers very 
shortly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Surgery Waiting-lists 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question comes from Mary Woloshyn from Kuroki and it says: 
Mr. Premier, I want to know why there is such a long waiting-
list for surgery. My mom waited eight months for her hip 
replacement surgery. She deteriorated so badly that she ended 
up in a wheelchair. Now after surgery, it will take weeks, maybe 
months, of therapy to make her walk. Where are the savings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as it has always been and it 
remains today, that surgeries are booked in this province by 
priority according to medical need. And those medical needs, 
Mr. Speaker, are established and determined by the physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to report to the individual who writes 
and to members that overall, Saskatchewan has a very good 
reputation for waiting-lists for surgery. We have some areas 
where we need to do some work and we are working with the 
specialist hospitals and with those districts to try and improve 
that circumstance. But, Mr. Speaker, overall, the waiting-list for 
surgeries and specialist treatment in Saskatchewan is second 
best in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Size of Premiers' Staff 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question to the Premier comes from Frank Nickel from 
Langham, and he writes: Mr. Premier, I want to know, with 
Saskatchewan's low population and all your talk about 
cut-backs, does it not seem hypocritical of you to have, by far, 
the most costly staff of any western province? Even at that, you 
offer them raises when so many children are going hungry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to 
answer the question put forward by the member on behalf of 
Mr. Nickel. To say that it is not the largest staff by a long shot 
. . . I'm rather surprised the member from Rosthern would 
repeat that, being a member of the government which did have 
the largest staff, if not western Canada, in Canada from 1982 to 
1991. 



March 28, 1995 

 
1181 

It is in fact a staff which is there to serve the people. It's partly, 
mainly actually, on the one side the policy and the 
administration of government, the departments, and is very 
much in line. 
 
The members of the opposition are asking these questions on 
behalf of the people, as they would describe them, and I think 
that's not a bad idea at all. But I think what really should happen 
here is it would be nice if they would table all of the "Mr. 
Premier, I want to know" letters that they're getting. Would you 
table them today? Table them today because . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The members of the opposition say they do. 
 
Well I tell you, if they do, the ones that I get, of which I've got 
folders here, indicate that you're not even touching a fraction of 
the Premier's "I want to know" letters directed to you as to why 
you got us into this mess that you did and congratulating us for 
getting the province a little bit out of the mess that we're in. 
 
So put all the facts and figures on the table in these questions. 
 

90th Anniversary Celebration 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, this question comes from M.S. 
Hannem, from Melfort. Mr. Premier, I want to know how you 
can justify spending $1 million on 90th birthday celebrations 
which cannot be enjoyed by all residents of Saskatchewan due 
to the declining and unsafe medical care being provided in local 
health care facilities, especially in rural areas, due to your 
budgetary efforts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm 
pleased to be able to respond to the question that's presented on 
behalf of the constituent or the citizen from Saskatchewan. 
 
The 90th anniversary is something that has caught the 
imagination of people all over the province. There are almost 
700 communities and organizations who have now inquired 
about information as to how they might become part of this 
event which revolves around the Grey Cup, which is happening 
in Regina and in Saskatchewan in November. 
 
People of Saskatchewan want to feel good about themselves 
and they want to celebrate the recovery which they are 
experiencing after the last several years of some rather difficult 
times, some of which the members may have . . . some people 
will allege were responsible for, and some were because of the 
economic circumstances that were there. 
 
It's the 90th anniversary of the province. It's an opportunity to 
promote tourism in Saskatchewan like we haven't had for a long 
time, which in itself, Mr. Speaker, will be a great economic 
boost to all the communities in Saskatchewan. And that's why 
they're all interested in being part of the celebration that's going 
to be taking place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MLA Pensions 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a question to Mr. Premier. And this question comes from 
Theodore Halter from Dodsland: Mr. Premier, I want to know 
how you justify getting a pension that works out to around $40 
an hour for a 160-hour month when most of the people in this 
province make only between 8 and $10 an hour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure I fully 
understood the question but I will certainly be pleased to 
attempt to answer the question presented by the member from 
Wilkie. Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member again — 
which I have said in this House on several occasions before — 
that there was a major reform of pensions, not only of members 
of the legislature, but of public servants and of teachers in 1978 
and 1979, where at that time it was negotiated that the pensions 
thereinafter would be on a money purchase basis so that there is 
no continuing obligation to the taxpayer. 
 
People who are under that plan, which is most members of this 
Legislative Assembly, get the money that they contribute at 9 
per cent, which I might indicate is fairly high — but that's okay. 
It is matched by 9 per cent. It goes into a fund and then at the 
time when the person retires it becomes their annuity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that was the right thing to do, and this 
province under an NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
was ahead of all of the rest in Canada in doing that. 
 
Now it so happens that there are some people who were left in 
the old plan, which you cannot do . . . You cannot do these 
things retroactively without . . . retroactively, including public 
servants and teachers and others, and people who are already on 
pension — widows. There were some people who remained in 
the old plan and through the process of evolution and time, that 
eliminates itself. 
 
But we do have, because of the reforms of 1979, the best 
pension system in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Effects of VLTs 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm 
pleased that the Premier is usually willing to get up and answer 
my questions, and hopefully he will do it now as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have a question for you. Today on the front page 
of the Star-Phoenix, we see another condemnation of your NDP 
government's gambling policy. The mayor of La Ronge calls 
VLTs (video lottery terminal) a symbol of the NDP 
government's greed and arrogance. He says: 
 
 "Those machines bring down the standard of living of 

those who can least afford it." 
 
Now isn't that something, Mr. Premier. The NDP attacking the  



March 28, 1995 

 
1182 

standard of those who can least afford it. 
 
Mr. Premier, community leaders in La Ronge say your VLTs 
are victimizing the poor. They say property crime is up 50 per 
cent. And worst of all, they say that you don't care. Mr. Premier, 
when are you going to start listening? When are going to stop 
the harm that are you causing in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for his question. 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out that I wouldn't use the term, 
community leaders, too loosely because in my reading of the 
article there was one person who indicated their disfavour and 
two community leaders who indicated their favour with the 
VLT program. 
 
You know that we're concerned about the impacts this program 
would have, and because of that we've expanded public 
education, prevention and treatment services. We're the only 
province that has prevention programs aimed at youth, and 
we've spent a decent amount of money on dealing with 
prevention, education programs. 
 
Now if there's a crime problem, we believe as we always have 
that the solution to crime is jobs, and because of that, we've 
instituted a northern development fund with 4 million targeted 
assistance with new and existing ventures in the North; 
development of Saskatchewan gold mine, hundreds of 
construction jobs and mining jobs; McClean Lake uranium 
project with 250 million for construction, 200 full-time jobs — 
60 per cent to Northerners. And I could go on with a number of 
other initiatives. 
 
But I would point out that Dave McIlmoyl, who's a general 
manager of Kitsaki Development corporation for the La Ronge 
Indian Band, says they discussed this issue thoroughly within 
the Indian band before deciding to proceed. The Indian band 
represents 5,500 people, which is a third of that local 
population there, and they have decided that in order to be 
competitive within the tourism business they had to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Premier, let's try this again. While your 
minister rambles on, there is something that you could do about 
this VLT problem, and that's by appointing a new minister. This 
is the fifth minister, Mr. Premier, that you've bet on, and each 
time you've busted — each time. In fact I would go so far as to 
say that this is the worst minister of all so far. She blames 
gambling expansion on churches and charities. She calls 
stealing from your church a learning experience. And now she 
accuses community leaders in La Ronge of hyping their 
concerns about VLT addictions. 
 
Why would they do that, Mr. Premier? What motive would 
these community leaders have, other than the best interests of  

their community? 
 
Mr. Premier, would you not agree that these are legitimate 
concerns that these community leaders have? Or do you agree 
with your minister who says concerns about VLTs in La Ronge 
are being hyped? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I might find 
this whole approach a little more credible had I not lived in La 
Ronge for 12 years. And I know the conditions that exist there 
and I know that people are very fond of gaming there. That has 
always been the case. And so it does not surprise me that they 
also enjoy the VLT program in their community. 
 
I would repeat that Mr. McIlmoyl, representing the Indian band, 
has said that they had this discussion within the Indian band, 
who is also part of the community — a substantial part of that 
community, at least a third of the total population of that 
particular town area there — and they have decided to support 
the program. 
 
So I guess you have on the one hand Mr. Gabrush who doesn't, 
and on the other hand the Indian band who does. And you tell 
me, I guess, who we will be listening to on this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Well, Madam Minister, for a person who has 
lived in La Ronge to come up with an answer like that, all I can 
say is shame on you. That's all I can say, Madam Minister. 
 
And as I've said before, Mr. Speaker, the first step in solving 
any addiction problem is, first of all, admitting that you have a 
problem. Nobody over there, Mr. Speaker, nobody over there 
seems to admit that there is a problem. Crime is up by 50 per 
cent. People who can least afford it are blowing their pay 
cheques and their family allowance cheques. One bar owner 
calls it a sign of despair. 
 
The mayor says the town will never receive enough VLT 
revenue to address the social and economic damage that is 
being done in that community. But the minister gets up and says 
we can't help it, that there's no problem, it's all hype. 
 
Mr. Premier, the only hype is your government's pathetic 
attempts to downplay the serious problems that your slot 
machines are causing. Mr. Premier, I ask you, will you put an 
immediate halt to gambling expansion during the . . . and ask 
the Saskatchewan people during the next provincial election 
whether they really want VLTs in this province? Will you do 
that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now again you might be able to tell 
some of the people your story, but I would have to say to the 
member that I lived in La Ronge when the friendship centre ran  



March 28, 1995 

 
1183 

a little, tiny bingo with a small prize board; and then you guys 
came in, privatized bingo, increased the prize boards, and 
basically expanded bingo gambling by 2,500 per cent. 
 
I tried to provide some alternative programs, and your 
privatization of the bingo drew all the activity towards those 
bingo halls. Now I guess we could say that you started the thing 
and I'm not sure I've seen any evidence that you cared at all 
about it. There was no addiction prevention programs, no 
education programs, no attempt to show any social 
accountability at all. 
 
And I might add, if you care to have a referendum I suggest you 
talk to your pals in Alberta, maybe in Manitoba, maybe in the 
United States, and see if they'd care to withdraw so that our 
industry can be competitive on a different basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Increases 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday I tabled a document showing that people in 
Saskatchewan pay more provincial taxes and levies than any 
other province in Canada but one. Today I table further 
information derived from the Provincial Auditor's report that 
shows just how much the NDP has increased taxes since 
coming to power. 
 
It shows the total taxes went from just under $6 billion in 1991 
to almost $7.2 billion in 1994. An increase, Mr. Speaker, of 
$1.22 billion in just three years. 
 
My question for the Finance minister: these numbers are from 
the Provincial Auditor; how can you justify an increase of $1.22 
billion in taxes and levies in just three years when your 
government is just as big and expensive as ever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this with 
respect to the Leader of the Liberal Party, but this is really a 
grossly misleading and totally inaccurate statement of the facts. 
 
What the hon. member is talking about is revenues — not the 
taxation levels — the revenues. Everybody knows we've had 
increase in land sales, increase in oil activity, all kinds of new 
revenue which is generated from that. And she extrapolates 
from that the taxation levels. 
 
I mean this is absolutely a pattern of inconsistency which the 
Liberals have instituted over the last now several months of 
being footloose and fancy-free with the facts and the figures, 
trying to guise it up with the statements of the Provincial 
Auditor. You know this is absolutely inaccurate. It is 
misleading. It is confusing. And I don't know whether it's 
confusing because you're confused, with the greatest of respect, 
or whether you want to try to confuse the public of 
Saskatchewan. Please try to deal with the basic facts here. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, let's look at who has been  

footloose and fancy-free with comments, Mr. Speaker. In 1991, 
during the NDP campaign, the Premier, who is now sitting in 
the Premier's chair, said, and I quote: 
 
 I say the people of this province are fed up with 

Devine's taxes and we're going to change that. 
 
The Deputy Premier is on record for promising no tax increases 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1992, the Deputy Premier stated, and I quote: 
 
 The problem is on the expenditure side. We have a 

structural deficit. Revenues cannot fix this deficit. 
 
Good advice, Mr. Speaker, but advice the government itself did 
not follow. 
 
My question to the Premier: why would your government 
promise that the solution lies in reducing expenditures and not 
raising taxes when you obviously had absolutely no intention 
whatsoever to keep your promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, the hon. 
member's . . . I wish I could coin a phrase which would describe 
it. The Minister of Finance was the closest to it yesterday in 
describing it as flip-flop finance. And I mean that's basically it; 
flip-flop finance is describing the very, very misleading 
approach that the member is taking here. 
 
And I don't know honestly — I say this with respect — whether 
she's confused or whether she tries to confuse the people. Her 
basic lead question was: here is your revenue figure, 1.2 billion, 
from which she then says, that is the taxation level. I've already 
spoken to that point. If there had not been more people working 
— there are 7,000 since 1992; 9,000 more, February '95 from 
February '94 — more people working, more people paying 
taxes, higher revenues; that's an entirely different circumstance 
than what you're asking about. 
 
Farm income is up. We've had a very good year in 1994. The 
Crow rate now of course has thrown a bit of a pall — and that 
is thanks to you and your party for doing that — over all of 
rural Saskatchewan. We don't know about the deficit situation 
federally which has thrown a pall on us as well. But I think 
Saskatchewan people will pull through. 
 
I don't know what the hon. member is talking about. I think she 
just simply does not know her facts in this regard and it's very, 
very troublesome to try to see this portrayal of some sense of 
direction when clearly the member is lost somewhere in 
Saskatoon Greystone on financial matters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this government completely contradicts its own logic. 
First they say expenditures are the problem; then they say they 
raise taxes; then they say tax and debt reduction are the  



March 28, 1995 

 
1184 

priorities, but they commit 33 cents of every surplus dollar to 
more government spending. 
 
The Gaming minister, interestingly enough, says Saskatchewan 
is not an island, that we have to compete with other provinces 
and offer what they offer or the people will take their money 
out of this province and go elsewhere. Somehow the logic they 
used to justify their gaming policy is not actually ever applied 
to their taxation policies. 
 
My question to the Premier. Sir, when will you admit that if 
people might drive across the border to gamble, they might also 
drive across the border to avoid sales tax, and they might in fact 
definitely move across our borders to avoid the rest of your 
government's tax burdens. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
asks me to admit hypothetically that people might do this and 
they might do that. They might even ask some very confusing 
questions in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan as, I say 
with the greatest respect, you have today. 
 
I want to tell the hon. member, and this is indicated in our 
financial statements, our expenditures of government to 1999 
will — to be absolutely careful about this, I'm going by memory 
so if I'm a little bit wrong, I hereby forewarn . . . it's 4.3 to 4.4 
billion is our expenditure on government, right through to 1999. 
 
Compare that to Manitoba at 4.6. Compare that to Alberta, on a 
per capita basis, of over 6 billion. Our expenditures in western 
Canada are as low — I would argue lower — than any other 
provincial government. 
 
That's not the problem. The problem is you use the figure of 5.1 
billion; 5.1 billion is there, but you know what it is? It's interest 
at $850 million on top of that $4.3 billion operating. I didn't 
create that. Those Tories created that. I didn't create the deficit 
in Ottawa; the Liberals created the deficit in Ottawa. 
 
And so long as you have this kind of a profligate spending, then 
I tell you, you have the mess that the people of Canada have to 
work their way out of. We have done an admirable job — I 
don't mean as a government, yes as a government, but I mean as 
the people of Saskatchewan  in controlling our expenditures. 
 
Please don't play footloose and fancy-free with the facts and the 
figures. Do not flip-flop financially on your positions. Tell us 
the absolute truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, the government can't have it 
both ways. We cannot have lower taxes and more spending. I 
mean I agree with that. The key to lower taxes is reducing debt 
 reducing debt and reducing the size of government, which is 
something they have not done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Liberals are committed to lower taxes and reducing the debt.  

But it's the NDP who are truly confused on this. In her recent 
budget, the Minister of Finance had a chance to put our tax 
money where her mouth is. And my question to the Premier: 
you cannot expect people to believe that you are really 
committed to lowering taxes and paying the debt when you 
couldn't resist the temptation to spend one third of every surplus 
dollar on more government instead of further reducing the debt 
or further reducing taxes. 
 
Will you admit, sir, that your debt reduction scheme misses the 
point by spending one-third of every single dollar on more 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this gets curiouser and 
curiouser. For two and a half years in opposition the Liberal 
leader was saying the following: lower taxes, increase the 
expenditures of government by $300 million. We will be very 
shortly tabling an official document of the Government of 
Saskatchewan detailing $300 million more of government 
expenditures. In due course that will come out. 
 
Now she's changed her line to saying: no, she didn't mean what 
she'd been saying for two years — much like on gambling, 
much like on the statistics on unemployment, much like on 
anything she's been saying in life. Now she's changed. She's 
trying to take the position of the Conservative Party, sensing 
that the Conservative Party presumably is coming up in the 
popular support or something  at least judging by The 
Financial Post opinion poll of a few days ago which shows her 
at 30 per cent, shows the government party at 46 per cent, and 
the PCs (Progressive Conservative) at something like 14 per 
cent and increasing. 
 
I don't know what the reason for this is. But do not accuse us of 
this inconsistency. You're the one who is exhibiting flip-flop 
finance — flip-flop finance. 
 
This is not a question of adding to government the one-third 
surplus that she's talking about. These are programs to buttress 
the reforms of health care renewal, buttress the need for 
education and job creation. These are programs which have 
been announced in the partnership paper, in the wellness paper, 
in the agriculture safety net programs. These are not new 
programs. They're within a scheme and a plan. I only wish the 
people of Saskatchewan could hear from you just once a 
credible plan on anything that would last beyond one week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1415) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Canadian Cancer Society Call Centre 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the 
opportunity to represent the Government of Saskatchewan as 
part of a team of volunteers and corporate sponsors announcing 
another national call centre to be located in our province. 
 



March 28, 1995 

 
1185 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Cancer Society announced and has 
selected Saskatchewan as the site of its new national call centre 
because of the strong team work and innovative thinking 
exhibited by the Saskatchewan bid team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the government has been working in 
partnership with Saskatchewan industry to create a climate of 
investment and growth. Our efforts have met with particular 
success in the developing of new information processing and 
telecommunications technologies and eliminating the E&H 
(education and health) tax on 1-800 numbers which has 
attracted a variety of companies to set up call centres in the 
province. 
 
One of the most recent you may recall, Mr. Speaker, was the 
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Call Centre with the 
potential of 500 new, full-time job equivalents. With this new 
call centre, Mr. Speaker, we have $1.5 million operating budget 
and the potential of 20 jobs, and this is significant in the 
addition to our growing Saskatchewan call centre 
establishment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's also the first such project to marry two of 
Saskatchewan's most prominent strengths — our leadership in 
health care systems and technologies, and our internationally 
recognized expertise in information processing and 
telecommunications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan corporate sponsors represent a 
who's who of leading edge information processing and 
telecommunications technology. But equally, Mr. Speaker, 
important in this process is SaskTel, ISM (Information Systems 
Management Corporation), and Sears Canada, and they 
represent a deep commitment to the well-being and betterment 
of the community and to the society of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sears Canada, whose major call centre is located 
here in Regina with a branch in Montreal, has offered to assist 
with the promotion of the cancer information services and has 
offered to house the centre within their existing facilities at no 
cost to the Canadian Cancer Society. 
 
This achievement by the local cancer society volunteers is 
remarkable in itself and is a reflection of Saskatchewan's 
approach of cooperation and partnership and innovation, and 
that is an integral part of the way of life here in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that kind of creative thinking and non-profit 
corporate and interprovincial partnership we have found has 
been . . . enabled us to form an accomplishment, and this 
triumph makes us all proud to call Saskatchewan our home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the Assembly I want to say are 
proud of the fact and I'm sure all will join with me in thanking 
and commending everyone involved on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A few 
comments in reaction to the minister's announcement, I believe 
that we could call that. 
 
Any time, Mr. Minister, there are jobs being created in 
Saskatchewan, it's a situation where all of Saskatchewan will 
benefit, and all of the people in Saskatchewan should feel a 
little bit better. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, there's always this “however” attached 
to any announcements that you make. When we consider the 
fact that we are still in a deficit of 1,000 jobs compared to 1992, 
you still have a big catch-up factor to try to accomplish here. 
 
Now if we have international or even national companies 
coming to Saskatchewan, that is good. In most cases, Mr. 
Speaker, unfortunately it is in spite of this government, simply 
because when we had the big fanfare about the CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) coming into Regina . . . certainly 
we welcome that. We welcome that, but we know that the only 
reason that happened is because the employer, as the CIBC, is 
under a national charter; it's under national laws; it's under 
national labour laws. 
 
The kinds of things that this government has done to small 
business, to part-time workers, does not affect this particular 
bank and they can come in and be competitive in spite of the 
expense and the cost that would normally be assumed by the 
general employer as such, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we talk about those kinds of things, again we are 
pleased to see this announcement but I cannot help thinking, 
Mr. Speaker, what might have been — what might have been in 
this province had we not had those folks across the way 
decimating the business community in this province with the 
types of legislation that they have seen fit. 
 
So with those few comments, a plus and a negative — I'm not 
sure it comes out in the wash — but certainly I'm very, very 
pleased that there are a few more jobs in Saskatchewan at this 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan really has been very, very slow off the mark in 
pursuing call centres for our province. And the Liberal caucus 
is greatly relieved that Saskatchewan is finally getting into this 
particular market. 
 
In fact a lengthy article by Randy Burton outlined the 
deficiencies of this government in attracting this industry to 
Saskatchewan. We're absolutely delighted with any progress 
that is going to take place in development in the province, 
investment in the province, and in particular, jobs for the people 
in this province. 
 
So if this indeed is going to bring 20 jobs to some individuals 
of the 40,000 unemployed people or the 86,000 who are on  



March 28, 1995 

 
1186 

welfare today, we are thrilled that 20 out of those masses of 
thousands will now have an opportunity for employment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 2:22 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 01  -  An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the 

Briercrest Bible College 
Bill No. 02  -  An Act to amend An Act respecting Our Lady of 

the Prairies Foundation 
Bill No. 03  -  An Act to provide for the incorporation of The 

Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the 
Seventh-day Adventist Church 

Bill No. 04  -  An Act to amend An Act respecting 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to 
amend and consolidate "An Act respecting 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to 
amend and consolidate An Act to incorporate 
Saskatchewan Co-operative Wheat Producers 
Limited" and to enact certain provisions 
respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 55  -  An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 1996 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:25 p.m. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of 
sadness that I rise today on behalf of the Legislative Assembly 
and the people of Saskatchewan to note the passing of a very 
well-known and, I might add, extremely distinguished former 
member of this Assembly, the Hon. Mr. Justice Clarence Estey. 
 
Mr. Justice Estey's death occurred suddenly on March 5, 1995 
at his home in Saskatoon, and he was aged 77. He leaves to 
mourn his wife of 50 years, Virginia Grace, and their children: 
Jean, Susan, and Jim. He's also remembered by his brothers, the 
Hon. W. Z. — otherwise known as Bud — Estey of Toronto, 
former Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada; and a very 
distinguished physician and surgeon, brother Dr. Harold Estey 
of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to pass this Assembly's most sincere 
condolences on to Mr. Estey's family and friends, and I'd also 
like to do so on my own personal behalf and that of my wife 
Eleanore. We both came to know Clarence Estey and Ginny 
Estey when I was first elected to the Legislative Assembly in  

1967. In that first election we were selected to opposition, and I 
was seated somewhere about where the member from 
Shaunavon is currently seated, and the government of the day in 
1967 was that of the late premier, Ross Thatcher. 
 
It was, to put it mildly — I'll say a few words about this — a 
government which had a lot of interesting facets to it, but one 
of the very endearing and warm relationships, as far as I'm 
concerned, that developed was that involving Clarence Estey 
and his wife — not only with respect to myself and my wife but 
to almost all of the members of the Legislative Assembly. No 
matter how the battle in the House got heated up and how 
excessive our words on occasion might be, Clarence Estey was 
truly a gentleman and one who was able to rise above the 
particular partisanship to extend a hand of friendship. 
 
And I think I can say this, even today for new members of the 
Assembly, when this does happen from time to time, even if 
you're on the opposite side of the fence, it makes you feel a 
little proud of being a member of this rare institution. The 
privilege given to us to serve in this institution makes you feel a 
little more comfortable at home and it also, I think, is an 
important dimension in which the debate takes shape, in the 
way that public policy should generally be debated. I know that 
Eleanore received much good advice from Mrs. Estey during 
those periods when we served in opposition. 
 
Now Clarence Estey served in the legislature — and I'll say a 
word about that again, as I say, in a moment. He was born in 
Saskatoon in 1917 and was a proud resident of Saskatchewan 
for his entire life. 
 
The Estey family, Mr. Speaker, as most people will know, is an 
extremely distinguished Canadian family. In fact when I was 
invited to join the government of the former premier, Allan 
Blakeney, back in 1971, June of 1971, the year that we won 
office, and asked to serve as attorney general, I quite naturally 
walked into the office quite awestruck by the responsibilities. 
 
And as those who have served in the front benches know, the 
tradition is to have pictures of former ministers serving in the 
portfolios in the offices. And there, although I knew it but I 
didn't quite know it, was the picture of the Hon. James Wilfred 
Estey who was elected to the Saskatchewan legislature in 1934; 
was minister of Education in the Gardiner cabinet, Jimmy 
Gardiner's cabinet; reappointed to the Patterson cabinet; and 
sworn in as attorney general in June 30, 1939. He resigned as 
attorney general in 1944, having served in the dual capacity of 
minister of Education and attorney general. 
 
(1430) 
 
I quite naturally took an interest in this because I had actually 
known Clarence Estey before 1967 and before I walked into the 
Legislative Assembly. I can't say I had known him in any very 
personal way or very deep or intimate way, but certainly I had 
known him in Saskatoon and circles. He was a lecturer at the 
College of Law at the University of Saskatchewan, and at that 
time, I was a very, very, very, very young student working my  



March 28, 1995 

 
1187 

way through law school. 
 
And at that time, Clarence Estey, in addition to being a 
sessional lecturer, was also a person who was involved in 
serving as an examiner, as I recall, of me and my capacity to 
serve as a member, a full-fledged member of the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan. And it was then that the discussion of law was 
part and parcel of his role, of necessity, but as was obviously 
his nature, the discussion of political and policy life also took 
place. I remember that very much as a young student. 
 
And I have to say that, looking back at the period that I just 
finished describing, 1967 to '71 when I entered the legislature, 
going all the way before that, Clarence Estey was there 
encouraging that I should seek elected office, or at least be 
involved in political life. 
 
I'm not sure he knew which way I was going to head in terms of 
political party selection. But I know for sure that it didn't matter 
to him. He might have had a preference, but it didn't matter to 
him. He felt strongly to his last hours, I'm sure, although I 
hadn't seen him for some several months before that time, that 
public service was perhaps the highest calling that one could 
serve in the democratic institutions of our country and of our 
province. 
 
And so when I entered the legislative office and the attorney 
general's office in 1971 as attorney general, there I saw Mr. 
Estey Sr., and all of a sudden you realize how distinguished this 
family really is. 
 
Here is Mr. Estey Sr.; Clarence Estey, the person that we're 
honouring and remembering today, serving in his capacity. I'll 
say a word about that in a moment. Two brothers, Bud Estey, a 
retired justice of the Supreme Court of Canada and an 
outstanding jurist in his own right even today  members will 
recall his service to the people of Saskatchewan at the time of 
the NewGrade inquiry a few months ago . . . a few years ago 
here when we assumed office  and of course Clarence Estey's 
other brother Harold, a very accomplished physician and 
surgeon. 
 
These are people who have always contributed willingly, 
unselfishly, in a very dedicated way, dedicated manner, to 
improving the quality of life because they were and are proud 
Saskatchewan people with a proud Saskatchewan heritage. 
 
That was certainly the case with Clarence. Born in 1917, as I 
say, in Saskatoon, he served his province in a variety of ways. 
And it began I suppose most traumatically in defence of the 
nation during the Second World War. And there in active duty 
he was wounded at Caen in France. 
 
Upon return to Saskatoon after the war years, he served his 
community not only as a professional person but in a number of 
areas, including sitting on the Saskatoon School Board, both as 
the trustee and later as the Chair of the entire board. He was 
very active in his church, as was his wife, and he supported a 
variety of provincial sports and cultural activities. 

Clarence Estey practised law with distinction. He was an 
eminent barrister and solicitor of his time, right up until his 
election to the Assembly in 1967 — the same year that we 
entered together — and his service in the government of the 
former, late premier, Ross Thatcher, where he held a number of 
portfolios . . . Municipal Government was one of the them, as I 
recollect, and that he also retained with a great deal of 
distinction. 
 
I wanted to say a little bit about the Thatcher administration of 
the day, and I say this admiringly. It was a collection of very 
strong-minded individuals and very capable individuals of 
accomplishment and good record. They were solid, and they 
were consistent in their ideology and their approach. And 
although we had many, many bitter battles . . . and, Mr. 
Speaker, there were bitter battles in '67 to '71. 
 
The one example that I draw to the attention of the House was 
the battle on the issue of deterrent fees on health care. The 
Liberal government of the day introduced deterrent fees; you 
had to pay $2.50, as I recall was the figure, for every visit to a 
doctor and $2.50 for every day in hospital. Let's forget about the 
merits or demerits of that issue, simply to say for the purpose of 
this remembrance, that was a period of high debate; it was a 
period of high oratory. 
 
There was a sharp cleavage of philosophy and direction toward 
medicare. And the orators of the day were perhaps unparalleled. 
I do not say this disparagingly of any of the current orators that 
we have in the House in this current session of the Assembly, 
but they were really something. 
 
When Ross Thatcher got up to speak, you didn't know whether 
to hide under your chair or to leave the Assembly and take leave 
for a moment, or how to handle it, but you knew you were in 
for a Royal American barn-burning speech which was not 
personal, but was a defence of the ideology and the direction of 
the government of the day. 
 
Darrel Heald was another one. Davey Steuart of course was the 
debater with wit par excellence — no one could match Davey 
and his wit. If you ever tried — and I did on one or two 
occasions before I learned very quickly when to fight and when 
not fight with Davey Steuart — you always came out 
second-best. 
 
And there was Clarence Estey in the cabinet. He was not by 
nature of training, and I suspect by temperament, the kind of a 
person who would be bombastic, as the late premier, Ross 
Thatcher, was. I don't say this disparagingly of him. Ross 
Thatcher was a deep thinker but he had a bombastic nature of 
oratory; he was not as caustic or as witty as Davey Steuart. He 
didn't have the sense of real partisan passion that those other 
members in the front bench communicated. 
 
Not that he believed less in what he fought for — he believed in 
them just as strongly — but he had a different demeanour. His 
demeanour was one, I think, occasioned by his professional 
background. It was an argument based on logic, an argument  



March 28, 1995 

 
1188 

that felt you could, after the debate was over, test in the 
corridors without fear that it would end up on some television 
or radio or newspaper clip. 
 
You could exchange this in a legal context, in a kind of civil, 
gentlemanly, appropriate context, which would be very, very 
much the nature of the individual. He was a strong defender of 
his government, but he was fair. And I have to say this — there 
are stories legion about the control on the former, late premier, 
Ross Thatcher. I think a lot of those are exaggerated. 
 
Ross Thatcher, as I say, knew where he was going. A lot of the 
mythology is that sometimes he was unpredictable. I don't 
believe that for one moment. But if there was an element of 
unpredictability, Clarence Estey played a very solid, solidifying 
role, a sobering voice — a voice of balance which gave the 
government its direction and its purpose. That is a very strong 
contribution to any government; it's a strong contribution to the 
Legislative Assembly; it's a strong contribution to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well in politics, as we know, we get elected and we get 
defeated. And in the case of the Thatcher administration and in 
the case of Clarence Estey, the government was defeated in 
1971. As I alluded earlier, the time that I walked into the 
attorney general's office upon the request from Premier 
Blakeney, and Clarence Estey, as other very able members of 
the House, lost his seat at that time. 
 
In 1974, he was appointed a judge of the Court of Queen's 
Bench where he served ably again to his retirement. I will spare 
the House my reminiscences when I practised, on occasion, law 
for a while there and appearing before Clarence Estey. But 
again he exhibited all of the characteristics that I have attributed 
to him earlier. 
 
One last comment that needs to be made, and that is the role of 
his spouse, his devoted spouse, Virginia, who was beside him 
for 50 years. We say this over and over again, and I don't think 
we can say it too many times. This is a very tough business on 
us. And I'm not saying in the context of debate and questions 
and answers — yes, but it's just a tough business and it's getting 
tougher with the information flow and the media, all of the 
problems which attach to public life. And I think it is 
impossible to succeed, or very difficult to succeed, if one does 
not have the understanding of a spouse of the character, of the 
intelligence, of the principle, of the integrity of Mrs. Estey. 
 
She too was and is strong-willed and strong-minded. This 
wasn't the question of being simply a back-up voice, although 
that was the case. This was a partner as I could see it. In any 
event, I didn't know them in their personal family relationships, 
but in anything that I observed in the House and in the 
community of Saskatoon and area, she was a partner. There was 
an equality there and she had a strength — she has a strength. 
 
I'm sure that we don't pay enough attention and we don't 
acknowledge enough the role that our partners, that our friends, 
provide to us in fulfilling our overarching mission of public  

service to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I want to 
pay a special tribute to Mrs. Estey and to the children in the 
family for putting up with the difficult years that they must have 
been in public life, but being a partner in support of Clarence 
Estey's task in building a better province, as indeed he helped to 
contribute, and the province is better for his contribution to 
public life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly with those few brief 
words, seconded by my colleague the hon. member from Morse, 
by leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 
 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
 Clarence Leslie Baldwin Estey, who died in Saskatoon 

on March 5, 1995, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly representing the constituency of Saskatoon 
Nutana Centre from 1967 to 1971. Mr. Estey was born 
in Saskatoon on June 29, 1917. He received his early 
schooling in Albert and Victoria schools and at Nutana 
Collegiate. He continued his studies at the University of 
Saskatchewan, from where he graduated with Bachelor's 
of Arts and Law degrees. 

 
 On August 17, 1945 he married Virginia Grace Smith. 

Mr. Estey was a barrister by profession and a noted 
jurist. His distinguished legal career began with his call 
to the Bar in 1941 and followed with his appointment 
first as Queen's Counsel in 1956, and later as a justice of 
the Court of Queen's Bench in 1974. He served on the 
bench until his retirement in 1990. 

 
 Mr. Estey was proud of his Saskatchewan roots and 

devoted much time and energy to the service of his 
community, his province, and his country. 

 
 His public service began immediately after his 

university graduation in 1941, when he enlisted in the 
67th Light Anti Aircraft Battery of the Canadian army. 
He served for three years in Britain before landing in 
Normandy a couple of weeks after D-Day. He was 
wounded in France during the Battle of Falaise near 
Caen and evacuated back to Canada. 

 
 At home in his community, Mr. Estey was a member of 

the Law Society of Saskatchewan, the Saskatoon 
Kinsmen Club, the Rotary Club, and the YMCA (Young 
Men's Christian Association). He served on the 
Saskatoon Public School Board for several terms and 
assumed the responsibility of chairman of the board. 
Mr. Estey was an active member of the Knox United 
Church. Local artists also benefited from his patronage, 
as did his favourite sports teams, the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders and the University of Saskatchewan 
Huskies. 



March 28, 1995 

 
1189 

 In 1967, the focus of Mr. Estey's public service shifted 
following his election to the Legislative Assembly. Mr. 
Estey held several cabinet portfolios during his term of 
office, including Municipal Affairs, 1967; Indian and 
Metis Department, 1969 to 1970; Industry and 
Commerce and Minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, 1970 to 1971. 

 
 Although Mr. Estey was unsuccessful in retaining his 

seat in 1971, he returned to his law practice and 
continued the pursuit of his many interests. 

 
 In recording its own deep sense of loss and 

bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, the member 
from Morse constituency. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of the official opposition to express with sorrow and 
regret the passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
express our grateful appreciation for the contribution he made 
to his community, his constituency, and to this province. 
 
Mr. Clarence Leslie Baldwin Estey passed away on March 5 of 
this year. He was a member of this Assembly for the Saskatoon 
constituency of Nutana Centre. And I want to point out to the 
Assembly here today that he took his early education in 
Saskatoon and also his university education. 
 
One of the things that I think are of very significance is his 
appointments, first of all as a Queen's Counsel, and then also as 
a member of the justice of the Court of Queen's Bench. And he 
served there for 26 years. And I think that that's credible not 
only for his ability but for his drive and his energy. 
 
Mr. Estey, when he graduated, became involved with the 
Canadian army. And I think that many times as I've spoken to 
members of my family — uncles and cousins of mine who 
served in the Second World War both for Canada and the 
United States — I have listened with a degree of respect for the 
vision they have for democracy. And I think Mr. Estey 
exemplified that probably as a part of his work and role in the 
responsibility as a justice of the Queen's Bench. 
 
He not only served but he was wounded in action and brought 
back to Canada. I believe that he needs this special recognition 
for those things that he did. He not only did activities in relation 
to his role as a lawyer and as a justice, he served in many 
organizations like the Kinsmen Club, Rotary Club, and the 
YMCA (Young Men's Christian Association). I think though 
that his recognition needs to be acknowledged, dealing with the 
role of his work on the Saskatoon School Board and also as the 
chairman of that board. 
 
The opposition would like to extend to the family, condolences.  

And we would also like to say to the family that a lot of times 
people who have experienced these kinds of incidents in their 
families, as I have, my mother told me one day, she said, you 
know, the pain never goes away; you just get used to it. 
 
And Mrs. Estey will have that same sense of loss. And as she 
recalls the times and the events of her husband and of her 
family involving themselves together in community work, as 
they think about the involvement of the family and their home, 
they will remember. And today they might cry and tomorrow 
they may laugh, but they will always remember it with a certain 
degree of fondness, the value that each of their family members 
contributed both to Mr. Estey's life and also Mr. Estey to theirs. 
 
And so our official opposition would like to extend our best 
wishes to Mrs. Estey and her family in view of the fact this is 
very difficult times. And so we want to . . . I feel privileged, 
Mr. Speaker, to second this motion by the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join 
with other members in this House as we pay tribute to a former 
member, Mr. Clarence Estey. On behalf of the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan and the members of our caucus, I extend to the 
family of Clarence Estey our most sincere and heartfelt 
sympathy. 
 
Clarence Estey's public service began more than 50 years ago 
when he joined the Canadian army in 1941. His service with the 
67th Light Anti Aircraft Battery ended when his knee was 
injured by friendly fire while he was in a foxhole near Caen. 
 
He served his country, his province, and his community at every 
level, including a term in this Chamber representing the 
constituency of Saskatoon Nutana Centre, as well as several 
terms on the public school board, culminating in 16 years on 
Saskatchewan's Court of Queen's Bench. 
 
Clarence Estey was a very patriotic man who was dedicated to 
the Liberal Party. He worked hard in the legislature and in his 
constituency. He was a patron of the arts and supported 
Saskatchewan artists throughout his life. He is also known as a 
great fan and supporter of the Saskatchewan Roughriders and 
the University of Saskatchewan Huskies. Clarence Estey loved 
this province and demonstrated his commitment to 
Saskatchewan through his many years of public service. 
 
His greatest love however was his family. His children and 
grandchildren were very special to Clarence and his wife of 50 
years, Ginny. I want to mention today his children who mourn 
the loss of their father — daughter Jean and husband Bob 
Cameron of Regina; daughter Susan and her husband Bill 
Leonard of Calgary; and son Jim and his wife Jacquie of 
Toronto. His passing is also mourned by his brothers: the Hon. 
Willard — better known as Bud — Estey of Toronto, a former 
Supreme Court Justice; and Dr. Harold Estey of Saskatoon. His 
presence in their lives as well will be very sorely missed by his 
seven grandchildren. 
 



March 28, 1995 

 
1190 

In closing, I want to make reference to the fact, as the Premier 
had, that Clarence Estey's father also served in this legislature 
for two terms, beginning in 1934 and again in 1938. Mr. James 
Estey represented Saskatoon City as well as serving as a 
minister of the government of the day. As members of this 
House will know, Mr. James Estey went on to serve on the 
Supreme Court of Canada. These facts were brought to the 
attention of this Assembly on February 19, 1968, during the 
throne speech debate of that newly elected government. 
 
Mr. William Forsyth, the member for Saskatoon Nutana South 
said, and I quote: 
 
 To follow in the footsteps of such an illustrious parent is 

not easy. But those of us who have lived and worked 
with Clarence Estey for many years have no hesitation 
in predicting for him a distinguished career in the 
service of his fellow citizens. 

 
That prediction, Mr. Speaker, of 27 years ago more than came 
true through the life and work of Clarence Estey. 
 
On behalf of the party he represented and the people he served, 
I express my gratitude and appreciation of the life and the 
legacy of this very distinguished public servant, Mr. Clarence 
Estey. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
honour for me to be able to add a few words to this tribute to 
the late Clarence Estey. My remarks will deal with the Clarence 
Estey that I knew as a lawyer practising law, not with him but at 
the same time, and as a lawyer appearing in his court after his 
appointment to the bench. 
 
The Leader of the Liberal Party used the term "distinguished," 
as did the Premier and the member from Morse, and this is the 
word that captures Clarence Estey better than any other single 
word that I could think of, Mr. Speaker — a distinguished 
gentleman from a very distinguished family. 
 
He distinguished himself in a number of careers. He 
distinguished himself probably first of all as a member of the 
armed forces fighting overseas in Europe. He distinguished 
himself in the practice of law in Saskatoon where he was a 
partner at an early age in what was at the time Saskatoon's most 
distinguished law firm. 
 
He then went on to a political career which the Premier has 
described in this House, in which he served again with 
distinction in this legislature and in the cabinet of the late 
Premier Thatcher and was known to be at the time a solid and 
stabilizing force within that cabinet. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, following his defeat at the polls in 
1971, he went back to private practice for a short time and then 
was appointed to the Court of Queen's Bench. He served there 
as a judge, as a trial judge, for 18 years, in effect a whole 
additional career in which he again distinguished himself as a 
solid jurist, as a solid legal thinker, and as a very diplomatic  

and accomplished judge. 
 
I had the privilege of appearing before him both in trials and in 
chambers and he was, in the finest traditions of the bench, 
courteous, attentive, and handled the cases with a great deal of 
legal acumen, producing judgements that while you didn't 
always win, Mr. Speaker, you didn't feel badly about losing 
because you knew you'd been heard and heard fully and your 
arguments were carefully considered. 
 
So I had the honour, Mr. Speaker, of attending the funeral of 
Mr. Justice Estey in the company of Mrs. Romanow. And it was 
a mark of his respect held by the Bar and by fellow judges that, 
I think, the entire Bar of Saskatoon showed up for the funeral as 
did almost the entire, I think, the entire cadre of judges from the 
Court of Queen's Bench. It was quite a sight to behold, and it 
was a mark of the respect and the affection in which Justice 
Estey was held by his colleagues and by members of the Bar. 
 
I would extend to Mrs. Estey and the family my deepest 
sympathy and my respect for the late Clarence Estey. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
don't want to take a long time in the Assembly, but I certainly 
want to add my words to what's already been said. 
 
If there were a single word which would characterize the career 
of Clarence Estey, it would be service. I think if there were a 
single word which would characterize his personality, it would 
be gentleman. Indeed, his career in public service began 
relatively early. In 1941 he went overseas; was, as would 
happen sometimes in any battle, was hit not by enemy fire but 
by what is called friendly fire — misplaced fire by his own 
forces. 
 
That happened to others; in some people it produced bitterness 
— with Clarence Estey it just seemed to renew his 
determination to dedicate his life to public service. And so he 
did. 
 
He practised, as has been said, with the firm of Moxon and 
Schmidt, was in any number of organizations in Saskatoon and 
that led, as it often does, to a career in politics. Was elected in 
'67 — his stature, his ability, was such that he served in cabinet 
during the entire period of time in which he was an elected 
member. 
 
My memory of . . . I came to the Assembly as he left. But it was 
to some extent the same era. It was an era, as Mr. Speaker will 
recall, before television, when the atmosphere in here was quite 
different. People called each other . . . we referred to each other 
as gentlemen, not only because there were very few of the 
distaff side in the House but also because people were 
gentlemen. They treated each other with civility and respect. 
 
In such a group of people, Clarence Estey stood out as a 
particular gentleman. And with the coming of television and the 
changing of times, we no longer use the term gentlemen when  



March 28, 1995 

 
1191 

referring to each other. Not only because there are, happily, 
more members of the distaff side, but also because we no 
longer treat each other with the kind of civility and respect 
which was a part of that era. 
 
If Clarence Estey had remained in this Assembly, he would 
have, I'm sure, regretted the changing in demeanour and the 
changing in attitude which has taken place. Having left the 
Assembly in '71 when a new group of MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), which included the current member 
from Riversdale and the current Speaker I might add, swept the 
city of Saskatoon, he then went on to a career as a jurist in 
1974. 
 
(1500) 
 
I associate myself with the comments made by the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. He was a gentleman. I appeared on 
occasion before him. There are some judges which one appears 
before with some trepidation. Mr. Estey was not one of those. 
He treated counsel with respect; never any sort of servitude but 
with respect, and the respect was returned. 
 
He was a person . . . I would describe him as being 
compassionate but also having considerable clarity of thought 
and clarity of expression. And one was never left wondering, 
after you'd read the judgement, why he decided what he did. It 
always made sense. 
 
He was a person who loved Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan 
returned that love. He will no doubt, Mr. Speaker, be missed by 
his family and his friends. It must be some comfort, however, to 
his family and to friends to know that Saskatchewan is a better 
place because he was here and that all of us owe a debt to 
Clarence Estey. 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, I'm honoured to have this 
opportunity to add a few words, comments, on the passing of 
Mr. Clarence Estey. When I was a young court reporter, in fact 
when I was certified first as being qualified to work in the 
Court of Queen's Bench, it was the then Hon. Clarence Estey 
who signed my certificate of certification which I still have. 
 
I just wanted to say that as distinguished as he was and 
respected for all the good reasons that have been stated here 
today, he certainly was a man who never lost his common 
touch. 
 
And so on behalf of all of the people who served him in the 
court system, all of the people that worked for him, who 
appreciated his wisdom and the respect with which he treated 
them, I want to add my condolences to the family, and it may 
bear some comfort for them to know as well that Mr. Clarence 
Estey will live on in the hearts and minds of all of those who 
served him. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would  

move, seconded by the hon. member for Morse, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 
 That the resolution just passed, together with the 

transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 
be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of 
this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
The form of the motion is not quite as clean as it normally is but 
the intent is, I think, quite clear. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to table 
the report from the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. And also 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who's in conflict? 
 
The Speaker: — You must read the report. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Bill No. 50 
 
The Speaker: — Also, before orders of the day, I would like to 
make a Speaker's ruling. Standing on the order paper for second 
reading, under the name of the member for Souris-Cannington, 
is Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Expropriation Act and 
The Expropriation Procedure Act (Land and Chattels). The Bill 
was introduced on March 16, 1995. 
 
It is the Speaker's duty to review all Bills in respect to rule 33 of 
the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. The rule states, in part, that any Bill which 
proposes: 
 
 . . . to impose any new additional charge upon the public 

revenue . . . (must be first) recommended by the 
Lieutenant Governor before it is considered by the 
Assembly. 

 
I also refer members to Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, 
Twenty-first Edition, where it is stated generally that a Bill 
which contains provisions extending the purposes of 
expenditure already authorized by statute might require the 
royal recommendation. 
 
More specifically, on page 715, May indicates that a Bill which 
provides the extension of cases in which compensation can be 
paid requires the recommendation. 
 
In these respects, Bill No. 50 was compared to the Act it seeks 
to amend, namely The Expropriation Act. I find that the 
member's Bill proposes to extend the application of The 
Expropriation Act to chattels, including firearms, and in 
consequence would cause the Crown to provide compensation  



March 28, 1995 

 
1192 

in the event firearms are expropriated. Therefore I find that Bill 
No. 50 requires a recommendation from the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
In applying rule 33, it is the practice of this Assembly to 
observe the parliamentary principle of the Crown initiative in 
financial matters. A ruling of the Speaker on March 30, 1965 
confirmed this practice when it was stated that, and I quote: 
 
 Nothing is more firmly established or clear than that the 

right to initiate legislation involving the collection 
and/or the expenditure of public money rests solely with 
the government. 

 
Because Bill No. 50 requires a recommendation, and because 
the member for Souris-Cannington is not a member of the 
Executive Council, I must rule that the said Bill is out of order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Repeal of MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I, at the 
conclusion of my remarks, will move a motion: 
 
 That this Assembly urge the provincial government to 

repeal the overly generous pension plan for members of 
the Legislative Assembly elected previous to April 
1979, which is an unfunded pension liability which 
burdens future generations, and instead urge the 
government to replace it with a new defined 
contribution plan to relieve Saskatchewan's overtaxed 
citizens. 

 
Mr. Speaker, for years we have heard members of the NDP 
government state, we're all in this together. While they were 
raising taxes, hiking utility rates, Mr. Speaker, they said, we are 
all in this together. Closing down rural hospitals, we're all in 
this together; do it for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, while the average Saskatchewan family is 
paying $4,800 more per year in taxes, premiums, and utility fees 
since the NDP formed government in 1991, the Premier and a 
few of his colleagues haven't shared that burden, Mr. Speaker. 
I'm referring to the old defined benefits plan for the members' 
pension of which the member for Riversdale is a part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does this plan work? For every 9 per cent 
MLAs contribute to their retirement, taxpayers contribute 24.5 
per cent to fulfil the defined benefit. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan contribute 9 per cent for every 
member in the money purchase plan, but in the defined benefit 
plan, the taxpayer contributes 24.5 per cent. 
 
Every elected member here today should be asking ourselves, is 
this fair? Of course it isn't fair. After all, why should politicians 
be receiving a much richer pension plan than any other  

government employee? They shouldn't, and I think that if each 
of the seven members that are members of the old plan were 
asked today if they believe it is fair that taxpayers fork out over 
24 per cent to the members' 9 per cent contribution, these 
MLAs would hard-pressed to come up with a defence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should a select few politicians be reaping the 
benefits of an unfunded plan, and one that is far too generous? 
They shouldn't, Mr. Speaker, and that's why the plan was 
changed in 1979 putting pensions of MLAs in line with other 
government employees, where a 9 per cent salary contribution 
is evenly matched. 
 
The new defined contribution plan pays its own way, with no 
unfunded liability. The old plan simply doesn't; in fact it's not 
even close, Mr. Speaker. As one article from the Leader-Post 
reads: where some NDP politicians draw the line when it comes 
to breaking the unconscionable contracts seems to be some 
place in their own backyards. That's where a few of them have 
buried their treasure troves, most commonly referred to as their 
MLA pensions. 
 
How much this old plan is costing taxpayers remains an issue. 
As Provincial Auditor Wayne Strelioff notes in his recent 
annual report: for every 9 per cent MLAs under the old pension 
plan, the old pension formula, contribute to their retirement, we 
taxpayers contribute 24.5 per cent to fulfil the defined benefit. 
 
The auditor also notes: the total unfunded pension liability 
throughout the government is now in the neighbourhood of $3 
billion — Mr. Speaker, a problem the auditor considers a very 
serious one. This may lead one to conclude the next 
unconscionable and unaffordable contract in need of breaking 
are those involving unfunded pensions, perhaps beginning with 
the MLAs' own. 
 
After all, last year they had few qualms about breaking their law 
that gave judges a 20 per cent raise because it was an 
unconscionable amount that would have had to be paid out by 
the taxpayers, an unaffordable 800,000 more annually to the 
judges. Unconscionable and unaffordable, however, are words 
you don’t often hear uttered by MLAs when it comes to their 
old pension formula. You don't hear that very often, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The editorialist ends the column by adding: evidently though 
this is one place where a contract is a contract. Mr. Speaker, 
this government has made null and void many contracts for the 
people of Saskatchewan, but this one they very likely will not. 
 
(1515) 
 
I say this is a good point, Mr. Speaker. The problem is that there 
are seven MLAs who were elected before April 1, 1979, who 
stand to collect large sums of money under the old plan. 
Specifically, the Premier under the old plan will collect $1.8 
million; Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier, $1.7 million; the 
Justice minister, $1.7 million; the minister responsible for 
Economic Development, $1.4 million; Mr. Speaker, the  



March 28, 1995 

 
1193 

member for Saskatoon Nutana, $1 million; Associate Economic 
Development Minister, $.9 million; former member for Quill 
Lakes, Mr. Speaker, $.7 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to put the old pension plan in perspective, if the 
Premier retires this year and receives no increases whatsoever in 
his pension plan, he will collect close to $80,000 per year. As 
well, if the aforementioned MLAs are around for their golden 
years, till age 80, taxpayers will have shelled out, Mr. Speaker, 
$9.8 million, which is likely twice what a defined contribution 
plan would have cost taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this inequity must be addressed. It is only fair that 
the Premier lead by example and repeal his own and his 
colleagues' pension and adjust them to the new plan. Anything 
less is completely unacceptable. We have requested just that, 
Mr. Speaker, and so far the members opposite remain mum on 
the issue even though they know that the old pension plan is 
wrong. It's unfair. 
 
We heard today in question period, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member, the Deputy Premier, spoke today that he would not 
ever change it, because he is a primary beneficiary of that plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, knowing what's right doesn't mean much unless 
you do what's right. Understanding what's right and knowing 
what's right and not doing anything about it is wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. The right thing to do is obvious to everyone here 
today. 
 
It seems that when the Premier said we're all in this together 
while asking taxpayers to tighten the belts, he meant everyone 
but himself and a selected few of his cabinet. 
 
In light of this over-generous, unaffordable, and 
unconscionable old MLA pension plan, Mr. Speaker, we on this 
side of the House believe that it's time to review these pension 
plans and do something about it. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why 
we have brought to the attention of the public of Saskatchewan 
some of the things that we've talked about here today. 
 
And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 
 That this Assembly strongly urges the provincial 

government to repeal the overly generous pension plan 
for members of the Legislative Assembly elected 
previous to April 1979, which is an unfunded pension 
liability which burdens future generations, and instead 
urge the government to replace it with the new defined 
contribution plan to relieve Saskatchewan's overtaxed 
citizenry. 

 
I move, seconded by the member from Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before you 
call the question, it is my privilege to speak in favour of this 
motion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I went to look for some words to  

prepare this, I was hoping to quote a few choice lines from the 
previous debate back in 1979. And guess what? There wasn't 
any. The Hon. Premier, who was then the attorney general, 
simply rose to move second reading, made a few brief remarks, 
and the Bill was passed, second reading, with absolutely no 
debate. 
 
This speaks volumes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only about the 
relative fairness of the current pension system, but also about 
the odiousness of the pre-1979 pension. Apparently, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the members of the day were so embarrassed 
by the generosity of the previous pension scheme that no one 
wanted to rise and oppose it. 
 
And this again brings up a point we have made since this came 
to the recent attention of the House. If the current plan is so 
good and the previous plan is so bad, then why do we not make 
it consistent for everyone? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is another thing that I get out of the 
two scant pages of Hansard that cover the 1979 Bill. No one 
who was sitting in the House at that time had to worry about the 
consequences of the Bill that they were passing. None of the 
members of the House at that time would have to make any 
sacrifice, so it was very easy for them to say, go ahead and pass 
this Bill; it will make us look good and it's the next guys who 
will be affected by it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it was improper for members at 
that time to take that attitude and is an injustice that we should 
correct today. It is an injustice that we should correct today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is underscored by the remarks the Premier made back then. 
He didn't much talk about how the new pension was less 
exorbitant. It was fairer to taxpayers. Instead he spends several 
paragraphs of his short speech talking about how the new plan 
was actually more favourable to MLAs  how the pension 
formulas for previously elected members and former members 
would continue, how the years of service had been reduced, 
how the rules for payments to surviving family members had 
been loosened. He spends an entire paragraph talking about 
how MLAs need special consideration for their pension plans. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he also mentions the cost elements of the 
new plan only in passing. It doesn't seem to even enter his mind 
that the MLA pension plan was being amended for the benefit 
of the taxpayer and not for the benefit of the MLA. 
 
This attitude seems to have persisted to the current government. 
This shouldn't surprise us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, considering 
how many legislative dinosaurs from the '70s the government 
still has in its ranks over there. Whenever we have raised this 
issue in the House, the government gets up and automatically 
resorts to the legal, technical arguments about the rights of the 
pre-1979 MLAs under this Bill. 
 
They praise the current pension plan but they refuse to discuss 
why it should not be extended to all legislative pensioners or  



March 28, 1995 

 
1194 

potential pensioners. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don't think that's 
good enough. 
 
We have a population that's on the verge of a tax revolt, largely 
due to the efforts of the members opposite to squeeze every last 
penny out of the taxpayers of this province. They see their roads 
deteriorating, their hospitals closing, and many other services 
cut. And in the meantime, government spending on 18 out of 23 
departments continue to raise. The people start to ask 
themselves, I'm getting bled dry and the government isn't 
making any sacrifices. The politicians and the bureaucrats at 
Regina are still getting fat at my expense. 
 
This sort of situation is creating crisis in the public confidence 
of our institutions, and this is obviously unhealthy for any 
society. On top of all this, the people have to live with the 
knowledge that the people who are taxing them to death and 
spending their money wildly, have made good and sure that 
their nests are properly feathered. 
 
No matter how thoroughly the government destroys the 
economy of this province with its high tax policies, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the Premier will have no worries with his $1.8 million 
pension benefits waiting in the wings. 
 
It's also a sore spot for the taxpayer to see who else in this 
House is entitled to these gold-plated pensions. The Deputy 
Premier, the Economic Development minister, the associate 
Economic Development minister, and the Justice minister. To 
the average taxpayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this looks all too 
much as if the closest to the centre of decision making in this 
province are awarding themselves special privileges. Also the 
former member from Quill Lakes is eligible for this pension. 
And with respect, I must point out that the public does not like 
how that looks, given the circumstances under which the 
member came to retire. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, given that many of those who 
are eligible for this pension are of the inner circle of this 
government, we must hold them to the highest standard. It's 
disappointing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Premier, for 
example, would not voluntarily forgo this exorbitant pension. 
And it's puzzling that the Deputy Premier, a former Finance 
minister, would not see at least the fiscal advantage to the 
province of forgoing this pension. 
 
The pension that I will receive under the new pension plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is quite adequate. I don't think that there's any 
reason why we have to have a gold-plated pension scheme like 
the old . . . before the 1979 pension plan. 
 
And I should say to you, sir, that it is uncharacteristic that the 
Economic Development minister would not see the political 
advantage in making this kind of a dramatic public sacrifice 
even though in his case he might actually need his pension for 
his household bills. Surely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these and 
other members who have been in the public service this long 
should feel some motivation to do the right thing, to do what 
the taxpayers and their constituents expect of them and  

withdraw these pensions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder indeed how the members who 
are eligible for this pension face their constituents on this 
matter. What do they say on coffee row and in their reports 
from the legislature? Do the people say, oh, sure, I'm getting a 
million dollar pension, and if it was up to me, I wouldn't get it. 
But to be fair to the other guys who are collecting it, I guess I 
just have to take it. I don't think they would get a very good 
reaction if those were the kind of words used, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I want you to keep in mind that we are not talking about 
cutting off those who are already getting their MLA pension; 
they would just get the same pension that most of the members 
sitting today would get, and that pension is far from being 
stingy. We contribute 9 per cent of our salary to that pension. 
We pay our way. It's not underfunded, and it's quite generous. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I began my remarks by saying that I 
wanted to quote from the 1979 debate, and I will. The Premier, 
who was then the attorney general, said at that time: 
 
 Election to the Legislative Assembly creates special 

pension problems for many people. As we all know, the 
average term of a member of the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly is very short. In many instances, a 
member's term of service comes at his or her peak 
earning years in other job, profession, or business 
enterprise. This means that the person can lose the 
advantage of pension contributions in these areas. 

 
Well I would challenge you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and all the 
other members of this Assembly, to find a former MLA who is 
doing as poorly financially as the Premier suggested at that 
time. 
 
I would suggest that most of the members of this House, past 
and present, leave their service here and go back to private life 
as successfully as they originally left it. Most are quite capable 
of looking after their own retirement and their own interests. 
 
Consequently many end up having two or more incomes or 
pensions. Even for those who do not . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member's time has 
elapsed. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it's my pleasure to enter into this debate which seems 
to me, as I reflect on the wording of the motion and the 
comments of the members who have spoken, to be motivated 
either by political cynicism or maybe perhaps more sinister 
motives than that. 
 
I listened very carefully to numbers that are very selectively 
used. And I, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also do give notice that I will  



March 28, 1995 

 
1195 

be listening very, very carefully to what the Liberals will have 
to say on this motion. 
 
We have to put this debate about pensions for MLAs into a 
broader context. And it will be true that through the 1950s and 
'60s and '70s, the normal format for pensions in those days was 
to be described as defined benefit. And it was also seen in those 
days to be reward for long service. That was the original 
thinking on pensions. 
 
But in the '70s, as the world of work began to change, also the 
notion of pensions began to change, and rather than be seen as 
reward for long service, it began to be seen as deferred income. 
So there was income that someone may be receiving currently, 
and then some is set aside for retirement years. 
 
That became what is described, Mr. Speaker, now as the 
defined contribution. So rather than knowing what the payment 
out was going to be, the thing that was set was the payment in. 
 
In April 1979, changes were made here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as a result of this review. Changes were made 
at the same time to the pensions for MLAs as well as the 
pensions for public service employees in the province of 
Saskatchewan. At that time, people were given the option, 
MLAs and public service employees, and in fact some chose to 
opt into the new pension plan, the post-1979 plan, because they 
saw it as better for them. 
 
Teachers came into this formula . . . into the new plan, the 
defined contribution, and passed out of the formula plan in July 
1, 1980. This addressed two concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
One is from the point of view of the province of Saskatchewan. 
What had previously been an unfunded liability, that was a debt 
owing to be paid out when people became pensionable age, 
changed then to a funded pool. 
 
So what would happen is that people would have deductions 
taken from their pay cheques that would be matched by the 
provincial government, put into investment pool, and made 
available at pension age for those when they came of that age. 
Clearly, clearly, clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was adopted 
that the thinking was this is deferred income. 
 
Now I note with interest that The Taxpayer, the publication of 
The (Saskatchewan) Taxpayer, in the winter of 1992 edition in 
an article entitled: Other MLA pension plans should follow 
Saskatchewan's example, said, and I quote: 
 
 To date Saskatchewan MLAs are the only legislators, 

federally or provincially, to have such a plan. As a result 
the other legislatures are seeing huge deficits beginning 
to develop in their MLA/MP pension plan. 

 
And when I look at what has just recently developed in Ottawa 
as put forth by the federal Liberal government — not yet 
finalized, but currently being drafted — it looks interestingly 
enough to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as though the new, 
improved federal Liberal MP (Member of Parliament) pension  

plan is at least as rich as the former formula plan here in 
Saskatchewan, the one that was done away with by the NDP 
government back in 1979. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to ask: is there anybody who 
actually believes that this is something other than the tip of the 
iceberg? They have come forward here today with a motion to 
change the structure that affects 104 former MLAs and their 
widows, along with seven or eight current MLAs. 
 
Does anybody believe that they are proposing to change the one 
that affects 104 former MLAs and their widows, and not at the 
same time intending to come forward sometime later with the 
same changes to the same kinds of structures that are used for 
pensions for 3,300 former public service employees and their 
widows and widowers, and some 5,500 superannuated teachers 
and their widows and widowers? 
 
Does anybody believe that this is only motivated to change the 
pensions of those MLAs and their widowers who were in the 
plan prior to 1979 and not the others? Get real, I think is the 
advice that . . . for anyone . . . should be asking these folks to 
do. 
 
Now as I said at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this seems to be either motivated by political cynicism 
or perhaps there are more sinister motives. And I say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that I think it is both. And others can judge for 
themselves what their own conclusions are. 
 
But let me conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying that 
pensions clearly today are deferred income, and employment 
commitments to deferred income must be honoured so that 
people who are told, this is your income, this is what you 
receive today and this is what's being set aside for you and 
being matched from your own deductions for your pension 
years, so that those people are able to plan for their pension 
years and their retirement years. 
 
But clearly it's easiest to manage the provincial financial 
obligation when the contribution is defined and then made — as 
has been the case in Saskatchewan since 1979. And the 
principles that are applied, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think must be 
equally true whether we're talking about MLAs, public service 
employees, or teachers — or teachers — all in the same 
category, Mr. Speaker, because they are all structured in exactly 
the same way and changed at the same time. 
 
And therefore, I move an amendment to this motion, seconded 
by the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, to amend the motion to 
read: 
 
 Strike all the words after "this Assembly" and replace 

them with these words: 
 
And that it'll read: 
 
 This Assembly reaffirm the province's commitment to 

honour its pension obligations to all those who  



March 28, 1995 

 
1196 

 ontributed in good faith to the formula-based pension 
plan, including 104 former members of the Assembly or 
their surviving spouses, 3,300 former public service 
employees or their surviving spouses, and 5,500 
superannuated teachers or their surviving spouses, who 
served the people of Saskatchewan in their professional 
careers; and further reaffirm the province's commitment 
to continue the defined contribution pension plan in 
place since April 1979. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don't intend to 
speak for very long. The member for Moose Jaw has made an 
amendment which I support, of course. 
 
This problem was largely dealt with in 1979 when the pension 
plan was amended by the then government of Allan Blakeney in 
a way that is satisfactory actually to the taxpayers' association, 
who hold up our pension plan as a model for the rest of Canada. 
 
But what I want to say is that I find it a little bit tough to take, 
listening to the Conservative Party and the Liberal Party getting 
up and crying crocodile tears on behalf of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, when in reality the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Kindersley, has publicly stated that the worst thing 
that would happen if these pensions that they complain about 
were paid out would be a total liability of $9 million by the time 
the present Premier reached the age of 80. 
 
And I'd like to put that in perspective, because we're paying 
$850 million a year in interest payments on the debt created by 
the Conservative Party in this province. And I'm not saying that 
$9 million isn't a lot of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But what 
I'm saying is that every day of every year we spend $2 
million-plus paying interest on the public debt created by those 
members opposite. 
 
And when those members opposite get up and try to pretend 
that the biggest issue in the world is a pension plan for 104 
people, some of whom served in the '60s and '70s and have 
small pensions or their spouses do, they're just trying to deflect 
attention away from themselves. 
 
As for the Liberal Party, which we're about to hear from, I'm 
sure, if the Liberal Party had any sincerity at all and any concern 
for the taxpayers, the Liberal Party would do something about 
the MP pension plan. They would look to Saskatchewan and try 
to amend the MP pension plan to be more in accordance with 
our pension plan. The Liberal Party would do something about 
the Senate which it's been stacking for the last 125 years with 
its cronies and hacks. 
 
And if the Leader of the Liberal Party, who professes to be 
concerned about the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and pretends 
that she has the common touch, Mr. Speaker, was the least bit 
concerned about taxpayers and had a common touch, then she  

wouldn't ride around in a chauffeur-driven limousine owned by 
one of the Saskatchewan senators. That's what she wouldn't do, 
Mr. Speaker. But now I'll let her get up and talk about her 
concern for the taxpayers. Never mind the fact that when she 
accepted the member from Shaunavon into her caucus, who was 
not elected as a Liberal, I think her own budget went up quite 
considerably. And that was okay. But we're going to hear the 
Leader of the Liberal Party talk about her concern for the 
taxpayers. 
 
This plan of course has been in existence throughout the Tory 
years and the Liberal years in Saskatchewan. And I would 
suggest to the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if 
they would have got serious about these issues a long time ago, 
as Allan Blakeney was when he was in office, we wouldn't have 
many of the problems we have that have been created by the 
Conservatives and the Liberals. 
 
With that, I'll sit down. I certainly intend to be voting in favour 
of the amendment, and thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I appreciate being acknowledged. This government 
talks a lot about fairness, but talk is cheap. And the fact is that 
there are some career politicians in this very Assembly, and yes, 
including some career politicians in the House of Commons, 
who have to bear a great deal of the responsibility for the 
cynicism the public feels toward elected representatives. 
 
Those of us who are fairly new to this Assembly and new to 
political life must consistently struggle with the double standard 
that has been created by some of the very people who sit in this 
House and talk about fairness. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's been a great deal of hypocrisy 
exposed about the NDP since they were elected. And nowhere 
is it more evident than when it comes to the rich pension 
schemes of the career politicians opposite, the ones who, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, made the rules, the ones who stand to benefit 
from the rules, and the ones who steadfastly refuse to change 
the rules for themselves. 
 
How many times has the Premier risen in his place and talked 
about how his government will do whatever has to be done in 
the name of the Saskatchewan people to erase the wrongdoings 
of the past, where he and his colleagues have believed that 
contracts were not in the public interest. They went in and they 
hammered out a "new deal" for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Wasn't that their slogan at one time, a new deal for people? 
 
Yes, sir, Mr. Speaker, they tore up the contract with NewGrade, 
tore up the contracts with civil servants, tore up the contracts 
with farmers, and they were indignant, indignant at the idea of 
paying judges the raise in salaries that their own binding 
commission recommended, so they tore up that contract as well. 
 
The fact of the matter is that this government acted as if there  



March 28, 1995 

 
1197 

were no sacred cows when it came to doing what was right by 
the people of Saskatchewan, they said. 
 
I was personally very disappointed at their application of justice 
and fairness because I thought they completely abandoned some 
very important, underlying principles of democracy and justice. 
But they are going to have to answer for that to the voters of 
this province. 
 
Things got really interesting, Mr. Speaker, when they finally ran 
out of contracts to nullify, and their own pensions were staring 
them straight, square in the face. But they wouldn't go so far as 
to bite the hand with which they feed themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
No, sir, they draw the line when it comes to applying fairness 
and justice to themselves — no leading by example for the 
political icons opposite. No, what they do is bring out this 
amendment, talk about everyone else, but don't stand in front of 
the mirror and decide that they are going to do the things that 
are within their power to do with themselves, leading by 
example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, explanations and justifications about fairness in 
honouring past agreements just don't hold up in the face of this 
government's endless rhetoric and dismal record on those 
issues. 
 
The facts are that there are eight sitting MLAs, most of whom 
hold or held cabinet positions, who were elected before 1979. 
All of these people put in 9 per cent of their salary over the past 
years, and the taxpayers have sweetened the pot by 24.5 per 
cent on top of those contributions. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld started to talk about 
what the taxpayers' association was saying. It's very, very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, to actually recognize in print 
something entitled: taxpayer funded pension plan. And it talks 
about how do these two differ — a picture of the Alberta 
Premier Ralph Klein and a picture of the Saskatchewan 
Premier. 
 
And it talks about the fact that the Premier in Alberta led by 
example, stating he completely scrapped his own pension plan. 
Meanwhile the Premier of Saskatchewan keeps his massive 
taxpayer-subsidized pension intact. And the question is: does 
the Premier of Saskatchewan feel it's fair that a privileged group 
of MLAs should receive excessive pension pay-outs while the 
other MLAs don't? 
 
This is a most interesting situation, given the comments from 
one of the members opposite. 
 
The taxpayers did not volunteer to do this, Mr. Speaker. It was a 
behind-closed-door decision, one of the many made back then 
which created the perception . . . and not the perception, the 
actual reality that these politicians, these eight members 
opposite, supported the view that they deserved special 
treatment. 

The fact is that the MLAs elected before 1979 have a pension 
plan which is way out of line with what anyone in the province 
would expect to receive today — or in 1979. An even sadder 
fact is that these MLAs who occupy the front benches of the 
highest elected office in this province, the Premier and his 
cabinet, cannot summon the decency and the sense of fair play 
to put their own personal well-being on a level playing-field 
with the rest of the people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing more which needs to be said on 
this issue. The ball is clearly in the court of the Premier and his 
colleagues who stand to collect. If they wanted to play fair ball, 
they would have taken the initiative to rewrite the rule book on 
their own pensions. We're not talking about the pensions of 
others, we're talking about them leading by example. Deal with 
themselves. That's what we're saying — deal with oneself and 
lead by example. 
 
By choosing not to do so they are thumbing their noses at the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I remind the member from 
Riversdale, the Premier, I remind the Deputy Premier, the 
Minister of Economic Development, the Minister of Justice, the 
Associate Minister of Economic Development — two others as 
well, I might add, Mr. Speaker — that while the people of 
Saskatchewan labour under excessive tax burdens to do their 
part for the province, they resent double standards. They resent 
the double standard that makes them do with less so that all of 
them can have more. 
 
And the saddest tale of all is that this list of MLAs who receive 
these jackpot pensions do not end with the members I just 
listed. There are two more, and let's talk about them, Mr. 
Speaker  the former member from Quill Lakes and the 
independent member from Arm River. 
 
Not only will the taxpayers be forking out more in taxpayer-
financed contributions to them than any pension plan would pay 
any regular citizen, these are members who chose to repay the 
generosity of the public by committing acts of fraud against the 
public purse. 
 
If there were ever a time when it was important to do the right 
thing, to do the right thing by the people of Saskatchewan, a 
thing that this government has so often purported they want to 
do, that time is now. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I support the original motion before 
the Assembly today which urges the provincial government to 
repeal the pension plan of the members of the Assembly elected 
previous to April, 1979, which is an unfunded pension liability 
which burdens future generations, and instead urge the 
government to replace it with a new defined contribution plan 
to relieve Saskatchewan's overtaxed citizenry. 
 
I support the original motion fully, without any amendments, 
and in doing so, I urge all members of the Assembly to commit 
their support to the legislation which will be introduced by our 
caucus this week to bring this motion to a legislated reality. 
Thank you. 



March 28, 1995 

 
1198 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to address the motion not only on my own behalf as an 
MLA, but on the behalf of my constituents. 
 
One constituent summarized for me what the working people of 
Saskatchewan are saying. She says, and I quote: 
 
 I find these pension plans appalling. It's true. My 

husband and I both work, we have four children in 
university, and are unable to put anything toward an 
RRSP. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ran for MLA because I felt it was my duty to 
serve the people of Regina North West, not to be served by 
them. I didn't run to line my pockets. In fact I refuse to accept 
per diems because of my constituents' concerns. 
 
Less than 50 per cent of the labour force, Mr. Speaker, is able 
to pay into pension plans. Less than 17 per cent of Canadians 
are able to contribute to RRSPs (registered retirement savings 
plan). In that context, Mr. Speaker, and in the hard economic 
times we've been living through, I am also appalled by the 
richness of the pre-1979 MLA pension plan. 
 
Saskatchewan has two MLA pensions. It has the old one, which 
is a defined benefit plan; and the new one, which is a defined 
contribution plan. The old MLA pension plan currently has only 
eight contributors and 108 people actively drawing from it. It is 
currently $24 million in the red. Each year it receives just short 
of $50,000 in contributions from the old MLAs. 
 
The old MLA pension is a defined benefit. A defined benefit 
will ensure that regardless of what MLAs contribute they 
receive a certain benefit. On the other hand, a defined 
contribution plan does not ensure that one would make a certain 
pay-out but only make certain that contributions are standard. 
The defined contribution plan involves the MLA paying out a 
certain amount of their salary, the government matches the 
contribution, and the benefit is paid out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being an MLA is not a salaried position. What we 
receive in pay is an indemnity. Because we receive an 
indemnity rather than a salary we are being compensated for the 
time we take away from our regular job and our regular life. 
 
In that context, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that we 
should consider eliminating MLA pensions. Certainly the 
indemnity should reflect the worth of the time MLAs contribute 
to serving the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we as MLAs serve many constituents who are 
unable to contribute to either a pension plan or an RRSP. Even 
though they cannot contribute for their own retirement, they are 
forced to contribute to MLAs' pensions. This seems to me to be 
a basic injustice to a significant portion of our constituents. 
 
That injustice, Mr. Speaker, is exacerbated by the richness of 
the pre-1979 pension plan. In that plan, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers  

pay four times more into the plan than does the old MLA. And 
the other fact is that the old plan is $24 million in the red. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe people who have been unable to put money 
away for their own retirement — and that's a majority of 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker — should not be forced to 
pay for pensions for MLAs. 
 
As I stated earlier, politicians must serve their constituents. I 
didn't get into politics to line my pockets and I don't think 
politicians should line their pockets getting out of politics. 
 
In conclusion, I support the original motion. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:57 p.m. until 4:02 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Van Mulligen Tchorzewski Lingenfelter 
Anguish Atkinson Johnson 
Goulet Lautermilch Calvert 
Cunningham Carson Penner 
Upshall Hagel Bradley 
Koenker Lorje Teichrob 
Cline Crofford Renaud 
Murray Serby Whitmore 
Sonntag Roy Langford 
Scott Kujawa Stanger 
Harper Haverstock McPherson 

— 33 
Nays 

 
Swenson Neudorf Martens 
D'Autremont Toth Britton 

— 6 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Rural Health Coalition Agreement 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
happy to speak today on this motion. In fact when one looks at 
what this government has done over the few years that they've 
been in power, Mr. Speaker, it became obvious that probably 
the biggest disappointment that the people in Saskatchewan — 
and especially rural Saskatchewan — have had with this 
particular government is in the area of health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course the New Democrats, when we take a look at 
what they've promised before being elected in 1991 — in the 
fall of 1991 — they had promised to be a compassionate 
government, to provide compassionate care and treatment for 
the people of Saskatchewan and especially the seniors. They 
promised such things as to restore the dental program which the  



March 28, 1995 

 
1199 

Conservative government before them had dismantled, and on 
and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what they did was something quite different. In fact the 
present administration was the . . . they were the ones to finish 
the sale of the dental equipment, Mr. Speaker. And we found 
that out in estimates the other night when Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation was before us. 
 
And in fact they did away with the prescription drug plan — 
any form of a plan — and what we now have today is a 
prescription drug plan which is $850 every six months, $1,700 
a year, Mr. Speaker. That's no drug plan. People of the province 
are saying, well that's unaffordable. We have people in this 
province that are going without medication because of what that 
government did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other things that . . . what they did which were quite contrary to 
what they campaigned on — dissolved boards, Mr. Speaker, 
health boards which oversaw the services and the delivery of 
those services. And it was the . . . boards were made up of 
essentially volunteers from rural Saskatchewan. Volunteers 
which over the years built up this province to be as great as 
what it was, providing the services that they found that the 
people in their communities and area were in need of getting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they replaced those volunteers, those people 
in rural Saskatchewan that put their life and dreams into making 
Saskatchewan a better place. And they replace them with, of 
course, very expensive, heavily administered health district 
boards. 
 
They also changed the taxation structure which provided a good 
portion of the funding for those rural hospitals, Mr. Speaker, 
and they changed it from the union hospital districts Act to the 
new Hospital Revenue Act. And they did this so that in fact 
when they were going to deliver the crushing blow that they did 
to rural Saskatchewan, they wanted to ensure that when they hit, 
and hit hard, that these communities wouldn't have the ability to 
stand up and fight back, Mr. Speaker. And they had to ensure 
that they couldn't access funds to defend rural Saskatchewan. 
That government didn't campaign on that either. 
 
They in fact gave notice at that same time that they would no 
longer be willing to fund or support the pioneers in our 
province, the people that built up this province over the years. 
And in fact and in their golden years when they themselves are 
needing some support, Mr. Speaker, that they themselves need 
the support, the government chose that they wouldn't be there 
and they gave warning that they would be pulling away. 
 
And finally I think the most disappointing thing in the eyes of 
the people of Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan, is the fact 
the government unilaterally closed the doors of some 52 rural 
hospitals, with no regard given to geography, their needs, the 
age of the population, demographics — no regards to the people 
out there in the rural areas that through their hard work had 
provided the services and the volunteer efforts to run those 
services in the way they saw fit, Mr. Speaker. 

Now the government proceeded without a plan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that did not go unnoticed by the people of the province 
— not at all. In fact what happened was that we had rallies all 
throughout the province, we had rallies on the steps of the 
legislature. There were communities all over this province that 
held meetings, packed halls, gymnasiums. 
 
And they packed those halls with one consistent message: you 
have no right — you have no right  to decimate the services 
that were out in rural Saskatchewan. You didn't campaign on it. 
And if you really felt that your government had to go ahead and 
make such dramatic and drastic changes, why didn't you have 
the guts enough to put it in your election platform? But they 
didn't, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, it was after all the rallies and the tens of thousands of 
letters and calls to the government ministers and the Premier 
and a show from the rural people of the anger and the fear, the 
frustration and helplessness of these people that the government 
started to think that, you know, we're in a lot of trouble here and 
perhaps we should start to rethink perhaps where we were and 
what it was all about. 
 
But from these rallies and the letters and the anger and the fear 
and so on, there was born the rural health care coalition. And 
that was, I believe, in September of 1993, Mr. Speaker. And 
they had some goals I guess which people in rural 
Saskatchewan still hold near and dear to their hearts, and that is 
to ensure that they have a level of comfort in living out in the 
rural areas. 
 
Firstly, they needed some essential emergency service and acute 
care. I mean that's a must when you're living out in the rural 
areas, especially in agriculture with the amount of accidents and 
tragedies that are happening out there, and they have got to 
have some sort of rural care. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, some form of respite care to give a 
break to the family; palliative care so that . . . to provide that 
compassionate care for people in their last days; convalescent 
care when people are leaving these larger centres, the larger 
hospitals, base hospitals, and needing some sort of treatment 
when they get home. And in fact, because of the ageing 
population that we have in this province, there had to be a lot of 
concern for long-term care. These were just some of the goals 
of the rural health care coalition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the government, they got into some of these agreements 
and negotiations with the rural health care coalition, and I'll tell 
you what was agreed to. It was to provide some level of 24-hour 
emergency care to the affected communities. And I think in the 
end it wasn't all the 52 affected communities, but I believe there 
were 40 or 40-some-odd communities that were part of the rural 
health care coalition. 
 
And the government agreed to . . . signed the documents that 
they would provide this 24-hour care, Mr. Speaker, to these 
communities. They would provide lab and X-ray services so 
that . . . I mean it only makes sense if you're living in the  



March 28, 1995 

 
1200 

community of, for an example, Mankota, why would you close 
down the lab and X-ray services and yet keep some semblance 
of a clinic. But you can't do anything there. I mean, and there's 
no sense shipping people two hours away to get an X-ray or to 
have some lab services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this was one thing that the government had agreed to and in 
fact all the above services which I stated were some of the goals 
of the rural health care coalition. 
 
Now what we have to ask ourselves, Mr. Speaker, is what the 
results were of this agreement. Did the government hold up to 
its end of the deal? Well let's have a look. I mean it was easy 
enough. If the government really wanted to find out just how 
acceptable their actions had been and in fact how well-received 
their agreement with these rural communities and the 
representatives of these rural communities, they could have 
done a questionnaire or a survey of the affected communities 
and of the people. Since they didn't have enough nerve to go to 
the people in a general election over some of these issues, they 
should have at least surveyed to find out exactly how much pain 
and grief and frustration and helplessness they had created out 
in the rural areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in fact because the government didn't do their survey, they 
didn't do their homework, some members of the coalition 
decided that it would be interesting, from their point of view, 
that perhaps they do a survey. And we have some of those 
surveys with us today, Mr. Speaker. And I'm not going to go 
through them all, but I do want to touch on a few. And in fact 
there's several questions to the survey, and I'll only deal with 
one question because I think it's relevant to the motion here 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the first question on this survey of members of the rural 
health care coalition to the affected communities is: what parts 
of the rural health care coalition agreement is your district 
health board failing to live up to? A very straightforward 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I go through some of these survey responses and see 
the answers, I think it's appalling, Mr. Speaker. In fact when I 
take a look a few of these . . . here is a note on the back of the 
one survey. And it just says: 
 
 I am afraid since Louise Simard (this is a quote, Mr. 

Speaker) dismantled our hospital board, I am not 
involved in the health care in our community as I was in 
the past so I'm not able to answer the questions. 

 
(1615) 
 
And this is the feeling from the community of Kincaid, and this 
is in my area, Mr. Speaker. The people of Kincaid felt they 
couldn't even pass judgement. They knew they had lost 
everything — poor day to lose my voice, Mr. Speaker — they 
knew they had lost everything, but in fact we're not being in 
touch with the government enough, or the government wasn't 
being in touch with them enough, to in fact give an answer to  

some of these questions. 
 
But I'm going to go through some of these communities and 
deal with just that one question: what part of the rural health 
care coalition agreement is your district board not living up to? 
 
And here's one that was returned to the community of Ponteix. 
And in fact Ponteix . . . I want to touch on a few other aspects 
of what happened in Ponteix. But just a few of the quotes from 
their own document, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Neither the board nor department were willing to 

acknowledge the agreement. Whether they didn't have 
one or they just had a predetermined agenda, but they 
were adamant on only using the press release. 

 
I mean what these people are saying is that the government 
never really intended on living up to any of this stuff. 
 
I'm going to keep quoting from this document from the 
community of Ponteix, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 The community has had incidents such as where a 

middle-aged male had a heart attack and it was 
immediately diagnosed and treated by the physician and 
nurse. However, the lab tech who was on call had to be 
located 20 miles away, which resulted in more than an 
hour wait. Once again our physician was put under the 
gun, and the physicians and surgeons department 
investigated the incidents afterwards. 

 
Which was appalling, Mr. Speaker, because if you have a 
physician that wants to do the best for the community, go the 
full nine yards, and yet because of the rules set forward by the 
government, that he wasn't able to and allowed to. 
 
Incidents of palliative and convalescent patients being looked 
after in other facilities some 55 miles away, or as far away as 
Regina, it states. 
 
There have been horror stories of the district boards expanding 
on — expenses, I believe that's supposed to be — on meetings 
and renovations and for purchases. Needless to say, the 
bureaucratic positions . . . made available. The safe level of 
quality care is of great concern in our community, and we feel 
that the sense of security is now definitely lacking. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to stay on the community of 
Ponteix just for a moment because Ponteix is one that . . . the 
people of that community absolutely felt betrayed by this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To be roughly an hour from every other facility, they could 
never have imagined that their facility would be one that would 
be just cut off right at the ankles, Mr. Speaker, and with no 
regard to the cultural situation in that community or the age of 
the population or the distance that would have to be travelled. 
 
So in fact the community of Ponteix felt we must do something.  



March 28, 1995 

 
1201 

And in fact they did do things. They were part of the rural 
health care coalition agreement, fighting the government on one 
hand, but on the other hand they took matters into their own 
hands, Mr. Speaker, and they took the government to court. 
 
In fact in the first court case, what they were actually fighting 
for was an injunction so that it would stop the government from 
taking the funds out of the community until this whole question 
of whether there was safe and reasonable health care out in 
these rural communities was actually decided. And whether in 
fact the terms and the spirit of the health care coalition 
agreement were actually being lived up to, because those people 
in that community, they said they weren't. 
 
And how could we say that they are wrong? I mean they're 
willing to go to court. They're willing to spend thousands of 
dollars and the effort to in fact take on a government, and that's 
really something that a lot of people are nervous about doing, as 
you can appreciate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the judge's ruling on this was an interesting one because in 
fact the judgement basically stated that he himself could not . . . 
he couldn't give the injunction because in fact the health district 
boards now had all the power. And in fact the judge couldn't 
say to the province, well you have to live up to your agreement 
because in fact the province had no right making the agreement 
outside of the district health board. 
 
So unless they were prepared to back up the agreement with 
funds — which they weren't — then it was all for nought, Mr. 
Speaker. And that's what was the frustrating part I think for the 
community of Climax, knowing full well that they would have 
to see this right to the end to determine if in fact this 
government overstepped its bounds in destroying health care in 
rural Saskatchewan before even court . . . before the injunction 
could be granted, Mr. Speaker. Because as the judge, I think it 
was Judge MacPherson in fact — no relative — stated, there 
just wasn't anything he could do for that community in granting 
it an injunction in this particular case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in fact I dare say I don't think this is over in a few of the 
communities such as Ponteix or Climax, and they're going to 
hold the government to account in the future. 
 
Let me go through a few others, Mr. Speaker. Here is one from 
the community of Borden, and I'm going to quote, and 
remember that first question, Mr. Speaker, is whether or not this 
health care coalition agreement had been lived up to by the 
district board. And here it says, and I'll quote from it: 
 
 Our community health committee has met several times 

with the district health board and the department 
representatives, and we have not been able to agree on 
long-term plan for our community. The need for 
24-hour nursing, long-term palliative care and respite 
convalescent care has not been met. 

 
And that's really the need for this motion today, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the communities themselves are the ones  

that are saying, well we had an agreement but no one's 
living up to it. In fact we're going to just keep going 
through this whole stack, and I can show you how many 
times the communities are saying none of the agreement is 
being adhered to. 
 
Let me go on here, Mr. Speaker. We are told by the district that 
financial restraints are the main impediment. The department 
states that no money other than the $50,000 one-time payment 
will be forthcoming, and it is up to the district board to decide if 
their global budget will continue . . . will include these delivery 
services in our community. 
 
And that really brings us back to what I just talked about in the 
community of Ponteix, Mr. Speaker. Here you have one 
community saying, well the department is telling the 
community that in fact the district board must live up to this 
agreement. And yet in the community of Ponteix the judges say, 
well no, the district board can't live up to the agreement because 
the province should have never struck the agreement unless 
they're prepared to back it up with money. That's the only way 
this can all work. And they weren't prepared to do that. 
 
Let me quote on, Mr. Speaker. The district states that it's 
cheaper to run large facilities. Our community wishes to use our 
foundation money to build an addition to enlarge the former 
hospital building to accommodate more long-term care beds. 
We have a number of clients in long-term care homes in 
Saskatoon as well as other places, some of whom have been . . . 
have given us written statements stating their wish to return to 
Borden. 
 
Population statistics show our community is to be an aged 
population. Our needs assessment indicating the need for such 
services has not made much impact on decisions. The district 
states that when and if capital funding is available, they'll be 
considered. 
 
Well I'll tell you, the community of Borden have no faith that 
anybody's going to consider them in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let's read on to a few others. Here's the community of Climax. 
Climax is also in my area. And as you recall, Mr. Speaker, all 
the headlines in the newspapers for days on end, Climax was 
the first community in the province to say enough is enough and 
we're not taking it any more, and in fact threatened legal action 
on many occasions on this government. 
 
The government finally tried to satisfy Climax somewhat. And I 
mean there again the community had to sit back and decide 
whether they themselves felt big enough to take the government 
on. And I mean that you can sense, Mr. Speaker, a terrible 
frustration from some of these communities. 
 
But here's what Climax had to write about that first question: 
district board and Department of Health have not met with the 
community in relationship to the $50,000 grant. And that 
$50,000 grant was part of the agreement where there would be  



March 28, 1995 

 
1202 

some semblance of service in that community, Mr. Speaker. So 
the money is still sitting there because no one is willing to meet 
with anyone in the community. 
 
In fact, it goes on to say that the district has been able to get 
some of the funds, but they have spent them with absolutely no 
community input. And I'll tell you, the feeling of the people in 
Climax is that they were sold out. I know each and every one of 
those citizens personally, Mr. Speaker, and they just feel they're 
been really sold down the drain by this government. 
 
If we take a look at the community of Vanguard, another one of 
the affected communities, Mr. Speaker. You know, I have a 
letter here that I'm going to read right now. And this one is from 
Dorothy Saunderson, mayor, village of Vanguard, and this was 
in the newspaper, The Southwest Booster, November 28, 1994. 
And I think this will really sum up exactly what they're going to 
be saying in their survey answers, Mr. Speaker, to that first 
question. 
 
And it's to Ms. Louise Simard, minister of Health at that time, 
province of Saskatchewan: 
 
 After two years of organized planning, you and your 

department have succeeded. You have, by many 
different methods, moved all of our elderly patients out 
of the district into places away from home, family, and 
friends. The last terminally ill patient, who has without a 
doubt been a thorn in the departmental flesh, has finally 
obliged by dying. Only God understands the timing of 
this. 

 
 Your department can feel a real sense of 

accomplishment. The Vanguard facility is now 
downsized to a health centre for five days a week, from 
9 to 5 o'clock. A doctor is to be present on three of those 
days for a few hours a day. 

 
And I know, looking, Mr. Speaker, at the only doctor in the 
present government, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
and listening to some of his comments and seeing some of his 
writings in the newspapers, I know he completely agrees with it. 
And I get that sense from looking at him here today, Mr. 
Speaker, that he is in agreement with what these people feel. 
But of course that government chose to even do in the good 
doctor. 
 
Let me read on: 
 
 It is of no concern to you and the department, and the 

residents left in the village and community that have no 
emergency care, no long-term care, no place for a 
24-hour fire alarm, no police protection, and no way of 
using cellular phones. 

 
In fact the comment on cellular phones is an interesting one, 
Mr. Speaker. Because I remember when some of these health 
care reform initiatives were first being discussed, the 
government of the day was talking about the enhanced use of  

cellular phones without realizing most of those rural areas don't 
have cell sites. You're keeping the cell towers in fact in only 
your populated areas of the province. 
 
Let me quote on here: 
 
 Nothing (in bold print, it says), yet we are told we will 

be better off than we have ever been before. Has your 
government thought of what you will do when there is 
no tax base left in rural Saskatchewan? When residents 
must move from the boondocks to the city to obtain 
health care? It is necessary to wait hours and even days 
to be given an appointment or receive referral treatment. 
Thank you for your government's consideration for 
those who live by choice in rural Saskatchewan. 
Dorothy Saunderson, mayor of the village of Vanguard. 

 
I just think, I think that really says it all from a lot of 
communities, Mr. Speaker, just on how disappointed the people 
in rural Saskatchewan are, not only with how this whole health 
care reform process came about through the back door, 
underhanded, however you want to call it, but in fact even after 
that when these communities worked together in cooperation to 
form a health care coalition agreement and in fact it wasn't lived 
up to. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I don't know if the government ever intended on really 
living up to it. All they want to do is get the heat off of them for 
the moment. And I'll tell you, that's what drives this 
government. It doesn't matter if you're talking about their 
gaming policies or their agriculture policies, all they do is take 
care of things for the moment. There is absolutely no long-term 
vision with the government at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me read on here from the community of Vanguard back 
to the survey, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 It is felt that the provision of adequate emergency care 

has still not been provided. Doctor services only on 
three days a week and for three hours each day. 
Ambulance services will be downgraded January 1, '95, 
as there is still no provision to replace the previous 
operator who is finished at that time. 

 
 There are no emergency beds, no long-term care beds, 

no palliative beds left in our community. With no 
facility there is no way of knowing about the numbers 
of people on waiting-lists nor what problems there are 
in getting placements. 

 
 The elderly in this community have very little choice in 

where they go when care is required. Basically they 
have to go where there is a bed. 

 
That's the community of Vanguard, Mr. Speaker. And obviously 
from what I've read here today, the community of Vanguard 
don't feel that the rural health care coalition  



March 28, 1995 

 
1203 

agreement has been lived up to. 
 
We now have the town of Cut Knife — Cut Knife, Mr. Speaker. 
At the moment we only have two eight-hour observation and 
assessment beds. They are available for use during the day only. 
According to the agreement, these should be available on a 
justified need and basis. We understand the physician is the 
person who decides what is justified need. 
 
And it goes on for quite some time, Mr. Speaker. But in fact the 
physicians, as you heard me talk about the physician in Ponteix 
awhile ago, in the end wasn't the one to decide who the justified 
need was; in fact it was the district health board, and it was 
those people that were in control of the funds. That's who said 
what the justified need was. 
 
Now it's the town of Cut Knife. Here's the community of Ituna. 
No doctor after . . . you've got to bear with me, Mr. Speaker; 
some of these are hard to read I guess due to some 
photocopying problems: no doctor after clinic hours and 
patients must be transferred; travel costs to the patient are very 
expensive. That's Ituna. And in fact then it goes on to say, no, 
there has not been any agreement that . . . no living up to the 
agreement. 
 
Here is the community of Gull Lake, and it states . . . the first 
question, Mr. Speaker. Gull Lake — I'm just going to pick out a 
few lines here — the district board refused to recognize the 
advisory committee in consultation on community needs. And 
in fact, no, parts of the agreement have not been implemented; 
they have no idea when they're going to be implemented, or if at 
all ever implemented. 
 
Let's go on. Here's the community of Mankota. And what does 
Mankota have to say about whether this rural health care 
coalition agreement has been lived up to. It says: agreement 
between rural health coalition and the Department of Health has 
been ignored. Communication is poor at best, and usually in the 
directive form only. 
 
I won't waste a lot of time going through these, Mr. Speaker. 
I'm just going to pick a few lines because I think it's pretty 
obvious what the people are really saying here. 
 
Oh here's the community of Norquay. And I hope some of the 
members that are listening, I hope these are communities that 
are in your ridings, because I tell you at the end of the day 
you're going to have to go back and at some point answer to the 
citizens of these communities. 
 
From Norquay, it states here: at a regular meeting on January 
18, 1995, the chamber of commerce of Norquay moved, 
seconded, and passed unanimously that our health centre must 
have at least two acute care beds. Because they're taking a 
position that they were taken away and they shouldn't have been 
taken away. 
 
And they give a few examples here: 
 

 We had one man sent to Canora and there was no bed 
when he got there. He was told to come back tomorrow 
. . . 

 
Well I hear members over there heckling, but perhaps you'd like 
to enter into the debate later on. Let me go on: 
 
 . . . only tomorrow he died. 
 
That fellow died. 
 
 Another man was sent to Yorkton to be tested for blood 

clots . . . 
 
And it goes on to say how there was no bed available. He then 
had to be moved to a different community. In fact it's on and on 
and on. There's no beds available, and agreements aren't being 
lived up to. Here's another one. It states that no, the agreement 
hasn't been lived up to. No staffing. Oh we could go on and on. 
 
I hope that you people have some explanation for these people 
in all of these communities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know how much some of these 
government members are going to be anxious to get into this 
debate because I think it's best for them to get into the debate 
because they're the ones that have so much explaining to do. 
And I don't know if there's enough time in a 28- or a 30- or a 
31-day campaign to explain why you people were part and 
parcel of the devastation and the destruction that you caused in 
rural Saskatchewan, especially out in health care, in the 
dismantling of health care in what our pioneers — your 
grandparents — built up over the years. You people with a 
quick vote and no thought decided that you would just take it 
all down. Somehow you felt you had that right. 
 
Well I'm telling you one thing, the member over there heckling, 
I hope you decide to get up and talk later and state your 
position, state your position clearly to the communities that 
you're hoping to represent, because you know, Mr. Speaker, it 
doesn’t matter what newspaper article you pick up, for about 
two years there was a crisis happening. And there still are. 
 
Here we have one from . . . oh actually, this one is only from a 
few days ago. This is in March. This happened at . . . this is 
from the health care in Prince Albert: PA health care slapped on 
the wrist, is the headline here, Mr. Speaker. And it talks about, 
it talks about a young lady who had actually broke a limb, an 
arm I think it was. I read this here the other day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A wrist. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — A wrist. And in fact when she went to her 
health facility in Prince Albert, in Prince Albert . . . now this is 
supposed to be one of the larger base hospitals that in fact were 
going to take care of a lot of these problems. She went to this 
facility and couldn't get treatment. They told her, well go on to 
Melfort. 
 



March 28, 1995 

 
1204 

Well you know what people in rural Saskatchewan are 
thinking? She . . . (inaudible) . . . a bad thing, and well, if I can't 
get treatment in a community the size of Prince Albert, why 
then would I go to Melfort? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, she attempted . . . I'm just going to go from 
memory. I don't have to quote. She attempted then to make it 
into Saskatoon to get treatment. She didn't feel it was safe to 
stay there because 10 minutes after she had been in the hospital, 
someone else came in with a broken limb and was told the same 
thing — go to Melfort. 
 
Why on earth, if they've devastated so many of the small rural 
hospitals, couldn't the base hospitals take care of the problems? 
Have you cut back on the funding to the point where they can't 
operate either? Heavens, is there no compassion, is there no 
thought in your actions? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, she tried to get to Saskatoon; didn't make it 
because, I guess, of the weather. Went back to Prince Albert, 
was given painkillers, said you must get there. You must get 
there because leaving it another day or two is too late. I mean 
there's people with broken limbs that are having to wait one and 
two and three days out there for treatment. 
 
We're almost to the year 2000. Like aren't you with it a little 
bit? It's fine for you to sit there and heckle, but aren't you with it 
at all? There's people that are needing care out there. You want 
to come out in the rural areas, Mister, and don't heckle me in 
here, but come out to the rural areas and debate me and we'll 
see how far you get. 
 
Because there's lists and lists and lists of people that are saying, 
we've had enough of your actions. That's what they're saying, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think I'm going to close on this, for the fact that this 
government has so much to answer for. And in fact, you know, 
when the government decided that they would have to get into 
health care reform, you recall, Mr. Speaker, that they were 
going to do it to save $20 million over a three-year time frame. 
But what have we found out in the last 10 days because we've 
raised it so many times in the legislature here? That in fact 
you're spending, I think it was $12 million more in health care 
this year than before health care reform started. And what 
you've done is shuffled off . . . we had I think it was 18 
statements from 18 out of the 30 health district boards, and 16 
of those 18 are showing $27 million of debt. 
 
And the people, I'll tell you what they're asking me, now that 
we've made this public. Perhaps the books of the province really 
aren't balanced at all. If we happen to find out in this one 
instance $27 million that you people have shovelled out there in 
debt to just health district boards, where else have you hidden 
the debt? But the truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, this 
problem is going to be around to haunt them for some time. 
 
And you know, it made us wonder too here in the past week or 
10 days when we were raising this, all the debt that is out in  

these health district boards, in fact how it was that the minister 
could not really tell us what the debt was. In fact he said he 
didn't know what the debt was, but yet he was still signing and 
he was still allowing health district boards to run deficits into 
'94-95. 
 
When the media questioned him — I recall his statement to the 
media; it was something like, oh well, we're going to have to 
analyse this. Well I think you're going to have to analyse a lot of 
things. I think you should go out and analyse what the feelings 
of the people in rural Saskatchewan are. I know in June they are 
more than anxious to show you exactly what their feelings are. 
 
And with that, you know, some of the members opposite, you 
can get up, amend the motion, make yourselves look good to 
just a few of the people sitting in here today. You go ahead and 
do that but, you know, it's not me that you're going to have to 
answer to. I only raise these concerns on behalf of the citizens 
of the rural Saskatchewan, of the people of these communities, 
in the communities that some of you people represent. That's 
who I'm raising them on. You should be sticking up for your 
own communities but you chose not to do it. So you go ahead 
and make any amendments you want, do whatever you feel you 
must do. But remember, at the end of the day we all have one 
boss, and I can't wait to see what your boss is going to say to 
you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 
 That this Assembly condemn the Minister of Health for 

his disregard for the health, safety and well-being of 
rural Saskatchewan residents through his failure to 
honour all of the agreed-to terms and conditions of the 
Rural Health Coalition Agreement between the 
provincial government and certain health districts. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Regina North West. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying that I 
welcome the Minister of Health back to the Assembly and I 
hope he is feeling better. I think we all agree that we don't think 
enough about our health and well-being until something critical 
happens and then it comes as a shock to be reminded that we do 
have limits to the stress and neglect our bodies can withstand. 
So on behalf of the Liberal caucus, I welcome the minister 
back. 
 
I also welcome the opportunity to enter this debate today 
because there are a great many unresolved problems in health 
care, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, our 
health care system needed to be carefully evaluated, and it was 
very important that a plan be developed to secure the quality 
and availability of health care delivery fairly and affordably 
across the province. 
 
The fact is that a great deal of change has taken place in our 
health care system, but it has become obvious that there has not 
been a plan from the outset. The point at which it became  



March 28, 1995 

 
1205 

obvious was when 40 communities joined together to form the 
Rural Health Coalition in protest over the failure to provide 
adequate services to the communities where hospitals were 
reduced from full-care facilities to wellness centres. 
 
The formation of the Rural Health Coalition confirmed what 
many people feared. The wellness plans for Saskatchewan were 
not carefully constructed plans after all, and the safety of 
Saskatchewan people was in jeopardy as the result of the 
decisions made to withdraw services wholly or partially from 
51 local rural hospitals. 
 
But why was it necessary for townspeople and community 
leaders to take up the challenge? It was necessary, Mr. Speaker, 
because this government not only failed to listen to people's 
concerns, they also failed to act on their promises to the rural 
communities whose hospitals were converted to wellness 
centres — promises that certain levels of service and care 
would be sustained. In their discussion, the Rural Health 
Coalition and the Department of Health finally came to an 
agreement that there would be a provision of certain level of 
services to the communities which had experienced conversion 
from hospitals to wellness centres. 
 
(1645) 
 
It is hard to image that the communities involved actually 
became so frustrated with the lack of cooperation from the 
Department of Health that they came to the point of threatening 
legal action in order to get action on the commitments that had 
already been made to them. What were they asking for? Were 
they asking for special treatment, Mr. Speaker? Were they 
asking for something different than other communities were 
asking or receiving? No, they just wanted to see basic services 
provided out of the facilities that were a big part of their 
communities. All they were asking was to be left with sufficient 
services to protect the health and safety of their citizens. 
 
When the reports started to come in about what was happening 
in rural Saskatchewan with respect to health care reform, we 
found them hard to believe. The minister knows that we support 
the need for change in health care, and you can go back to the 
record and realize that we were not levelling criticism at the 
idea of thoughtful, well-planned changes to health care. The 
problem is the changes this government implemented have not 
been thoughtful or well planned. 
 
We have spent countless hours since that time meeting with 
people from rural Saskatchewan, from northern Saskatchewan, 
and in Regina and in Saskatoon, and they all have stories to tell. 
What is becoming increasingly obvious, Mr. Speaker, is that 
what started out as a commitment from Saskatchewan people to 
work with this government to try to improve their health care 
system, quickly turned into a battle. 
 
First the government asked the people what they want. And 
while people were still trying to figure out what they need and 
what they want, along came the Department of Health and said, 
never mind what you need or what you can get by on; here's  

what you get and don't make a fuss. 
 
Reform of rural health care had no rhyme or reason, Mr. 
Speaker. New facilities were closed while initiatives were being 
devised down the road to build or upgrade ageing facilities. 
Fully equipped hospitals were converted to health centres, 
where the priorities became office space and administration 
instead of people and patient care. 
 
I give full credit to the members of the Rural Health Coalition 
for having the courage to stand together and demand some 
accountability from the minister. That was not an easy thing to 
do. It shows us just how much health care matters to these 
communities and how much sacrifice the people of 
Saskatchewan are prepared to make to protect the services they 
pay taxes to receive. 
 
But it also shows that there is only so much compromise in the 
countryside. People know the difference between cooperation 
and coercion. They understand the difference between sacrifice 
and social suicide and they know that communities without 
accessible and dependable health care will not survive. 
 
One of our party's candidates in the imminent election is an 
integral part of the Rural Health Coalition. He understood what 
the changes were going to mean, not just the changes to his 
community, but to rural communities across Saskatchewan who 
were facing conversion by coercion. 
 
And his was one of 40 communities who would not accept the 
blatant coercion of the rural health reform agenda. And so they 
threatened to sue the government for failing to provide certain 
basic services — threatened to sue, Mr. Speaker. I have yet to 
hear an explanation why 40 communities had to threaten legal 
action just to get their own government to come to the table and 
discuss health care reform. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that a reform is a good 
reform if the reform process has been developed with the 
support and consultation of the people who will be affected. 
Then there should be an expectation that dialogue and 
discussion about what is working and what is not working will 
be an accepted part of the process. 
 
We have received so many complaints about the process in the 
wellness reform that I could not even begin to communicate 
them all to this Assembly. But the whole issue of process is 
certainly equal in magnitude to the issue of actual health care 
which is being discussed. People's concerns about the 
mechanics of health care are the deep and overriding concerns. 
But the concerns about process are not to be ignored or 
dismissed. 
 
In fact one of the things the coalition insisted upon was 
services, and the other, Mr. Speaker, was process. They 
committed to provide certain basic services that were stripped 
from communities and they agreed to institute a process for 
people to resolve outstanding issues. 
 



March 28, 1995 

 
1206 

The government signed an agreement to put the dispute 
resolving mechanism in place by April 30, 1994. But when did 
they finally deliver on that agreement? Not in April, 1994, not 
in September, not even by the end of 1994. No, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister could not even get it together to put the dispute 
resolution in place until January, 1995 — eight months past his 
own deadline. 
 
So setting aside the issue of services, I say shame on this 
government for not being able to develop the process to resolve 
disputes for eight months during such a crucial time in health 
reform. 
 
Just at the time the process was finally announced, Mr. Speaker, 
our candidate in Meadow Lake canvassed a number of his 
fellow Rural Health Coalition members for their assessment of 
whether the Rural Health Coalition Agreement was being 
addressed in their communities. He also asked them a number 
of direct questions about the status of the services they were 
promised. 
 
The motion before the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, 
condemning the government for failing to implement the 
agreement with the Rural Health Coalition, is fully supported 
by the comments from the members of that coalition. 
 
From Climax, I quote: 
  
 District board and Department of Health have not met 

with the community in relationship to the $50,000 grant 
that was part of the agreement and which was to have 
been spent to bridge the transition to a longer-term 
health plan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these communities were assured they would be 
part of the planning; that they would have input into the 
decisions. 
 
From Vanguard the comments are: 
 
 It is felt that the provision of adequate emergency care 

has still not been provided. Doctor service is only three 
hours each week and for three hours each day. 
Ambulance service will be downgraded January 31 as 
there is no provision to replace the current operator who 
is finished. 

 
Mr. Speaker, ambulance service was part of the services agreed 
to. 
 
And from Cut Knife, they had to say: 
 
 We have not had convalescent care other than that 

provided through home care, even though Cut Knife's 
health centre is an integrated facility. 

 
Government members have a choice this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker. I notice that they chose to delay introducing the 
condolence motion for Judge Estey until today and to use as  

much of the private members' day debate as possible to avoid 
the issues of pensions and rural health care. 
 
Rural health care will continue to be in a state of mismanaged 
crisis, Mr. Speaker, as long as this government refuses to stand 
and be accountable for its actions. 
 
I second the motion of the member from Shaunavon and urge 
the government to immediately address this serious issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, being near 5 o'clock, I 
move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member can't do that because we are still 
on the motion before the House and that motion has not been 
adjourned. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I disagree with most 
of what the Liberals . . . in fact all of what the Liberals said and 
move this debate do now adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 
 


