






















































May 15, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 15, 1995 

 

 
2207 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
deliver petitions on behalf of the Shaunavon school and the 
people there, and I will read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
programs towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1, 
rather than allocating these funds towards capital 
construction projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to deliver these on behalf of the people of south-west 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from Spalding, Quill Lake, Rose Valley 
areas of the province, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions I 
wish to lay on the Table today, and I'd like to read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearm owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the petitions I am presenting today, Mr. Speaker, are 
signed by . . . the majority are signed by individuals from the 
Nipawin area, White Fox, Saskatoon, Birch Hills, St. Louis, and  

 P.A. (Prince Albert). I so present. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have several pages of petitions I would like to present, and I 
will just therefore read the prayer. And the prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these come from Preeceville, Sturgis, Saskatoon, 
Regina, and several other places. I would like to present them at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
my colleagues in presenting petitions to the Assembly from 
people around the province, and I will read the prayer to 
identify the type of petition: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come mainly from Preeceville, 
although there are signatories as well from Endeavour, Hazel 
Dell, Prince Albert, and Wadena. Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure to lay these on the Table at this time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have petitions 
dealing with this issue of gun control. They come from the 
Buchanan, Yorkton, Estevan, Prince Albert, Canwood areas of 
the province. I'd be pleased to present them now to the 
Assembly. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose changes 

to federal legislation regarding firearm ownership. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2208 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, a group of students from the North Star School at Hyas 
and they're seated in your west gallery, Mr. Speaker. Eleven 
students in all from the grades 7, 8, and 9 and they're 
accompanied here today by their teacher, Stella Wohlgemuth — 
and I hope I pronounced that right, Stella. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome this group here as most of 
them are friends and neighbours of mine, as my farm is located 
probably only 12 miles from Hyas and less than that from many 
of their farms. So, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask all the members 
here to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my real 
pleasure today to be introducing to you and to all members of 
the House, 53 students from Westmount School in Moose Jaw. 
They're accompanied by three of their teachers and the two bus 
drivers. 
 
Westmount has had a tradition, Mr. Speaker, of having school 
groups visit the legislature. I'm glad to see that tradition 
continue. I'm looking forward to meeting with the students for 
some drinks, some good questions, and some photos a little 
later this afternoon. I'd invite all members of the House to 
welcome these grade 8 students from Westmount School in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
introduce through you and to all members of the Assembly, 
along with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 10 living 
skills program students from the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) Palliser campus in Moose 
Jaw who are seated in the west gallery. 
 
They are accompanied today by their instructor, Paula Green, I 
see. And following their stay in the Assembly here, they'll be 
taking a tour of the building and then we'll meet later for photos 
and refreshments and a visit. 
 
Members may recognize some former colleagues of theirs who 
have attended to the Legislative Assembly in the past. And I'd 
ask all members to wish them a warm welcome and a very 
successful conclusion to their studies this year. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to the other members 
of the Assembly, a constituent of mine, a grade 12 student from 
Pangman, Heidi Kessler, who is here today and seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 

She's here on a school-related program in which she is getting 
some kind of work experience or shadowing the work of our 
pages. And so I welcome Heidi here today. Enjoy your visit. I 
understand also that Pangman School will be in on Thursday, 
and hope to see you then also. 
 
I'd like all members to welcome Heidi Kessler here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

SaskTel Modernization in Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to report some 
excellent development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm reporting the SaskTel's 3-phase $29 million 
modernization program. And it includes, Mr. Speaker, a fibre 
optics from Molanosa to Pinehouse. We have digitization in the 
communities as well as satellite-based stations. 
 
On phase 1 and 2, Mr. Speaker, we have communities impacted 
. . . are Wollaston Lake, Southend, Grandmother's Bay, Stanley 
Mission, Pinehouse, Pelican Narrows, Sandy Bay, and Hull 
Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on phase 2, satellite earth stations and also the 
switches will be done in the following communities  of Black 
Lake, Stony Rapids, Fond-du-Lac, and Uranium City. Mr. 
Speaker, this important connection, which creates the latest in 
technological and communication linkages, is a tremendous 
step forward, with the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
communities of the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I would like to say this. We have, on Friday, 
on last Friday on the 12th, the Premier was there, the Highways 
minister was there, and the bridge of Cumberland House was 
. . . the sod was finally turned. A tremendous, tremendous day 
for Cumberland House. Mr. Speaker, we feel also that there was 
representation from the MP (Member of Parliament), Vic 
Althouse, and I think that this is a tremendous day. The linkage 
between the community of Cumberland and the province of 
Saskatchewan, a great day for the people of Cumberland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meat Processing Plant Expansions 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here's an 
appropriate after-lunch topic: meat. Last week Intercontinental 
Packers in Saskatoon and Western Canadian Beef Packers in 
Moose Jaw announced plant expansions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Intercon expansion will include the addition of 
smoke houses for sausage and smoked meat with larger 
shipping and distribution facilities. Meanwhile Western 
Canadian will construct new coolers and expand its plant to 
include bone beef, processed hamburger, and counter-ready  



May 15, 1995 

 
2209 

beef products. 
 
These expansions are the result of government cooperation; $5 
million in forgivable loans are being made available. These 
loans are interest free for five years and forgivable at the rate of 
$12,500 for every incremental job created in the first three 
years. Taxpayers will also benefit because the two companies 
have agreed to forego more than a million dollars in tax 
investment credits. That was the good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now for the really good news. The expansions will create 400 
jobs, while maintaining the existing 1,070 jobs. As well, 158 
person-years of construction will be required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those who want to do away with our 
Economic Development department, and they must also want to 
do away with both these new jobs and the many existing jobs. 
 
I want to congratulate Intercon and Western Canadian for their 
expansions and thank these companies and their productive 
employees for their continuing contribution to our economy. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battered Women's Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, this is Battered Women's 
Awareness Week. With studies showing that as many as 4 out 
of 10 women may be subjected to abuse, we must ask why so 
many women live in fear in their own homes. We as a society 
cannot afford to dismiss this problem. We have a responsibility 
to examine what causes this violence and to deal with its 
results. 
 
While this is a serious problem, I am encouraged by the 
progress we have made to alleviate and eliminate it. Last year, 
this Assembly passed The Victims of Domestic Violence Act. 
We also have increased support for community-based services. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, volunteers and agencies 
continue to perform selfless and important work. They quietly 
perform their task, neither receiving nor demanding attention. 
The reward is the faith and hope that domestic violence may 
some day be non-existent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I commend those who deal with the issue. 
Their work is both meaningful and necessary. I also challenge 
all people to strive to ensure that the larger issue of the 
treatment of women in our society is dealt with. It is only in 
dealing with these large issues that we will be able to solve this 
ongoing social problem. 
 
Finally, to bettered women everywhere, I say: please do not be 
afraid to reach out and seek help. Your pain is not your fault 
nor is your burden yours to share alone. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Opening of Bakuluk Bus Lines 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very happy to 
announce that as of next Tuesday you will be able to get on a 
bus in Radville, make quick stops to pick up other passengers 
and freight in Ceylon, Bengough, Ogema, and Pangman, and 
travel on to Regina, and be able to return home the same 
evening. 
 
This good news announcement is the result of efforts of 
individuals, businesses, and the communities in my 
constituency. I am pleased with the results and gratified that I 
could play a role in bringing this service to my constituency. 
 
The official launch of Bakuluk Bus Lines Ltd. was held in 
Bengough on Saturday at Bengough Motors with Jack Toothill 
as the agent in Bengough. 
 
Bakuluk Bus Lines is operated by Joe and Elizabeth Bakuluk 
with agents in Pangman, Ogema, Ceylon, Radville, Bengough, 
and the Oasis at the junction of Highway 6 and 13. Drivers 
Linda and Bev were also present. 
 
The Highway Traffic Board has approved a five-day per week 
passenger express service. Business people, farmers, and 
seniors, applauded the announcement of this service. 
 
The Bakuluks bring proven experience and expertise to this 
line. They currently operate a similar service between Regina 
and Kenosee. Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of entrepreneurial 
spirit that keeps rural Saskatchewan viable, and although I 
expressed my personal congratulations and thanks to the 
Bakuluks and all the agents and communities involved on 
Saturday, I want to publicly repeat them and extend our best 
wishes to this vote of confidence in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spiritwood Featured in Canadian Living Magazine 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, the rural way of life in 
Saskatchewan is once again receiving acclaim. Today I'm 
pleased to inform the Assembly that the June edition of the 
Canadian Living magazine has excellent coverage of the annual 
Spiritwood grounds and garden competition. 
 
In the words of the reporter who wrote the article, Naomi 
Frankel: the gardens of Spiritwood, Saskatchewan are 
motivated by community pride and the love of the land. 
 
The article went on to say that not only is the natural beauty of 
the area captivating, but the cultivated beauty of the grounds 
and gardens is impressive for what it says about the area's 
residents. 
 
I would like to congratulate Betty Mykietiak who won first 
prize for both the rural garden and the rural grounds category,  



May 15, 1995 

 
2210 

and Julie Simon for the taking first place in the urban ground 
Spiritwood category. 
 
I would also like to extend my congratulations to the other 
award winner and to the Spiritwood Horticultural Society for 
putting on this event. As the article suggests, this annual 
competition and show are part of the region's community spirit 
and one way the residents keep the lifeblood of their 
community flowing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Advertising 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the other 
day my party ran an ad in some newspapers and some people 
made the comment that they thought the name Progressive 
Conservative was too small. That's funny, because every day the 
papers are full of NDP (New Democratic Party) ads that don't 
say NDP anywhere. I guess that's because these ads are paid for 
by the taxpayers and disguised as government advertising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Provincial Secretary. Mr. 
Minister, I understand one of the very few actual duties you 
have as Provincial Secretary is to oversee the advertising that is 
done by all government departments. I was wondering if you 
could give us a report on the amount of advertising your 
government has done this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is the year's overall advertising budget for 
the government Crowns and departments, and how much have 
you already spent of that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
member, the Leader of the Opposition, well knows that to get 
specific answers on numbers is . . . the appropriate place to do 
that is in the estimates of the relevant departments. I don't have 
that information before me. I will undertake to provide for it 
when the questions are asked in the . . . whichever departments 
they're asked. 
 
And in my department, I certainly will be able to respond, and I 
hope that maybe we'll be able to get to those estimates this 
week and I'll have that information available. 
 
But I can assure the member of one thing, that the amount of 
advertising that is spent by this government is by several 
million dollars less than was spent by the former administration 
in the last year of their term. And I think that that's the 
appropriate thing to do in order to reduce the expenditures of 
government; but yet at the same time make sure that the citizens 
of Saskatchewan know, through advertising and other means, 
the programs which they pay for which are available to them, so 
that they can access them. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, here's 
another one of your broken promises: the NDP will reduce 
government advertising by 80 per cent. Remember making that 
kind of commitment to the taxpayers of this province during the 
last election campaign? Well it hasn't happened. 
 
And now you're spending more than ever on taxpayer funded 
pre-election ad campaign — well over a hundred thousand 
dollars on health advertising, almost half a million dollars on 
job creation advertising. And it's interesting that health and job 
creation are your two major . . . probably two major election 
issues upcoming, and the two areas where your government has 
had the most dismal record and need to shore up its image. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are the taxpayers of this province paying for 
your pre-election campaign promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I can say very clearly 
to the Leader of the Official Opposition that if he checks the 
record he will see that the amount of advertising that is being 
spent by the government in every year since we became 
government — including this year — even after inflation is 
taken into consideration, is less than was spent under the time 
when that administration was on this side of the House and 
occupying these front benches, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there are certain kinds of advertising that is necessary — 
whether it's JobStart, Mr. Speaker, or whether it's services that 
people need to know so that they know where they should be 
able to go to access those jobs or those particular services. It's 
important that the public be made aware of them. 
 
And that's the kind of advertising that this government does — 
advertising that serves, from an information point of view, the 
people who pay the taxes to get those services. Not the kind of 
political advertising that used to take place under the former 
administration and that you see take place by Liberal 
administrations everywhere across this country and has really 
no useful purpose whatsoever except to try to promote the 
political party of that particular administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, another 
area where your government has a dismal record is utility rates. 
You've used utility rates as a back-door taxation method and 
raised them time after time. So now do you do anything 
concrete to address the problem? No. Instead you are hitting 
Saskatchewan people with a barrage of ads telling us how low 
our rates are. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much did this advertising campaign cost so 
far? And how much more taxpayers' money do you intend to 
spend on image advertising before the election is called? 
 



May 15, 1995 

 
2211 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The advertising is done by each of the Crown corporations. 
This, Mr. Speaker, is a more appropriate question for our 
Crown Corporations Committee. The government itself and the 
Crown Investments Corporation does not do any advertising 
directly. 
 
Let me say with respect to the substance of the ads, as distinct 
from the ads themselves, they advertise rates which are 
competitive with those across Canada  more than competitive 
 and the return on equity of the Crown corporations is more 
than competitive with the private industry. 
 
So both the rates and the corporations are efficient and the 
public get good service and we believe they acknowledge that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Loans to Business 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is to the Premier or to his designate. Mr. Premier, last week you 
announced a $5 million forgivable loan to Intercon and Western 
Canadian Beef Packers. Now in today's order in council you 
have granted an additional $2.5 million to Watergroup 
Companies Inc. Since the beginning of this session you have 
given out millions of taxpayers' dollars in your efforts to bolster 
your poor job creation record before the election. That includes 
$150 million loan to your former nemesis, Crown Life 
Insurance. 
 
Mr. Premier, I realize that we're on the eve of an election. But 
given your loud opposition to government loans and grants to 
businesses, I'm wondering why you feel it's necessary to buy 
jobs with taxpayers' money. That's not what you promised the 
people during the last election, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that I'm pleased he is paying attention to the 
thousands of jobs that are being created in Saskatchewan by the 
business community. 
 
And I want to say to him very clearly as well, is that when 
announcements are made, when CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank 
of Commerce) announces they're moving to Saskatchewan to 
create 500 good paying jobs at a call centre, the members 
opposite are critical. 
 
When we talk to them about Drake Meats expanding in Drake, 
Saskatchewan, and creating jobs, they complain about it. And 
when Thomson Meats doubles their capacity in Melfort, they 
complain. And when Mr. Glass announces that he's expanding 
his air service into the United States under the new bilateral 
open air policy, they complain. 
 

There isn't anything that will make these people happy even 
though under their administration, billions — not millions, but 
billions  of dollars were squandered in almost any area you 
can think about. 
 
But for you to talk about waste when it comes to expanding the 
beef processing, the slaughtering capability in this province, 
when we watch to the west of us, where I believe $200 million 
were forgiven by the Alberta government for your buddy, Mr. 
Pocklington, in that fiasco, to say that we have anything to 
worry about or to be critical of us and the deals that are being 
struck with the small assistance from the people of this 
province, is almost laughable in light of the fact that we have to 
compete with your friends in Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, 
we're only struck by your hypocrisy in this whole matter. Last 
month you lost a thousand jobs; you gain a few but you always 
lose more. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me quote from a speech that your Premier gave 
on the eve of the 1991 provincial election. This quote comes 
from your 1990 fund-raiser dinner: In the 1990s, governments 
cannot be involved in this kind of financing to be involved in 
commercial activity. 
 
Pretty definite. That was the Premier's comment back then. But 
as usual, you've delivered something completely different. In 
spite of your repeated and noisy opposition to grants to 
businesses, you've done exactly that; you've done just exactly 
what you promised you wouldn't do just before another 
provincial election. 
 
Let me ask you the same question that you asked while you 
were in opposition. And this was the Premier's comment: Why 
are you throwing hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayers' 
money around while you're asking everyone to tighten their own 
belts, taxing them to the hilt, and closing their hospitals to 
boot? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member obviously 
is into his election rhetoric and exaggeration when he talks 
about hundreds of millions of dollars. That's obviously the 
former Conservative government when they were in 
government and dealing with things like GigaText and all of 
those wasteful expenditures of money. 
 
I want to quote to you and to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a 
quote from one Mr. Wilfred Campbell who is the Saskatchewan 
stock growers president, and his comments on the expansion 
announced Friday. But he says that major expansion of the two 
meat-packing plants in the province will be substantial boosts to 
the provincial economy. Campbell says the increased capacity 
will open new markets, create more jobs, and mean even greater 
growth in the livestock numbers in the province. And I quote: I 
see this as being real positive for our Saskatchewan beef 
industry. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2212 

Now if the members opposite understand pork and beef 
production, they will understand the need for slaughtering 
capability in the province. They will also understand that we 
have need to compete with the megabucks that are being 
subsidized into the Alberta economy as it would relate to the 
same industry. You may want to get onto the phone and give 
Mr. Klein a call and see if he will reduce the amount of money 
he's subsidizing this industry so we don't have to compete with 
him for the same results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, this 
morning I heard on the radio that Alberta had the best record in 
the past year for growth, and Prince Edward Island was next. 
Saskatchewan wasn't even on the top end of the list at all. So 
you'll have to excuse us for our cynicism, Mr. Minister. But 
there are a lot of cynics out there who don't believe you because 
of your past promises and your past record. You create one job 
and you lose two, and the two usually go to Alberta. 
 
Now you have promised to eliminate poverty. You've promised 
that the PST (provincial sales tax) would end by October 21, 
1994. You told people in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) government would close down all of 
the hospitals in that constituency, and then you went out and 
did it yourself. 
 
Now the Premier also promised, Minister, that  in the same 
fund-raising speech that I talked about a minute ago and I'll 
quote from that again  an NDP government would eliminate 
unfairness in the awarding of government contracts. 
 
Unfortunately, you delivered the exact opposite, as usual, and 
the most unfair, biased, politically motivated, and costly 
tendering process possible is what you delivered. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how does giving these kinds of grants to 
businesses and these kinds of contracts through your union 
buddies, square with your promises to get the government out 
of our economy? And how does this square with your Premier's 
promise, Mr. Minister, to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the members opposite and to the Assembly, that the 
government, we believe, does have a role to play when it comes 
to developing the economy of the province. We are not in the 
category, as the Liberals and Tories seem to be, competing for 
the Reform vote. 
 
I must say though that with the small percentage that the 
Reform vote is at in this province, I'm surprised that both 
parties are competing for that small ground. But maybe one 
shouldn't be surprised when you realize that they are so lacking 
in any policy that they have to go after the Reform Party to try 
to find a platform to run on. 
 

And I noticed with great interest the attempt to Americanize the 
process more by talking about recall of MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in the platform announced in their 
platform last Friday by the Leader of the Opposition. But I can 
tell him he shouldn't worry about recall, because there's going to 
be an election very soon and when there'll be a number of 
recalls from members of that caucus, and so you shouldn't be 
too anxious for recall of MLAs because it's going to happen 
very quickly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Training Programs Advertising 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this province 
learned Saturday that the government has spent almost a half a 
million dollars on advertising for so-called job creation 
programs. This advertising blitz comes at a time when a 
provincial election call is just around the corner. The minister 
has stated in this weekend's paper that these costs will rise as 
the programs progress. 
 
My question to the Minister of Education. I am sure that your 
department has a total advertising budget. What will the total 
cost of advertising be when Future Skills and JobStart are 
completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to thank the member for the question. This program so far 
has created over 600 jobs — real jobs. If you look at 
governments across this country — and the Liberals are famous 
for it — they have thrown grants to business to train people but 
the training has led nowhere. It has led absolutely nowhere. 
 
This program is ground-breaking, Mr. Speaker. For the first 
time in this country we're addressing the question of training for 
what. We are training people for real jobs, jobs that will exist 
into the future. The individual will receive publicly recognized 
training that will allow them to go on to further post-secondary 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this is the wave of the future. This is 
what we need to be doing — training people for real jobs, jobs 
that exist now so that Saskatchewan people, not Albertans, not 
Manitobans, not Ontarians, can have those jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, I have no argument with the 
fact that this is a leading-edge concept that the government has 
brought forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — My concern, Mr. Speaker, has to do with 
the fact of how they brought it forward. Mr. Speaker, I table a 
list titled Future Skills status report. This is a detailed list of 
proposed Future Skills placements as of the end of March. The 
list shows that just over 900,000 in grants have been approved  



May 15, 1995 

 
2213 

or conditionally approved for this program. 
 
My question to the Minister of Education: how can you justify 
spending half a million dollars in advertising already, when 
according to this list you have only actually allocated 900,000 
to businesses to help create these jobs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is we 
are having business work with public training institutions to 
deliver a training program that is real, that leads to a portable 
credential — to a credential that gets you into further education. 
 
This is not an easy process. We're challenging business and 
challenging public training institutions to deliver work-based 
training that leads to a real skill, a portable skill, a skill that will 
lead elsewhere. 
 
Now you say you've got a report as of the end of March. We are 
now into the middle of May — six weeks later. There are other 
training projects that have been approved by SIAST. We have 
other projects that are in the process of being approved. But we 
don't want to deliver any old training program; we want to 
deliver a training program that meets the needs of the individual 
employer, that will also lead to a real credential for the 
employee that's receiving that training. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister has stated that 
there have been over 8,400 inquires about Future Skills and 
JobStart through the 1-800 number. The department surely has 
tracking in place to show how many of these inquiries actually 
led to job placements, or whether the majority of jobs were 
filled by companies suggesting specific workers. 
 
My question to the minister: how many of these inquiries 
actually led to successful placements for people using the 1-800 
line? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we have 600 
people that are now in jobs, real jobs. 
 
I was in Biggar last week. Microgro industries, which is the 
leading edge for the greenhouse industry in Saskatchewan, for 
the first time we're going to try and wholesale seedlings to 
greenhouses across the province. We're not going to import 
those seedlings from British Columbia or the United States. 
This is a made-in-Saskatchewan industry. 
 
We have trainees at Microgro, people who were unemployed in 
the area of Biggar — I just happen to know this area because 
that's my home area — these are people that didn't have jobs. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they're working in that greenhouse and 
they're going to get, at the end of this process, a horticultural 
certificate from the University of Saskatchewan. That's the kind 
of training, work-based kind of training, that's going to not only 
lead to permanent jobs, but going to lead to industry in this 
province that could sustain itself, and we could begin to export 
our goods and services instead of being importers. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, these programs are supposed 
to provide jobs for young people across the province. The main 
focus is on training these people to qualify for specific 
industries, specific jobs. 
 
My question to the minister: will all the people who receive 
training under the Future Skills program be placed in related 
jobs when their training is completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the way we have the 
program designed is that in order for the employer to get 
reimbursement for the training, that individual, if they're 
successful, has to be in a long-term, permanent job. They have 
to be there into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was in Prince Albert last week at Shuttle Craft. 
The average age of this company is 22 years of age. They have 
over 50 people, young people from the city of P.A. and area, 
working in that business. And we are training over 20 people to 
become fibreglass applicators; 99 per cent of the Shuttle Craft 
product is exported into the United States — Florida and Texas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of jobs that we need to develop 
here in Saskatchewan. We're not only training people to become 
fibreglass applicators, but we're supporting a young business 
where the owners are 25 years of age, so that they can create 
jobs in Saskatchewan, pay taxes here, and develop a product 
that we can export into the U.S. (United States) market. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Sales Tax Exemption 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier or his designate. Mr. Premier, why is it so hard for your 
party to give a straight answer regarding the PST exemption for 
status Indians? I have made our position very clear. I would end 
the exemption for purchases made off reserve. However the 
clearest answer we can get out of you guys is the Associate 
Minister of Finance saying it's in the government's interest to 
determine whether or not some different accommodation might 
be put in place with respect to the PST. But he wouldn't 
elaborate on any specific changes. 
 
Mr. Premier, or Mr. Minister, as leader of your party, can you 
give us a straight answer? Do you intend to end the PST 
exemption, yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As was pointed out in an editorial in 
the Leader-Post this morning, complex questions do not admit 
of simplistic answers. 
 
We are undertaking discussions and promoting discussions in 
an attempt to resolve a broad range of tax issues which are 
difficult and complex. We think that is an appropriate way to  



May 15, 1995 

 
2214 

resolve this. We do not think the Conservative approach, which 
is in equal parts cynical and the timing is strange right before an 
election, we do not think your approach contributes to a 
solution at all. What will contribute to a solution is both sides 
discussing the matter with a hope of resolving it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister is 
saying, kind of in code, but what he is exactly saying is that 
they don't want to discuss important issues during an election 
campaign. What better time to address those kind of issues, Mr. 
Minister, than an election campaign? 
 
Every day the election gets closer, your answers get more 
confusing. You might lower the PST, then again you might not. 
You might end the PST exemption for status Indians, then again 
you might not. It's just like you made all the promises you made 
in 1991. You might keep your promises, then again maybe you 
won't. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know exactly where we stand. We would end 
the PST exemption on off-reserve purchases as an overall 
package to lower the PST to 7 per cent. Why won't you give 
Saskatchewan people the same kind of straight answer? Or do 
you intend to do exactly what you've said? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's apparent, Mr. Speaker, some 
things don't change. In 1982 the Progressive Conservatives 
promised to eliminate the sales tax, and we know what 
happened thereafter. What happened thereafter is you led the 
province to the brink of ruin. This party came into office 
promising sound fiscal management, and that's what we 
delivered. 
 
It is true that members opposite have promised to reduce the 
sales tax by 2 per cent. It's also fair for the public to ask, where 
are you going to get it from? I want to tell the members 
opposite, the public have a sense of déjà vu. You went into the 
1982 election promising the sun, the moon, and the stars, and 
you delivered the dark of night. Once again you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I wish members . . . look, 
let's not point fingers at each other. I think members know who 
have been interrupting this whole question period. And I'm 
asking members to please have respect for the minister and for 
the questioner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would point out to members 
opposite, your 2 per cent cut in the sales tax is going to cost 
$215 million. It is fair and the public are asking, where are you 
going to get it from? And they know where you're going to get 
it from. You're going to get it from Education, from Health, and 
from those two main services. And I say to members opposite, 
that is not what the public of Saskatchewan want in 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So you're saying to the 
people of Saskatchewan what they want is a promise like your 
Premier made in 1991 to eliminate the PST on election night 
midnight. That's what he promised and he didn't deliver to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Your answers get more and more confusing as the days go by. 
So do the contradictions between you and the FSIN (Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations). The Associate Minister of 
Finance says that the government is negotiating with the FSIN 
on this matter. Chief Blaine Favel says no negotiations are 
under way. 
 
Who are we supposed to believe, Mr. Minister? Mr. Minister, 
why does the NDP keep saying that negotiations are under way 
when clearly that is not the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a contrast 
in style. We are attempting to resolve the problem; members 
opposite are attempting to put together a hasty election plank — 
and it does look hasty. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think we should consider 
moving the Leader of the Opposition's chair a little ways away 
from the Liberal leader because you're catching some of the 
disease of the problem with facts. You've changed your position 
on this at least twice . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No we haven't. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Oh yes, you have. You've changed 
your position on this at least twice. 
 
I've a suggestion to the Leader of the Opposition, that is, you 
take a little more time and put a little more thought into what is 
a complex issue and stop trying to turn it into a cynical election 
plank. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Changes of Name 
/Loi concernant les changements de nom 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting Changes of Name be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the keeping of Vital 
Statistics/Loi concernant les services de l'état civil 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the keeping of Vital Statistics be now introduced and  



May 15, 1995 

 
2215 

read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Regulations 
/Loi concernant les règlements 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting Regulations be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 69 — An Act respecting the Interpretation of 
Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing Enactments 

/Loi concernant l'interprétation des textes et édictant 
les règles les régissant 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I move that a Bill respecting the 
Interpretation of Enactments and prescribing Rules Governing 
Enactments be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 70 — An Act respecting the Solemnization of 
Marriage/Loi concernant la célébration du mariage 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the Solemnization of Marriage be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 71 — An Act respecting Victims of Crime/Loi sur 
les victimes d'actes criminels 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting Victims of Crime be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think this is the last warning I'm 
going to give those two members. Order. 
 
(1415) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
ask leave of the House to introduce a motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Does the member have leave? Does the 
member have leave? Order. The member may proceed with his 
motion and will ask for leave. 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
move a motion that a humble address be presented to His 
Honour, the Lieutenant Governor. This address will 
recommend that Kenneth W. Acton of Moose Jaw be 
reappointed as the member of the Public and Private Rights 
Board pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure 
Act. 
 
The reappointment would be effective July 1, 1995 for a term of 
five years. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Acton has 
been the member of the Public and Private Rights Board since 
July 1, 1990 in his capacity as director of the mediation services 
branch of the Department of Justice. This arrangement has 
proven to be very successful. The primary function of both the 
mediation services branch and the Public and Private Rights 
Board is dispute resolution. 
 
The Public and Private Rights Board is established under The 
Expropriation Procedures Act. It assists landowners and 
expropriating authorities in reaching agreement on the most 
appropriate route or design of a public improvement. It may 
also assist in determining what fair and reasonable 
compensation should be paid for the required land or easement. 
 
Given the analogous nature of the board and mediation services 
branch, the reappointment of Kenneth Acton as the member of 
the board is appropriate. As director of the mediation services 
branch, Mr. Acton manages a mediation system that is one of 
the most advanced in Canada. Mr. Acton has extensive 
experience in dispute resolution. He is recognized by his peers 
throughout Canada and the United States for the leadership role 
he has taken in the field of dispute resolution. 
 
Mr. Acton's experience has ensured that landowners facing 
expropriation have access to an enhanced model of dispute 
resolution. His background in administration has facilitated the 
effective administration of the board. His work with 
expropriating parties to encourage them to adopt a more 
collaborative approach has decreased the number of complaints 
received by the board. As a result, the operating costs of the 
board have been reduced during the last five years from 
approximately $100,000 to less than $10,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member for 
Regina Churchill Downs: 
 
 That an humble address be presented to His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor, recommending that Kenneth W. 
Acton, of the city of Moose Jaw, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, be reappointed as the member of the 
Public and Private Rights Board, effective July 1, 1995,  



May 15, 1995 

 
2216 

pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure Act. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 
 

The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
minister, please introduce the officials who have joined us here 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to my 
left is the chairman of the Securities Commission, Marcel de la 
Gorgendiere, QC (Queen's Counsel). Behind Marcel is Ms. 
Barbara Shourounis who is the director; and behind me is Dean 
Murrison who is the deputy director, legal, of the commission. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials, to our deliberations on The 
Securities Act. I understand the main action of this Bill is to 
enact a registration system for commodity traders. And I'm 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just brief us on how this 
system will work and how it compares to the system that this 
legislation will be replacing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — In a few words, Mr. Chair, the system 
that will be in effect for commodity trading is the same as the 
system that is now in effect for the trading in securities 
generally. And the difference between what will happen under 
this amendment and what happens now is considerable. 
 
Right now they simply file a notice that they are trading. Under 
this Bill, they will be required to become registered under the 
provisions of The Securities Act as other traders in securities 
must do. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So then what does that do, Mr. Minister? Does 
that firm up or make our system more accountable? Is that what 
the intention is under the present legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, that's exactly the case. I think the 
member may recall my telling him, Mr. Chairman, at the last 
time the Bill was before the House, that these provisions are 
being included as a result of a request from the industry coming 
from . . . the request coming from commodity traders on the 
Winnipeg Exchange. And this will firm up the registration and 
licensing requirements and is a considerable advance. 
 
Mr. Toth: — You mentioned that it firms up our legislation, 
and you've also, I believe, the last time talked about the fact that 
there were discussions with the Winnipeg Commodity 
Exchange, if I'm not mistaken. What amount of consultations  

did you have with either the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange or 
other security legislators before drafting these changes? And at 
the present time, are most commodities involved in favour or in 
agreement with the legislation as it currently exists today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There has been, I think, an ongoing 
consultative process that is comprehensive and covers 
everybody involved. The copies of the proposed amendments 
have been circulated to the commodities trading industry which 
is located in . . . centred in Winnipeg in so far as western 
Canada is concerned. 
 
They have reacted favourably to the structure of the Act, and we 
have assured them that the regulations that will be developed 
under the Act will be first of all done in full consultation with 
them and will be consistent with regulations that are already in 
place in British Columbia and Alberta. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I believe I did direct a question regarding the 
power to remove individuals from the boards of companies, any 
directors with any sort of previous record of fraud. And what 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, when this Bill gives the 
government that power, how does the government know 
whether they should be recommending or removing a person or 
a director from a company? 
 
Is it because an individual within the company or another board 
member or someone has complained and possibly pointed out 
that a current sitting board member may have at some time 
before been involved in a fraudulent action that somebody 
wasn't aware of and then the minister is asked to react to that? 
 
Could you maybe explain that just a little and make it a little 
clearer, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chair, it's important to remember 
that it is not the government that makes decisions in this area. It 
is, rather, the commission, which operates independently of 
government, and this kind of order would not be made without 
a public hearing. And those hearings are done with due notice 
to everyone who has an interest in it. 
 
The other thing that I want to point out is that the commission 
requires police checks with respect to all directors that are 
involved in an enterprise that's trying to obtain clearance from 
the commission or registration with the commission, or 
whatever. And the police checks are done in an effort to pinch 
off the problem before it happens; to identify any bad actors 
and keep them out of the picture. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, if . . . I'm not sure whether it would 
be somebody from the board of directors or someone outside of 
security would indicate that possibly a board director may have 
. . . or there may be reasons to believe that an individual should 
be reviewed or the case reviewed regarding being part of the 
board, and that review is undertaken. 
 



May 15, 1995 

 
2217 

You mentioned that it comes before a commission before a 
person is reviewed, if I understood you correctly. So then the 
commission would actually review all the details. And if they 
felt that action was needed, they would take it. If not, then it 
wouldn't be taken. 
 
And I'm bringing that to your attention just from our debate in 
Justice the other day regarding some of the concerns I have and 
how charges may be laid or actions may be taken before we 
really review to see if actions should be taken. So if I 
understand you correctly, I hear you saying that there will be a 
review before any open discussion or action or removal of any 
board member is in place. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The commission has both an 
administrative side and a decision-making or quasi-judicial 
side. A lot of matters are dealt with by administrative inquiry or 
administrative investigation and prospectuses are accepted and 
all sorts of things are done under the Act simply by the 
administration of the commission. 
 
With respect to anything where the board is . . . where the 
commission is empowered to make an order under the Act, 
where the commission is exercising a power which this 
Assembly confers upon it, then the commission will have a 
hearing. That hearing will normally be preceded by an 
investigation by staff of the commission. 
 
But then the matter proceeds by evidence before the 
commission and persons are notified, as I indicated in my 
previous answer. They have a right to appear. They have a right 
to make representations. And the normal rules that govern 
quasi-judicial tribunals apply to this tribunal as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand the Bill provides for fines for persons involved in 
security fraud, fines limited to $1 million, and second, paid to 
the general fund. I guess the question that most people have is: 
would that be considered low, to have fines of only $1 million 
in view of what some people may lose through fraudulent 
endeavours, especially in dealing with securities or commodity 
exchange? 
 
And at the same time, I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if indeed 
there are situations like this, if a person would end up being 
charged or convicted or having defrauded the public through 
illegal actions through the securities or commodities exchange, 
wouldn't it be more appropriate to put this fund, this money, 
into a fund that could be used to compensate victims versus just 
handing it to the minister or to the General Revenue Fund for 
the Minister of Finance to spend at her leisure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The million dollars is pretty much 
standard across the country. There is also a provision in the 
legislation that will allow the offender to be imprisoned. And in 
the case of insider trading, the penalty may be a triple . . . triple 
the profits that are made from the particular transaction, which 
is another way of looking at the penalty in those kinds of cases. 
 

Across Canada, it is our understanding that fines are paid into 
the general revenue, and this is pretty standard in other areas 
other than securities law also. 
 
It has been argued, and I think accepted, that if the commission 
were to keep the fines itself, along the lines that the member has 
suggested, then the commission opens itself to an allegation of 
having . . . or a charge of having an interest in the amount of the 
fine that goes beyond the mere penalizing of an offence. And 
the commission then becomes interested in raising its own 
revenue. And I'm told that that can lead to complications under 
the charter. 
 
So it's not likely that Canada will get away from the sort of 
approach that we have here where the fine goes into the general 
revenue of the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in that case would it be possible to 
take this money and rather than putting it right directly into the 
hands of the Securities Commission, set up, if you will, a fund 
to assist victims of fraud, that would be allowed to maybe 
maintain a certain level and help with some compensation for 
loss? 
 
I'm not exactly sure, what avenues do victims have? Is there 
insurance that a victim could buy for when they enter into 
securities or when they're buying on the commodity exchange? 
I'm not exactly sure. But is that a potential or a possibility of 
building up some kind of, if you will, a trust fund to assist 
victims of fraud? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — There is no such trust arrangements that 
we're aware of anywhere in Canada, and we have not given any 
consideration to setting up any sort of assurance fund with 
respect to the sale of securities. It is very much a private sector 
activity with the governments, through the securities 
commissions, simply trying to ensure that the rules respecting 
fair and honest trading are adhered to. In that respect, a great 
deal of effort is made to try and keep out the bad guys, people 
that will be unscrupulous and will take advantage of investors 
who are looking to make a bunch of money in a hurry. And the 
member will see that in going through the Act. 
 
I might also mention that the fine system, the fines just don't 
work. The offenders who are charged are people without any 
money, and the fines don't get paid. The substantial people in 
the industry — the registered brokers and the licensed dealers 
— are substantial people with fairly deep pockets and with 
insurance and bonding and all sorts of requirements, so that the 
investor will know that their investment is safe. And that would 
be very much the case with all of the major trading houses. 
 
So the problem doesn't arise with the established firms, but it 
arises in the fly-by-night situation that we were discussing the 
other day, where a small group of hustlers go into a small town 
and start selling shares in some get-rich-quick scheme, like 
maybe that they're going to extract gold from the groundwater 
— which actually happened in a recent case in a small 
Saskatchewan town — and before anybody knew about it, a  



May 15, 1995 

 
2218 

great deal of money had been raised, and it's just gone. 
 
And before the Securities Commission hears about it, it's over 
and the people have moved on, and the poor investors are just 
left holding the bag. There's no insurance around to cover that 
sort of thing. There's nothing they can rely on. 
 
And I'm afraid to have to say that that's appropriate. I mean 
people should require that these hustlers produce a licence and 
establish that they are legitimate sales people licensed under 
this Act, and not just grab at a get-rich-quick scheme and try to 
make a bunch of money in a hurry. And if they do that, then 
they're out the money. I don't like to be simplistic about these 
things, but I don't see why the government should make good 
their loss in those circumstances. 
 
So we haven't given any consideration to setting up the kind of 
trust fund that you're mentioning. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm just going to raise one 
incident that happened locally, and actually it was a former 
accountant who had built up quite a practice in the community 
of Moosomin. And had been investing . . . had this little 
investment company, and all of a sudden pulled the pin. And a 
lot of people were left holding the bag, because for all they 
knew they'd been treated fairly over a number of years in their 
accounting and having their books done. And Revenue Canada 
certainly didn't find anything wrong with that. 
 
And the unfortunate part, even though through their 
investments they seemed to be getting the appropriate interest 
that should be coming, but through further investigation there 
seemed to be a scheme going on. 
 
But at the same time, how does an individual realize that there 
may be an incompetent or fraudulent type of person they're 
dealing with. Up front, everything seems to be kosher and 
everything seems to be working well and yet for individuals, 
whether it's 10 or 20 or 30 or $120,000, that may be a 
substantial loss in retirement savings that a person was looking 
at. 
 
And it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that it might be 
appropriate to have some kind of a fund established through 
fines, when charges are raised and fines are levelled and the 
fines are paid into, that would help compensate. Because not 
only did the individuals lose their investment, but it costs them 
money to hire legal counsel only to find at the end of the day, 
that legal counsel they really couldn't get anywhere either. 
 
(1445) 
 
Because like you say, the person or persons or individuals, 
whether it's the case I've raised, or other cases where individuals 
who had no money, were basically declaring bankruptcy and 
there was no means of trying to recover or recoup that loss. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, what I'd like to know is were there any  

discussions with regards to victims of fraud as to establishing a 
type of a trust fund to help compensate victims for loss? Was 
there any discussion like that taking place, or did you pursue 
any discussion in that matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member. The 
incident in Moosomin was a very important incident as far as 
we're concerned. The commission became so concerned about 
the facts of that particular case that it set in motion a process 
that resulted in the establishment of rules respecting deposit 
agents such as the person that the member mentioned in 
Moosomin. 
 
And as a result, we have a set of rules now that govern all such 
agents, that requires registration, that requires a sort of a 
double-check with the companies who is involved. The 
company who that person is acting as agent for will confirm 
who their agents are in the province, so we get it from both 
directions. 
 
And then there is an auditing system that has been established 
with respect to those deposit agents. And I mention to the 
member that that's so important because these are the first 
deposit agent rules in the country developed by our commission 
as a direct result of that Moosomin experience. 
 
I just remind the member that there isn't enough fine revenue 
that is collected to fund anything. So that if there is any talk 
about, any suggestion of, a trust account or some sort of an 
assurance fund for investors, it would have to be funded from 
other than the fine revenue. And that would be quite a task, 
quite an order. 
 
We do however try to do as much in public education as we 
can, so that investors will know that the first thing they should 
do is check to see that the person who is ringing their . . . 
knocking on their door or ringing their doorbell is licensed 
under The Securities Act. If that person is not, that door should 
be slammed shut right now. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
just indicated that you didn't think there was enough revenue 
from fines that would warrant or make it even feasible to set up 
a trust fund. And I'm not exactly sure if you'd have the type of 
numbers that would indicate what you would receive or what 
you may have received through fines to date. 
 
But maybe I could suggest one thing, Mr. Minister. If this might 
be a potential, maybe we should do a first . . . or made in 
Saskatchewan, and be the first jurisdiction that might look at 
that as an option, based on whatever revenues may be available. 
 
And I can also appreciate, if there isn't sufficient in that fund, 
that any allocations may have to be prorated as well. But maybe 
it's something to look at in this province and maybe give some 
leadership in that direction. 
 
One question before we move on. At the end of the Bill, I 
notice we've exempted this Bill from The Saskatchewan  



May 15, 1995 

 
2219 

Evidence Act. And I'd like to know why this was done, how it 
affects the rights to privacy of Saskatchewan citizens, and what 
kinds of unusual searches will this allow against individuals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Sorry to take awhile. It's a technical 
answer that I give, so I had to take some advice on it. 
 
The banks have been exempted under The Saskatchewan 
Evidence Act for, I suppose, as long as there's been such an 
Act. They're under federal jurisdiction, and they are exempt. 
And then under The Securities Act, as it is at this moment, that 
exemption from the evidence Act is removed as regards 
investigations conducted under The Securities Act. 
 
We now propose in this legislation to make the banks fully 
subject to proceedings under The Securities Act so that their 
exemption from the evidence Act will not apply to anything that 
involves The Securities Act. They will fall fully under The 
Securities Act. That's the answer to your question. 
 
So far as individuals are concerned, the confidential 
information is protected unless the information is subject to a 
specific order of the Securities Commission that it be released. 
But it would normally be confidential. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 75 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd like 
to thank the minister and his officials for having taken the time 
to come and review the information before us and the 
legislation, and I don't know if you left any stone unturned with 
— what is it? Is it 75 clauses we have? 
 
Hopefully, the other Bills we have in front of us aren't going to 
take that long, Mr. Minister. But we certainly appreciate the 
time and your forwardness and the officials for their advice and 
help. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to thank 
our officials. The amount of work that's gone into this Bill is 
readily apparent looking at its size and its complexity and they 
have done an excellent job throughout, and I thank them for 
coming today. 
 
(1500) 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to establish an Aboriginal 
Courtworkers Commission 

 
The Chair: — I would ask that the Minister of Justice please 
introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I'm accompanied today by Mr. Darcy 
McGovern of the Department of Justice. 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd like 
to welcome the minister and his official, Darcy, today. 
 
Mr. Minister, this Bill before us, I believe, if I understand it 
correctly, you've initiated an aboriginal courtworker program, 
and I believe it's already started or at least there's an educational 
process underway as I caught it on the media. 
 
And if I understand it correctly what you're attempting to do is 
to educate individuals in a matter of law so that they can work 
with the aboriginal community or their peers as they appear 
before or in a court to explain the process of law and any 
charges that may be laid against them, what the implications of 
those charges may be, and so they can understand before they 
plead. Is that what we're really working at and do I understand it 
correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The member has got it about right, Mr. 
Chairman. The kinds of services that a courtworker performed 
are collected under section 16 of the Act. And these people 
have received a four-week training course that the member was 
referring to; some of them have years of related experience. 
And the program is actually under way. Courtworkers began to 
appear in Saskatchewan courts to exercise these functions about 
a week ago. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, does this piece of legislation deal 
with all aboriginals or are we talking of . . . I just notice under, I 
believe it's section 16, courtworker services, and (2) it says: 
 
 For the purposes of subsection (1), "individual charged 

with an offence" includes an individual under the age of 
18 years (of age) 

 
Are we talking a specific age group or are we talking all 
aboriginal community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It applies, Mr. Chair, to all aboriginal 
people, youth and adults, Indian status and non-status, and 
Metis. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I note as well, Mr. Minister, under section 17 
we've got a section that deals with grant-making powers. And 
I'm wondering what the purpose or what the intent of this 
section is and who it may apply to as far as . . . it seems to be 
we're talking of granting of certain sums of money. And if those 
sums are to exceed $10,000 then you need the approval of the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council for that. So maybe you could 
explain that to us and the purpose and the intent of that section 
in the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, we expect that this will 
be a very limited power in the sense that the power will be used 
for very limited purposes. Examples would be supplemental 
courtworker training or perhaps piloting new approaches to 
service delivery or some such thing. 
 



May 15, 1995 

 
2220 

The vast bulk of the program will be spent on direct service 
delivery and there won't be much left to distribute for any of the 
purposes that I've mentioned. But it none the less is something 
that the authority, that the commission will . . . may find itself 
in a situation where it has to do. 
 
I should mention while I'm on my feet about this that the 
grant-making power does not encompass matters such as 
providing money for individuals or groups to pay for court costs 
or that sort of thing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I notice the Bill also establishes a 
commission but it doesn't really give us an idea of how many 
members would constitute the board of the commission or the 
commission board. I wonder, Mr. Minister, do you have that 
number in mind and why it isn't in the legislation, or where is 
it? Did I just not find it or it's not glaringly obvious to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — It is a board with a flexible size. It will 
be . . . the size will be determined by agreement from time to 
time between the groups affected. At the moment it is a 
five-person board. The board consists of a representative of the 
FSIN, a representative of the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, 
two representatives from the Justice department, and a Chair. 
 
In the future it may be that other groups will want to become 
represented on this commission and that's why we've left it to 
agreement to sort out the size of the commission as we get more 
experience. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, would it not have been appropriate 
to maybe have set a minimum and a maximum number of 
members? And to allow for that to take place, if you did 
eventually arrive at that maximum number, then possibly 
looking at reviewing it and expanding it and having that fixed 
in the legislation? 
 
Also I notice the commission fixes the amounts to be paid to 
members for their services. Why would you not have taken the 
time to fix the per diems or the costs or how members' services 
would be covered as far as travel and time spent in committee 
or work on the commission or a combination? Why would that 
not have been at least addressed and laid in here as you would 
for any, say, other public servant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — All of these arrangements, Mr. 
Chairman, were negotiated between Saskatchewan and Canada 
and the two main aboriginal groups — FSIN and the Metis 
Nation of Saskatchewan. As in any negotiation, you perhaps 
don't always achieve perfection nor do you always achieve a 
similar result as you would apply in other cases. We think that 
this is a workable approach to the matter. 
 
With specific reference to the question of payment for services 
and for expenses, the member will note that the commission's 
determinations are subject to the approval of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, and that, we thought, was enough control 
over the situation in order to make it manageable. 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, that may be the concern we have, 
regarding the view the Lieutenant Governor in Council may 
have as to the size. And it might have been appropriate to 
address the compensation based on what another sector of 
government may have or the public sector may have for 
meetings, or even other boards and commissions that may be in 
existence, and I guess, the fact I think that you've indicated that 
this has been a discussion that's taken place with another level 
of government plus a lot of the aboriginal community. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you would have had the ability to set those 
guidelines and the negotiations were basically between you and 
the aboriginal community, would you have worked towards 
establishing some fair guidelines and having them basically 
limited rather than leaving them as open and as flexible as they 
are in the legislation as we see it today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I think we would've arrived at a similar 
system. I think all or almost all of our boards and commissions 
are set up with the Lieutenant Governor in Council having the 
statutory power, the statutory responsibility, to set the level of 
fees or per diems and the way in which the expenses will be 
dealt with. So we would probably deal with this in a similar 
way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I really don't have further 
questions. I think there are some questions here, but I think 
maybe it's appropriate too to allow the process to work. I think 
it has a lot of potential. And maybe in a year or so we can 
review the legislation and see how it's worked in the court 
system. And hopefully it has made the court system just work a 
lot smoother, especially for the aboriginal community. And I 
thank you for it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 18 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move: 
 
 That clause 18 of the printed Bill be amended by adding 

"of the commission, a courtworker, a courtworker 
service carrier or agent," after "employee". 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 
 
(1515) 
 
Clause 19 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that we: 
 
 Amend Clause 19 of the printed Bill by striking out  



May 15, 1995 

 
2221 

 clause (e) and substituting the following: 
 
  "(e) a courtworker; 
 
  "(f) a courtworker service carrier or agent; 
 
  "(g) any person appointed by the commission". 
 
I so move, Mr. Chair. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 20 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd like to thank the 
minister and his official for having taken the time to spend this 
time with us reviewing some of the concerns and wish him well 
in the establishment of this commission. Thank you. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to establish an Aboriginal 
Courtworkers Commission 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to consideration of item 1, I 
would ask that the minister please introduce the officials who 
have joined us here today. 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Hello. I'd like to introduce the officials 
who are here with me today. President, Brian Woodcock; senior 
vice-president, finance and accommodation, John Law; 
vice-president, commercial services, Al Moffat; and director of 
financial planning, Rob Isbister. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Madam Minister, and officials. I'd like to turn first to the 
globals that we received and inquire as to the differences in the 
travel allowances from last year to this year. In province, the 
travel has dropped considerably, about $500,000. I was 
wondering what changed within the department that dropped it 
from last year's totals of 821,000, to 313,00 this year. What are 
you doing differently or what aren't you doing that was being 
done before? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Could we have some clarification on 
exactly which document you're referring to and the numbers? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, last year's globals for '93-94, if I 
can find the right page here, the cost of travel was $821,300. 
This year the travel under the globals are 313,000 for '94-95. 
I'm wondering what changed in that one year's period that made 
a decrease of $500,000, or are some of your numbers wrong 
here? Because on the globals we received on May 17 of '94 
from the previous minister; it's 821,000. The ones we received 
this year from you are 313,000. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Sorry to take so long. Some of the 
discussion we were having is because we don't have a list of the 
things that were included in the previous year's figure compared 
to the list of things that were included in this year's figure. So 
what we can do is provide you a detailed breakdown of whether 
in fact we are comparing apples to apples or not. 
 
There is a factor in there, that there was a deliberate cut-back in 
the amount of travel, but given the size of the difference, we're 
going to need to go back and itemize the differences. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. While 
you're itemizing those differences, can you give us then a 
breakdown of all of the minister's travel, where they went, what 
the purpose of the meeting was for, and who attended with 
those meetings? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we can do that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
When I say attended, I mean not only the people that were 
attending the meeting but who travelled from the minister's 
office or the department to that meeting also. If you would 
include that, please. 
 
Madam Minister, a number of employees within your 
organization have come and gone. The numbers that we have 
for August of '93 was that you employed 900 people. Is that still 
the case? 



May 15, 1995 

 
2222 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In December 31 of '94, if you include 
permanent, temporary, part time, and contract, it was 945. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. From our 
last discussions on SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) and your new ministerial assistant, Jill McKeen, 
we still haven't received her qualification list. I would thank you 
for the travel, but I haven't received her qualifications though, 
Madam Minister. If you could please send those over to us. 
 
In August of '93 your government provided a two and a half per 
cent increase to the salaries for the employees. I believe it was 
in August of '93. Was that the year that that came into effect? 
And how long was that period for, that 2.5 per cent salary 
increase? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That was the same as everybody else at 
that time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe at 
that time there was also a one-time payment to employees 
earning less than $12 an hour. What was the purpose of that 
pay-out and how much did it cost in total? And how much did 
the average employee receive for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There were some lower-level 
adjustments, but we'll have to give you more detail on that. But 
there was just specific low-end ranges that were brought up. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Madam Minister. When you say 
low-end wages were brought up, were those employees then 
that were less than $12 an hour all raised to above $12 an hour, 
as well as receiving a pay-out of some of this form? Or what do 
you mean, were brought up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'll have to provide that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
think it's very important then, when you're providing this 
information, that you can give us the breakdown. We need the 
total costs, how much the average employee paid out, and what 
was the purpose of it. Hopefully you can provide that though 
today. What was the purpose of that pay-out? Was it just simply 
to top up those employees that were below $12 an hour? What 
was the reasoning behind providing this additional pay-out over 
and above the contract? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Those things are specific to the 
agreement. And I think everybody would feel more comfortable 
if we gave you the very specific information on the particular 
adjustments in that agreement. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, more than just 
the particulars on it though, what was the rationale behind it? 
What was the justification for providing that top-up? You must 
have had a reason for doing so. If the reason was you felt that  

$12 an hour was not enough, well then say so. But what was the 
rationale for providing a top-up for those employees who were 
being paid less than $12 an hour? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The reasons varied from position to 
position. It was just part of the negotiating process. And some 
may have been adjusted to bring them in line with other 
positions. Some may have been adjusted because they were 
below the entry level standard. There's a variety of reasons why 
you adjust. And there wasn't one consistent reason across the 
board, so they'd have to be specific in terms of the actual 
agreement. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Are 
there employees then that are employed by SPMC that are 
below the contract standard, or the entry level as set under the 
union contract? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'll check that for you. And if you 
can just ask again in a little while, we'll just go out and check 
that; then you'll have it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. There 
certainly seems to be a lot of confusion over there as to the 
contract you signed with the SPMC employees. And I find that 
very surprising. 
 
My interpretations of a union agreement of a contract were that 
it was fairly settled, fairly hidebound; in fact that everything 
was spelled out — you will do this, supply that, so forth and so 
on in return for the labour services provided to you by your 
employees. 
 
And yet this seems to be pretty loose here in what you're doing. 
I think there needs to be certainly some more information 
provided, Madam Minister. But we'll leave that while your 
official is gone looking for the information. 
 
You've gone through a number of changes within your 
department — personnel coming and going; some of them were 
temporaries and casual employees, but a number of them were 
also permanent. The employees that have moved on from 
SPMC, according to the globals, how many of them continue to 
work within government organizations, be it within another 
department or a Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Most of the people who left — actually 
it was retirements or early retirements. So we think there's 
maybe two that have gone on to other work in the government 
and the rest would have retired. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Can 
you indicate which two those would be that have gone on 
within the government? I see a number here that have resigned 
or quite a number of them that have resigned. There's a number 
that have taken early retirement or appointments were no longer 
valid, etc. So I wonder if you can indicate which two of your 
knowledge that went on. 
 



May 15, 1995 

 
2223 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's difficult to know what happens to 
people who resign because we'd have to hunt through every 
name of every employee in the government. But we can give 
you a more specific list if you would like to give us the time to 
do that research. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister, I'll take 
you up on that. But I'd also like to bring forward the names of 
four that you might happen to remember if and where they're 
working within government: S. Caragata, who was a ministerial 
assistant 2; T. Harding, a ministerial assistant; A. Thomson, 
ministerial assistant 4; S. Weir, ministerial assistant 4. 
 
Now I'm sure that . . . I'm not sure if they worked in your office 
but they worked in the previous minister's office, if not in 
yours. They have resigned as of April 30, '94; June 30, '94; 
November 1, '94; and August 21, '94. So if you could respond 
about any of those, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I can tell you where those 
individuals are. Tricia Harding is within the Minister of 
Economic Development's office; Sean Caragata within the 
Premier's office; A. Thomson within the Gaming Corporation; 
and S. Weir left the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That's 
three out of four that have just simply moved within the 
government organization and it would be interesting to see what 
changes there were in their salary structures as those 
movements were made. I would like if you could indicate 
please which other ones within these lists that may have 
resigned and gone on to some other employment some place 
else within the government, if you would, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can undertake to do that but I 
would note to the member that if they have moved on to other 
jobs, their wages would be commensurate with the wages 
offered for those positions. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'd like to 
question about your advertising. There don't seem to be any 
page numbers on here, so I can't give you a page number on the 
globals. But it deals with Fieldstone Marketing for $133,000. I 
wonder if you could indicate what that was for. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In regards to Fieldstone 
communications, sales and salvage ads, 54,328; building tender 
ads, 56,936; and other general ads, 22,071, for a total of 
133,335. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
When you're doing these sales, advertising for sales and 
salvage, how broad or how extensive do you advertise those? 
Do you do them in the two dailies? Do you do that on radio, 
television? What kind of advertising are you buying for 
$54,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The advertising is done primarily in the 
weeklies. There's no radio or anything like that. And eight to  

ten auctions were held last year, and we advertise about two 
weeks in advance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would 
you cover the entire province then with those ads, or do you do 
that . . . Say there's a sale in Swift Current, would you advertise 
in the south-west then, but would you also advertise that same 
sale in Yorkton or Hudson Bay or P.A.? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, it's pretty much around the 
province coverage. There might be — when there's differentials 
and equipment in different places — a little more emphasis in 
the actual area where it's being sold, but the whole province 
gets coverage. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Dealing 
with some of the buildings that are involved with SPMC, are 
you responsible for the Sask Crop Insurance head office in 
Melville? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We're responsible for that Crop 
Insurance space. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When will 
the lease expire on that particular building, and will you be 
renewing it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — January 31, 2002. We may both live to 
see it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I don't know 
about you, but I plan on living that long. 
 
So we don't have to worry about a renewal in the near future. 
Okay. 
 
Madam Minister, the numbers that you have here under 
personnel for salaries, does that include all of the pensions and 
benefits that would be payable to those employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The 33 million number includes all 
benefits. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you would have any breakdown though on how much would 
be then for pensions and how much would be for benefits out of 
that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The pension number is about 1.2 
million. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How about 
the benefit package? Is that included in that, and how does that 
number work in there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — About another 1.9 million would be the 
global other benefits. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2224 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
SPMC has from time to time become involved in a number of 
court cases. I wonder if you could indicate to us what cases you 
have ongoing and how much you have spent on legal actions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The total amount spent on those would 
be 48,920. And those would be basically two kinds of legal 
costs — one would be related to staffing issues and the other 
would be related to injuries, or those kinds of things. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you 
talk about staffing issues, are you talking about searching a staff 
member's background for hiring or for dismissal, or exactly 
what are you talking about when you're talking about staffing 
issues? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Dismissal or grievance preparation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Are these 
cases that are ongoing from year to year or are they new cases 
that have come forward this year? And of those cases that you 
may have had in place last year, how many of those were 
settled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's about 80 per cent carry-over from 
last year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Of the . . . 
I believe there was 30 individuals that were dismissed 
following the '91 election or closely thereafter. How many of 
those cases are ongoing and how many of them are settled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's one left that we think is in the 
final stages of settlement. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — You say you have one left that's in the 
final stages, of the 30 that were initiated from the 1991? Okay, 
thank you very much. 
 
I wonder if you can give some indication of what kind of 
settlements you arrived at with these — with the 29 others that 
were dealt with. I realize you may have some concerns about 
that, but there's just the two of us really listening to this, so you 
shouldn't have a major concern about that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It would vary widely for various people 
because it's based on age, level of responsibility, and years of 
service. So it would vary according to all those factors. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In 
comparison to what was offered initially to most of those 
employees at their termination, is the settlement lower, the 
same, or higher? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It appears that we reached a 
compromise in these situations, although not all 30 were 
resolved in this manner. Generally they received less than they 
wanted but a little more than we wanted. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
guess that's part of the negotiations. Everybody asks for 
different things, and while everybody may, that be their Utopia 
solution, don't always get it. So would they have received 20 
per cent higher than what the initial offer had been from the 
government, 50 per cent, 75? Can you give us some ballpark 
percentages? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The negotiations usually take place 
within a 25 per cent variance range between our position and 
their position. And again, to point out that the majority were 
settled not through legal processes but just through a 
negotiation process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. A question 
about another building. SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) is no longer or is being wound 
down. I'm not sure if they're still operating to a limited degree 
or not. Does SPMC control or look after the SEDCO building 
up on Broad Street? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Winnipeg or Broad Street? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Winnipeg. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. No, SEDCO still has it. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Never 
having been there, I wasn't exactly sure what street it was on. 
 
Madam Minister, if we can go back now to the travel. Your 
staff person has returned hopefully with the answers to that, to 
the half a million dollar difference in the travel. Perhaps you 
can provide some clarification on that now. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We're back with the answer on the 
personnel question. And if you'd like that one, we could provide 
that. 
 
During the contract negotiations, the 2.5 per cent that was 
available, they made the decision to apply it more to that 
category of worker rather than to apply it thinly across the 
board. And so it was used to bring those positions up over the 
$12 mark. And they would be mostly the general service worker 
category. 
 
Now since that time there's been some new entry level people. 
And that wasn't a permanent adjustment to the entry level rate. 
It was merely the application of the 2.5 per cent within that 
particular system at that time. So there still are people entering 
who are entering lower than the $12 rate. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The 
people that were prior to '93 or summer of '93 under the old 
contract that were below the $12, were their salaries raised 
henceforth to over $12 permanently, or were they simply given 
a one-time pay-out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They went there and they stayed there. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2225 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Then is 
this going to be a precedent set for future contracts, that 
everyone that SPMC hires that's below the $12 level, the next 
time the contract comes up for renegotiations will automatically 
be bumped up to the $12-plus and then you'll continue to hire 
somebody else down at less than $12? And perhaps you could 
indicate what salary they're receiving that is less than $12 — is 
it 11.50 or 11.90 or $8, or where is it, Madam Minister? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We'd have to get the specific wage 
rates. But always in bargaining, it depends on what the mandate 
is on both sides of the bargaining table. And so let's say for 
example, if the mandate was zero, well zero applied anywhere 
would still be zero. So it really does depend on the particular 
mandate at the particular time that that contract is bargained. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, if it's zero then 
it's zero for everybody. But if it's .01 you could take that over 
the entire . . . your figure here shows 1,025 employees; you said 
that you now have 945. You could take that .01 per cent over 
the whole area and give it just to those that were less than $12, 
because you've now set the precedent of bumping up those that 
are less than $12. So I think you've set a precedent there for 
yourselves that you're going to have to deal with on this. 
 
On the travel, Madam Minister, perhaps you can answer this 
one. It's $48,000 this year for the '94-95 year that we were 
dealing with for out-of-province travel, whereas the previous 
year was $27,000. Can you give us some indication of what that 
was about? Why the doubling of those numbers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We will provide you with details on 
this. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Will 
you give us the commitment then, that if we have further 
questions related to your travel, that you will supply us the 
answers with them? Because you're pretty vague today on 
answers on travel questions. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Certainly we will. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, is your 
department responsible, or SPMC responsible, for student 
summer employment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The department has its own summer 
student program, but they're not responsible beyond that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying is the normal student 
summer employment program — the one which students apply 
to if they're going back to university or some other form of 
education — is not under SPMC? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is SPMC. That's PSC (Public 
Service Commission) that does that. 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 
The Chair: — Did you want to thank your officials or 
anything? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank my officials for 
attending today and assisting me with these responses. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 
officials that have joined us today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Today 
with us to assist in the deliberations are Mr. Duane Adams, the 
deputy minister of Health; Ms. Kathy Langlois, executive 
director of finance and management services; Ms. Lorraine Hill, 
associate deputy minister; Mr. Steve Petz, associate deputy 
minister; Ms. Glenda Yeates, associate deputy minister; Ms. 
Maureen Yeske, executive director, health planning and policy 
development; Ms. Carol Klassen, executive director of strategic 
programs; and Ms. Lois Borden, executive director of district 
support. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
have a few questions today about health in general, but more 
specifically I want to talk to you about health care problems in 
my own constituency. I think the people there would like to 
have some answers to some of the questions that they have been 
asking. 
 
But first of all, I understand that there is a liaison person that 
has been appointed for each of the health boards in the 
province, and that that person's role is to coordinate decisions 
by the local boards with government policy. 
 
If that is so, then I would ask you if you could give me the name 
of the liaison person that works for the Southwest Health 
Board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think the member is asking 
about the consultant who comes from the department that works 
with the district. In the case of Southwest it's Ms. Dawn Smyth. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, Dawn 
Smyth, I'm told, was formerly nee McFadden. And we have a 
report that this person is coordinating through an office in 
Maple Creek, the town of Maple Creek, but that this person 
does in fact live in Alberta on an acreage near Medicine Hat. 
 
Is there any policy in this government that employees of the 
government working with communities in our province must 
live within the province while they are working for the  



May 15, 1995 

 
2226 

province? And if not, why would that not be? 
 
And also we have a report that this person does her work, as a 
common practice, through the use of SaskTel's new, modern 
day technology, which is called call forwarding; and that in fact 
the office in Maple Creek is call-forwarded to a home in the 
Medicine Hat district; and that in fact the business of this 
liaison person is conducted out of her private home in Alberta. 
Is there any truth to that rumour, report, that we have been 
given? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there may be some aspects of 
the member's question we'll have to follow up on for detail. 
Those of us who are here in the House today understand the 
individual that he wishes to discuss was very, very recently, was 
very recently married. Married an individual who lives on the 
Alberta side of the border, and I think, understandably, wants to 
reside with her husband. 
 
There is no policy per se which prohibits this. I would expect 
that one could travel up and down the borders on either side of 
the province, Manitoba and Alberta, and find similar 
circumstances. I expect you would find it certainly around the 
Lloydminster district. And so there's no strict policy which says 
that every employee of the Government of Saskatchewan, or for 
that matter of the Department of Health, must reside within the 
confines of the province. 
 
In this case, I think, as I would suggest, that true love doesn't 
know the definition of a border, and I understand these folks 
have been married, and they're residing in Alberta. But Ms. 
Smyth is doing very good work for us while she's at work in the 
district in the province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have absolutely no 
concern whatsoever with true love or with this lady's marital 
status. We do have concern though for the several calls that 
we've received in our office, all stating basically the same thing 
— I am a member of the health care system and cannot possibly 
have my name used or I'll lose my job. But we have a serious 
situation where an individual is hired by a provincial 
government, doing a job supposedly in Saskatchewan, and 
resides outside of the province; and in fact has an office that is 
not often times able to be accessed because the doors are not 
open. 
 
And in fact, when the numbers are phoned to try to access the 
individual who's supposed to be doing the work in that area, 
there is an answer. And the answer to that whole scenario is call 
forwarding. Is it common practice for your government to allow 
individuals to call forward their office numbers to their homes 
so that they can conduct their business from their homes instead 
of out of their offices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member makes all sorts of 
accusations here. Let me try and explain what I understand of 
the situation. The individual is the consultant, not for just one 
health district but in fact for two — both the Southwest District 
and the Rolling Hills District — and the member will well  

know the kind of geography that she'll have to deal with, as he 
does. And I'm sure that he's not in his office eight hours of 
every day, nor would I suggest that he should be. 
 
This consultant will be doing a fair bit of travelling within the 
district. And in addition, to keep that proper liaison function, 
the consultants are regularly into meetings here in Regina or 
meetings with their fellow consultants. And so there will be, I 
think, some appropriate time that is spent away from the office. 
Now in efforts to remain accessible to those who will need to 
speak to the consultant, we do ask that our consultants do 
provide a call-forwarding service so that they're not inaccessible 
when on the road or when in Regina. 
 
(1615) 
 
We do have a policy — and I underline this for the member — 
that work is not conducted at home. If in fact the home number 
is being used as a call forward — and I'm not sure of that — but 
if in fact that is the case, then the calls will be received on 
personal time, and I think therefore, is above and beyond the 
call of what her duties may imply; that she's using some of her 
personal time then to be accessible to people. 
 
But I want to reaffirm that this is an individual who is serving 
two health districts, which will cause her, I'm sure, to be on the 
road a significant bit of time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
these are not accusations that I'm making. These are accusations 
that I'm delivering to you from my constituents, and the 
comparison you make between my office is hardly relevant to 
here whatsoever. My secretary is in my office and she will do 
her job effectively and efficiently, and if she doesn't do that we 
would see to it that somebody else took her position. 
 
And I think maybe you will have to look into this matter for the 
people of the south-west who are very concerned that there is 
an impropriety here. And I think that what we're trying to do 
here is to bring this matter to your attention so that you will in 
fact do that and straighten out this situation. 
 
Because obviously, as you said, the geography of our area 
dictates that you have to travel an awful lot of miles in order to 
conduct the job that this person has been assigned to. It makes 
it immeasurably worse if you start with the premiss that you're 
going to drive from Medicine Hat in order to start accessing 
Saskatchewan with an hour's drive before you start embarking 
on your job which entails probably an area the size of 
Switzerland. 
 
And so, Minister, it is very critical that we get to the root of this 
problem and have it resolved. I have no objection to a person 
being on the road doing their work and having a cell phone or 
whatever it is, but the truth of the matter is then that there 
should be at least a sign on the door saying someone will be in 
this office one day a week, one hour a week, at least some time 
during the week — at least some kind of an indication of an 
accessibility. And apparently that service is not being provided. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2227 

So I suggest to you that you should have a chat with these 
people and see if you can't provide the service that is needed out 
there. And realistically, I don't — living close to Alberta — 
blame this person or anybody else for wanting to move out of 
Saskatchewan if they have a chance to. I mean you've got all the 
benefits of both sides of it. You've got your cake and you can 
eat it. 
 
You simply move to Medicine Hat, have a good-paying job in 
Saskatchewan, pay no sales tax over there on the stuff that you 
buy, have cheap taxes on your home, you enjoy all the benefits 
of a good government in Alberta, while in fact you get paid a 
government salary from Saskatchewan. Well, Minister, that's a 
pretty attractive way to live and I really can't say that I criticize 
the person for doing that if they can get away with it. But I don't 
think it should be allowed at the expense of doing the job 
properly. 
 
So I will await your comments on how you intend on handling 
this matter, and whether or not you plan to get to the root 
problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, even as we speak 
someone is making contact with the individual that the member 
raises these concerns about. And in that regard, we will be 
following up to see if in fact there is a problem. So I'll make 
that commitment to him. 
 
And in fact it's happening right now. We'll be talking with the 
individual and people involved and we'll find out the truth of 
the matter. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, 
Minister. I appreciate that and I take you at your word, not only 
because of your past profession but because I know very well 
that there now has to be an election coming if you're going to 
put out a prairie fire that fast politically; it's got to be getting 
close. That probably will prompt you to do a good and effective 
job of checking this out and resolving the problem. So I'll leave 
that area and go on with a couple of other problems that we 
have in the south-west. 
 
We have in the town of Gull Lake, as your officials will be 
aware, if you're not yourself personally, we have a hospital 
building there that was reconstructed at considerable amount of 
cost. A lot of community money went into the project, along 
with a lot of government money and taxpayer dollars. A lot of 
local money was raised through taxation and is continuing this 
very day to be raised on a continuing basis to pay off the arrears 
that were built up as a result of having to do that project. 
 
That building of course becomes, under your new health 
program, nothing more than a band-aid station. And we have of 
course a couple of rooms that are basically used in the entire 
building. The rest of the building, at several hundreds of 
thousands of dollars of expenditure, sits basically unused and 
empty. 
 
The people in our community think that that is a crying shame  

when we hear about buildings in other areas that are basically 
ready to fall down, or so people say, that people have to be put 
into and are being used in order to provide special kinds of 
treatment and special kinds of housing for different levels of 
sick people. The folks in that community are suggesting that 
this building, being in such good shape, ought to be utilized and 
that perhaps some kind of a plan should be in focus to provide 
this building be used for a special care home, for perhaps a 
special home for people with Alzheimer's disease or palliative 
care or something like that. 
 
And so my question for the people of the Gull Lake community 
is simply this: is there any plan presently afoot to utilize this 
building and put it to some good use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I would want to disagree with 
the member when he wants to characterize the facility in Gull 
Lake and the programing that is happening there as simply a 
band-aid station. That's just not the case. 
 
The programs and services which are available in the facility 
include emergency services, observation and assessment beds, 
foot chiropody clinics. Wellness clinics are being held in the 
building. The health nurse is on call when the building is not 
open. And as he will well know, there is an ambulance in Gull 
Lake, and there is a resident physician in the community. 
Certainly the program in Gull Lake is something more than a 
band-aid station. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Rolling Hills District will work with the 
community of Gull Lake to look at that facility — but perhaps 
more importantly, not to just look at the structure of the facility 
and the building itself, but to look at the whole needs and 
programing needs in that community. Buildings must simply be 
part of programing. The district board will work with the 
community, as they have done and will well into the future, to 
assess the needs and develop the appropriate programing and 
services both within that facility and beyond that facility in the 
community. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, you can nit-pick all you like 
about my phraseology in terms of describing what the facility is 
and how it's being used. But the people of Gull Lake and area 
know exactly what's going on, irregardless of how I choose my 
words. 
 
And what they know for a fact is that the service that we get is 
excellent. We have a good doctor and we've got good nurses 
that work there. And there's no complaint about that at all, 
except that when you compare it to the service that we used to 
have, it becomes in real terms, by comparison and 
metaphorically speaking, nothing more than a band-aid station 
compared to what we used to have. 
 
Now we've got a big building there that is very good. It's been 
redesigned and rebuilt, and it's not being utilized. And 
irregardless of the long list of things that you have put together 
that the building is being used for, the truth of the matter is that 
all of those functions come out of basically one large lobby and  



May 15, 1995 

 
2228 

maybe two rooms, though possibly three if you want to stretch 
it. But I mean that is a whole hospital building with wings that 
are absolutely empty that could be used to put people in, people 
with needs right at this moment. 
 
We've had requests from people in the area for a home for 
specifically Alzheimer's patients. Now that's one alternative, 
and I know there are probably a dozen. But I make this specific 
point to you for the sake of argument. Is there any plan to 
utilize the rest of that building for some useful purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think to accurately reflect 
the situation not only in Gull Lake but in communities across 
the province where former acute care beds and centres have 
been converted, across the province in those communities and 
with those districts alternative use of the facilities are being 
explored. 
 
Now what is appropriate for Gull Lake today? That answer I 
don't have with me. Nor do I believe there is an answer in place. 
But what I do know is that the district boards work closely with 
those communities and will look at the facilities. But more 
importantly, and you see this is where the change has happened 
— it's a change that has not yet seemed to affect the thinking of 
the members opposite — that we're moving away from a 
physical structure, building mentality to look at needs and how 
do we meet the needs, the real needs in communities. And if 
there are needs in the community of Gull Lake or in any other 
community of the province that can be met through a physical 
building and programing within a building, then we'd want to 
look at that. 
 
But many of the needs were not being met by the physical 
building — not being met by the buildings. They need 
programing that brings the programs and the services closer to 
people. That's the work that's going on. It won't all be 
accomplished by the end of this month or by the end of next 
month or by the end of this year. It'll take many, many years. 
But that's the direction we're moving. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, you've stated your position 
and the direction you're moving in. We'll let the people judge 
that shortly, I'm sure. The truth of the matter is though, that I 
don't think anybody in the Gull Lake area is going to ever agree 
with you that it's a good idea to treat sick patients in the ditch. 
 
You're going to have to put them in a building some place and 
call it a hospital if you like, call it a storage facility for sick 
people. Call it what you will, but it will be a building, because 
in Saskatchewan you're not going to have sick people laying on 
the roads or out on the lawns; you're going to put them in a 
building. So your statement that you're moving away from 
physical buildings in health care is preposterous, because you 
do need buildings that are properly repaired, properly upkept, 
and properly meet the health standards and health needs. 
 
And you have a perfectly fine building in the town of Gull Lake 
that goes unused to the large extent. And while you're using it 
for some things, there's an awful lot more that could and should  

be done with it. Your answer simply tells me that you don't 
have a plan. You haven't got a plan and you have no idea what 
you're going to do. Your health plan is a total disaster with no 
direction, no plan. You're just dumping the responsibility onto 
local health boards, hoping to duck the political pressure of its 
failure. 
 
Well, Minister, I think that in due course the responsibility of 
health care will come to your doorstep because you are the 
minister and you're supposed to know what's going on and 
you're supposed to have a plan. People expect that. And when 
you indicate that you don't have, you will pay the price, 
answering for your job when the time comes for you to ask 
them to rehire you, which will be in the next election. 
 
The town of Maple Creek, Minister, has a special care home 
that has been around for a very, very long time. Many, many 
people have called our office and asked us if there's any way at 
all that they could get a new special care home because this one 
quite frankly, they say, is wore out. I've been there and their 
statements, while are probably a little overemphasized in terms 
of saying wore out, they are not out of line by saying that; it's 
very close to that. And while you can continue to say to a 
building, well it'll last a little longer, it'll last a little longer and 
make that happen, the reality is that at a certain time in history 
you have to draw the line and say, this building is no longer 
useful and functional; today we're going to tear it down and 
have a new one. 
 
I think that point has come and gone realistically. But I want to 
ask you, do you have any plans to rebuild this care home in the 
town of Maple Creek for the people there? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, to start at the bottom 
and work back, we're not aware here in the House this afternoon 
that there has been any specific request to the district board in 
Maple Creek, or certainly none from the district board to the 
province in terms of new capital construction. 
 
Mr. Chair, you will well know that in fact, where the need is 
shown, that we are continuing to approve new capital projects 
given the financial constraints of the budget. We are approving 
new projects. There have been a number of projects approved 
and some coming to completion in the long-term care sector 
this year. 
 
I am not aware that there has been the request from the district 
or from the community in regard to a new construction. If the 
need is there, then there is a process of assessment and 
priorization. The member will well know that you can't do 
everything at once. And we would look at that request as we 
would look at any request from any community in the province. 
 
Now the member a few moments ago talked about how good it 
was in Alberta. He talked about how good it was in Alberta. He 
talked about how good a government they're offering in 
Alberta. 



May 15, 1995 

 
2229 

Now I'm not going to get into a lengthy conversation about 
what's happening in Alberta these days. But if he is concerned 
about acute care closures in this province, then he should just 
take a little trip across the border and see what his friend Ralph 
Klein's doing in Alberta in terms of acute-care bed closures in 
urban and rural Alberta. Cutting in an unprecedented manner, 
far beyond any cuts that were undertaken in this province. Now 
that's the good, Conservative government of his friends in 
Alberta. 
 
Now the member from Moosomin wants to get into it; maybe 
he'd like to defend Mr. Klein. He talks about the ridiculous kind 
of comment, talking about people going to be left in ditches. 
Now that kind of rhetoric, Mr. Chair, tells me it is pre-election. 
And the members over there are so desperate to save his seat  
because it's one of the few they have a chance at, I think  that 
now they'll engage in this kind of rhetoric in the legislature. 
Now I ask the member to just take a look in Alberta if he wants 
to see acute-care bed cutting. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, I had told my colleague that I was 
finished questioning but your comments just have to have an 
answer and a response. Because truth of the matter is, Minister, 
that you allude to the election probably being close by and that 
sort of thing and I happen to know that your seat is not as safe 
as mine is. So I just wanted to let you know that the United 
Church in Gull Lake is looking for a pastor in case you happen 
to need a relocation. 
 
But the reality is that you've alluded to Maple Creek not having 
made any formal applications for a new lodge or a new care 
home. And I guess there are two buildings there that house our 
seniors in different capacities of their stages of health. Both are 
very old and both do need to be replaced. 
 
So I stand here in my place today telling you that we are 
formally making a request to you to build two new facilities in 
Maple Creek to accommodate the needs of those people in that 
community. So in case you have never heard about it before, as 
you have suggested . . . and that really does surprise me because 
I just can't imagine that the people there wouldn't have made the 
formal applications and the comments necessary to bring this 
matter to an awareness in your department and to yourself. 
 
But just in case all that has slipped past you, consider this to be 
our formal request, that we need these facilities in Maple Creek. 
So don't come and say to us later on now that you have never 
heard about it and you don't know anything about it, because it's 
a fact of life that it's needed and it is a serious, serious request 
on behalf of the people of that community. And I'm sure that 
they've made that request themselves. 
 
And realistically, Minister, I know that time is money and so 
I'm going to turn this matter over to my colleague after you 
comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I frankly wish the member, 
when he says time is money, he might have thought about that  

when we were debating some other issues in this House in the 
last session and in this one, when he kept us entertained for 
hours and hours and hours personally. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think we need to put on the record here  because 
the member opened this line of questioning this afternoon with 
some accusations about our district consultant in the Rolling 
Hills and Southwest District, Ms. Dawn Smyth, formerly Dawn 
McFadden  I want to put on the record, Mr. Chair, because 
we have followed up, that her phone is never forwarded to her 
home, her married home in Alberta; that there is a message 
machine which is available at her office. She covers all the 
costs and time driving from the border to her home, personally 
covering all those costs; and, Mr. Chair, she maintains a 
residence in Maple Creek. And I hope that will satisfy the 
member for the information that he was requesting. 
 
And again, in terms of the facilities in Maple Creek, I suspect 
that the member, like many members, appropriately would want 
to come to the Department of Health, the Minister of Health, 
the legislature, and lobby on behalf of facilities in their own 
constituency. But he should know that there will be facilities in 
other of his colleagues' constituencies, indeed in constituencies 
across the province, that may well over the course of the next 
few years need to be replaced or renewed. 
 
The only way that any government can deal with this is to look 
at all of the requests and establish a system of priorities so that 
you know, with the limited resources that you have, that you're 
putting them to where they are needed the most. And so if there 
is a request from Maple Creek, we will look at that as we would 
look at any request from any community in the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, I have some questions 
that I basically had in the estimates file for a little while, and I 
keep getting notes from my staff that . . . please ask those 
questions, questions that have arisen as people have been 
watching the debate. And so I'd like to get these questions on 
the record and get a response. 
 
What I'll do, Mr. Minister, some of these have a number of 
different questions, and I'll try to read them in a fashion, that 
rather than up and down maybe six or seven times for the same 
individuals, try and get all the questions related and then a 
response from you. 
 
The first question comes from a gentleman who would like to 
know what date the government eliminated level 1 and 2 
funding for senior care homes. And then subsequent questions 
arising from that is he would like to know how much money 
goes toward paying for senior care, how much the government 
subsidizes seniors presently in senior care homes. How much 
did the government subsidize seniors previously to eliminating 
levels 1 and 2 funding? As well, is the government building any 
senior care homes presently, and if so, will any include those 
seniors who are level 1 and 2? And for those seniors in need of 
receiving home care, how much does a senior pay? How much 
does the government pay per individual? How much in total  



May 15, 1995 

 
2230 

does the government spend on home care? 
 
Is that too many all at once? You can fill me in, Mr. Minister, 
on the ones that you caught, and then we'll get back to the 
others. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I'll start on the list and see 
where it takes us. This is a long list. I know I won't get right 
down to the bottom of it, but we'll start. 
 
In terms of level 1 and 2 funding . . . and I believe the member's 
question was, what was the date of the elimination of that 
funding? Mr. Chair, the funding itself has not been eliminated. 
 
We are phasing out from subsidizing level 1 and 2, but the same 
dollar amounts that were used to subsidize level 1 and 2 have 
been left with the districts. The money has not been taken and it 
is being redirected both into meeting the needs of level 3 and 4, 
the heavier care needs, and some directed into community 
services. So the money has not been eliminated; what is being 
eliminated in a phased-in approach is the subsidies to those who 
have lived in levels 1 and 2. 
 
Now the question I think that followed was how much of the 
Health budget is being spent on seniors and that's a little 
difficult to give an exact amount . . . or on special cares homes. 
Our long-term care services budget for this year is 250.923 
million — so almost $251 million for long-term care services. 
 
Our home-based services — many of them will be available to 
seniors, not exclusively, but many of them — is budgeted at 
sixty million, seven hundred and ninety-four thousand . . . 
hundred thousand. 
 
And then our community services — again many of them will 
be for seniors — is eighty-three million and sixty-one. Our 
acute and rehab services budget is 550 million and a good 
portion of that will go to seniors. The specific budget item that 
talks about long-term care, long-term services, is a budget item 
of about $251 million. 
 
One of the questions was, are we building any special care 
homes? The answer is yes. There's one coming, I know very 
well, coming very near to completion in my own city of Moose 
Jaw — Providence Place — which will bring together 
long-term care and other new programing, geriatric assessment, 
day hospital and adult hospital, and so on. 
 
I think somebody now will be finding us the actual home care 
fees and that sort of information. 
 
Mr. Chair, in terms of resident charges and fees — and this will 
apply to level 2, 3, or 4, straight across the board — the charges 
are based on an annual income, and so the higher your income, 
the higher the charge. 
 
And I can just read the most recent charges. If your monthly 
income  and this would take into account all sources of 
income, interest earnings and pensions and so on  if your  

monthly income is $874, then your charge will be 743; if your 
monthly income is 900, it'll be 756; if your income is a 
thousand, the charge would be $806; if your income is $1,100, 
it would be $856; if your income is $1,200, it will be $906; if 
your income is $1,309 or more, you will be paying $961. 
 
And so that's the range of fees within the level 2, 3, and 4. They 
would range from a minimum of $743 to a maximum of $961. 
And that would be the monthly charge. 
 
We have the information on the home care fees. Now under the 
current policies there are no home care client charges for 
nursing, for therapy, case management, or volunteer services. 
There are charges for home-making, which might include 
personal care and respite, Meals on Wheels, and home 
maintenance. 
 
For all the chargeable services, the client will pay for the first 
10 units. A unit of service is defined as one hour of 
home-making or home maintenance or one meal. The current 
charge for the first 10 units is $5.70 per unit. After 10 units the 
client is charged a unit rate to a maximum monthly charge, 
corresponding to the client's adjusted monthly income. And so 
you reach a maximum monthly. If you're on social assistance in 
the province, if your income is very basic and very low, the 
maximum monthly charge will be $57. The maximum charge at 
the top end will be the lesser of the client's adjusted monthly 
income or $345. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, did you give me how much in total 
the government spends on home care? I just don't remember if 
that was one of the numbers you gave. 
 
And what the government would pay per individual, I take it 
from the last response that can vary as to income. And 
secondly, one question in here, it says, how much does the 
government . . . how much the government subsidizes seniors 
presently in senior care homes. I think what we're looking at 
here, what is the total cost to provide for a senior in a care 
home, per client or per individual? And then we can determine 
out of that, from the numbers you already gave us, what the 
client would pay and what the government would pay. What's 
the total cost per individual to maintain or to live in a seniors' 
care home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The actual — and this will be shown in 
the blue book — the actual home-based services budget this 
year will be $60.794 million. So $60 million, but that may not 
encompass all of the services that are being . . . like we also 
have a budget called community services which is an $83 
million budget. But strictly on home care or home-based 
services we budgeted $60.794 million. 
 
And then in terms of the subsidy for someone who is in level 2, 
3 or 4, with the rates that I spoke of earlier, if we just averaged 
it out to about $1,000 a month . . . Some are lower. Some are a 
little higher. But let's just say it's about $1,000 a month that the  



May 15, 1995 

 
2231 

individual would contribute. The actual cost would be closer to 
$3,000 a month to provide the facility, the bed, the care. And so 
it's about $2,000 a month subsidy from the government, from 
the taxpayer, to subsidize the bed. On an annual basis we're 
looking at about a $24,000 to $25,000 a year subsidy. 
 
Mr. Toth: — This question comes regarding a . . . Actually our 
office was contacted by a woman named Carol Ekell — I 
believe that's how you pronounce it — E-k-e-l-l. And Ms. Ekell 
was visiting in her back yard with Sherry Mercereau two years 
ago when Sherry's husband threatened both women and killed 
Sherry and himself in front of Carol. And you may remember 
this took place in Saskatoon. The detective on the case referred 
Carol to victims services because he said she would clearly 
need counselling. She was told by victims services that she 
wasn't a victim and that she should get counselling on her own. 
 
Mrs. Eckell has suffered from depression, nightmares, and 
many other effects since the incident. The lawyer has written to 
the Health department requesting help, and as of yet Carol has 
received none. Mr. Minister, will you ensure that this situation 
is looked into and that Carol Eckell receives the counselling she 
needs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I commit that we will look 
into it. I can't commit to an outcome without having some 
further background, but we'll certainly look into it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and certainly I can send 
you a copy of these questions as these were taken of concerns 
raised over the phone, and maybe follow up in that manner. 
 
Another individual had called us and said, I have another 
question from a senior citizen regarding the prescription drug 
plan. This gentleman's drugs cost him $1,450 each year, and he 
is having great difficulty paying for them. When he phoned the 
Health department for assistance, he was informed that unless 
all of his RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan) and 
investments were tapped dry, that he would not be eligible for 
any assistance. 
 
Is this indeed the case, Mr. Minister, that people have to have 
no resources before they can get help paying the high cost of 
prescription drugs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Chair, that's not true. I would 
encourage the individual, if you're in contact again, to reconnect 
or . . . There's some misunderstanding here. The drug plan is 
based on income. We've tried to tailor . . . the higher your 
income the lower your support, but it's based on income; it's not 
based on assets. Now if one has RRSPs or other sources of 
income, that will show as part of generated income, but it's 
certainly not based on assets. So I would encourage the 
individual or those who are in touch with him to be in touch 
with the drug plan again. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Our office was also 
informed about an incident that happened recently regarding an 
ambulance trip. A pregnant woman was being rushed to the  

hospital while her husband was following the ambulance in his 
car. The ambulance hit an elk and unfortunately had no backup 
phone to seek help. Luckily the husband had a cell phone in his 
car and was able to phone for backup. 
 
Question, what is the . . . and there's three questions here. I'll 
give them all. What is the procedure for rural ambulances in 
this regard? Is it standard for ambulances not to have cell 
phones in rural Saskatchewan? And what about dead areas 
where there is no cellular reception? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it's my understanding that 
ambulances use a variety of means of communication. Most, if 
not all of them, will be using a dedicated radio frequency, will 
be using not cellular communication but a radio frequency 
which would mean an access to most everywhere in the 
province. Now there may be a few dead spots, and so I'm not 
. . . 
 
In terms of the circumstance the member raises, I don't know 
the particulars. I can't really comment on it. Some ambulances 
now are carrying the cell phones where the network would 
provide. But of course we still have some ways to go yet to get 
total cell coverage for the province. Although we're working at 
it, made some great strides forward, but there's still a fair bit to 
do there. 
 
And then I was very pleased just a couple of weeks ago to 
announce a pilot project, one up in the north-west around North 
Battleford in the north-west and one down in the south-west 
where the emergency providers of all sorts  ambulance, fire, 
police  are coming together in a pilot project using the newest 
technology which is fleet net technology which will enable 
clear communications among all of the providers in a common 
radio network. 
 
The circumstance, if the member has more detail about that 
particular circumstance . . . I'm just not able to answer this 
afternoon why their radio communication wouldn't be available. 
I know in certain areas of the province cell communication 
wouldn't be available anyway, but many ambulances now do 
have cell phones aboard. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, a quick question. Does the 
department have a policy or guidelines regarding ambulatory 
service and communication equipment that must be part of the 
ambulance and part of their equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chair. We have quite extensive, 
I think, descriptions of what must be within the confines of an 
ambulance. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Another individual who was watching one 
evening . . . and some of these questions come back. I think it's 
about three or four weeks when we were up and we were 
discussing seniors' care, and the following question came to us. 
If someone was 84 years old, can't live alone, can't get 24-hour 
day care home care, can't stay in a hospital more than a certain 
number of days, where do they go and what do they do? 



May 15, 1995 

 
2232 

And then the following was added afterwards. How can you 
justify healthy 20-year-olds receiving welfare payments and 
then make cuts that affect the elderly so drastically, elderly who 
supported themselves and contributed to society and your 
government all their lives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in regard to any person of our 
province who has a need for services, that need should be 
appropriately assessed. In this case I would suggest if that 
individual would return either to his or her physician or his or 
her district office to undergo the proper needs assessment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, another individual writes or phoned 
in and would like to ask the following question regarding the 
Parkland health centre board. How many lay-offs were there in 
Hafford, how many in Spiritwood, and in other facilities in the 
district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we don't have the exact 
numbers. We'll get them and get them to the member. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Another individual writes . . . I was contacted by 
a nurse who had 14 years of experience in her field, most of 
which were earned in Moose Jaw since 1991. She briefly 
moved out of the province between '91 to '93 and upon her 
return, once again applied to be a nurse in her health district. 
She was told that she would no doubt, quote, not be rehired in 
the Thunder Creek health care district because I was not 
practising in this district when health care reform took place. 
Why would this be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — There may be, Mr. Chair  and again, 
without knowing the specifics, it's a little hard to comment  
there may be a variety of issues here. In some of the districts 
where there has been some reductions in staffing, they have 
made commitments to try and hire back, first of all, individuals 
who have lost their employment within the district. So there 
may be some local recall provisions here. There may well also 
be some bumping provisions because of contractual 
arrangements and so on. Without the specifics, I don't think I 
can say much more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


