






















































April 6, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 6, 1995 

 

 
1405 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions that have been delivered to us from the area of 
Gull Lake. We have one from Calgary and a few other places 
along No. 1 Highway. 
 
I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of No. Highway 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these on behalf of the people from 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have also 
petitions to present today from the Salvation Army in Maple 
Creek, that read: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions comes from Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

funding toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this Tartan Day 
and with the celebration that echoed in our halls, it's my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, special guests that are gathered with us today in 
your gallery. 
 
I would begin with the worthy grand chief of Canada, Gord 
Gardiner, and his wife Marjorie, who is also a past chief of 
Camp Balmoral. 
 
We have with them the present chief, Wanda Matheson, and her 
husband Bill, and another past chief and sister, Wilma. 
 
And with the dancers we have — they are also gathered in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker — Marieka Barrie, Karen Prior with mom 
Wendy; Andrea and Carman Bruce and mom Jean; Erica Parker 
with mom Judy; Lindsay Keith with father Ross; Amanda, 
Chelsea, Brian Delparte with mom Jackie; Catherine and 
Caroline Hart with parents Carol and Paul. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in a warm welcome. If 
any can stay, I'm arranging that we could meet about 1:45 on 
the steps for a picture to commemorate today. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, sitting in your gallery, I'd like to 
introduce Zena Putnam. Zena is the spokesman for the 
Saskatchewan Association of Responsible Firearm Owners and 
has done a very good job in twice debating Wendy Cukier of 
Gun Control and defeating her both times. 
 
I'll ask everyone to welcome her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to add my 
congratulations to Zena for the job that she's done, a very good 
job. She's been a friend for some time and it's a pleasure to see 
her in the Assembly today. 
 
I also want to extend a personal welcome to Ross Keith, who is 
a well-known Regina developer and noted for his preservation 
of heritage sites, as well as a special hello to his daughter, 
Lindsay. If everyone would join with me in welcoming our 
guest today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add 
my words of welcome to those of the previous speakers to Ross 
Keith who I've known and worked with for a number of years in 
my capacity at city council. He doesn't live in the  



April 6, 1995 

 
1406 

constituency of Regina Victoria — I believe he now lives in 
Regina South — but it's a pleasure to see him here today. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and to all members of the 
legislature, the group from the Re-Entry Roads Consulting 
Network, teacher Zena Putnam, and seven students who are 
accompanying her this afternoon. 
 
So I would ask all members in welcoming this group to the 
legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms Atkinson: — As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
legislature, Fred Herron, general secretary of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation. I note that Fred has been around the 
building at lunch and into the afternoon, and I'm sure that he'll 
enjoy the proceedings this afternoon, given that we'll be dealing 
with some topics that he's interested in. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce 
to you, and to the members of the legislature, a constituent of 
mine who's sitting in the west gallery, Craig Sorenson, young 
farmer from just north of Ogema. And I'm sure he'll enjoy 
question period today, and I look forward to meeting with Craig 
after that. I would have all members join me in a warm 
welcome for Craig. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tartan Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year on this 
day I was privileged to recognize Tartan Day in this Assembly. 
As a Scot by marriage, I am pleased to speak for all those who 
are or wish they were Scottish on this day which honours the 
contributions of Scottish people to our Canadian life. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, this year on Robbie Burns Day at the Sons 
of Scotland banquet, I proposed the toast to Robbie, so I think it 
entirely appropriate that once again I have the honour of 
welcoming the Sons of Scotland to the Assembly, of thanking 
the highland dancers, and piper Danny Matheson, for the 
entertaining of us over the noon hour and of saying a few words 
about this day. 
 
Tartan Day was declared in Saskatchewan in 1992 to publicly 
acknowledge the notable Scots of Saskatchewan and their more 
notable accomplishments. For the sake of brevity, let me say 
two words: Tommy Douglas. Geographically, Balgonie and  

Weyburn — or wee burn — are a few of the towns that find 
their counterparts in Scottish soil. 
 
The Sons of Scotland have been in existence since the 1880s. It 
was originally founded as a benevolent society, but now 
concentrates on preserving and furthering Scottish culture in 
Canada. I welcome them. I congratulate them. And in the words 
of Robbie Burns, may we all be blessed with health and peace 
and sweet content. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll join with my 
legislative colleague to make note of appreciation for Tartan 
Day and the Scottish clans here in Canada. April 6 is Tartan 
Day across Canada and I am pleased to extend the official 
opposition's best wishes to people of Scottish descent across the 
province. 
 
In the 1992 legislative session, the official opposition had the 
privilege of introducing the legislation that allowed for a day of 
appreciation for Scottish clans in Canada. We were pleased to 
have the cooperation of all members of this Assembly on the 
passage of that Bill — a rare occurrence for Bills presented by 
the official opposition. We would appreciate that same courtesy 
for the Bills that we currently have on the order paper, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Tartan Day allows those of Scottish descent an opportunity to 
acknowledge their heritage and the role it played in building our 
province and our country. On behalf of the official opposition, I 
wish all those of Scottish descent a memorable day. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — Mr. Speaker, sir, I would like to add a few 
words in commemoration of Tartan Day. It was a pleasant 
surprise for me today as I came into the building to hear the 
skirl of the pipes in the rotunda, there. I really wasn't expecting 
it. 
 
Although I am a Celt, I have no highland blood in my veins. 
Nevertheless, I have a Celtic blood group, which is O positive if 
anybody's interested, and I have fond memories of Glasgow, 
Scotland, where I spent 12 years, studied medicine, I met my 
wife, and my two older children were born. 
 
I've swum in Loch Lomond. I've climbed Ben Nevis several 
times. I'm addicted to the pipes and Scottish music as an art 
form, and of course the kilt, the filibeg, and the tartan. 
 
We at home celebrate St. Andrew's Day on November 30 and 
Robbie Burns Day on January 25 with a dram or two of Glen 
Fiddich, and as a Welshman, I acknowledge the contribution of 
my Celtic cousins to Canada and I give you the Highland toast, 
Slange Va — good health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 6, 1995 

 
1407 

Saskatchewan Tartan 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as a Scot by 
blood, I too would like to say a few words on Tartan Day. And 
I'd like to use this opportunity to comment on Saskatchewan's 
own tartan, since few in our province know that we even have 
one. 
 
Saskatchewan's tartan was unveiled at a news conference on 
October 6, 1961. It was designed by Mrs. Frank Bastedo, the 
wife of the province's lieutenant governor, and was the second 
provincial tartan in Canada. Nova Scotia had the first provincial 
tartan. 
 
At the news conference, Ms. Bastedo explained that the tartan 
was recorded by the Court of Lord Lyon, King of Arms of 
Scotland, as the Saskatchewan district tartan. According to 
tartan etiquette, Ms. Bastedo said, a tartan design must be 
recorded so it may be called a tartan, otherwise it remains a 
plaid. 
 
Ms. Bastedo, a former fashion designer, began to work on the 
tartan in 1958. The seven-shaded tartan has gold blocks to 
represent prairie wheat, brown for summerfallow, green for our 
forests, red for the province's lily, yellow for rapeseed flower 
and sunflowers, white for snow, and black for oil and coal. 
 
The two-block tartan alternates across the width of the material 
and follows the same sequence of the length. The tartan is 
available to residents of the province with no hereditary or 
traditional claim to a clan or a family tartan, but does not 
supersede traditional tartans. 
 
The Saskatchewan tartan is a very proud part of our provincial 
heritage and is on display at the Athabasca Gallery on the main 
floor along with our other provincial symbols. 
 
Given the fact that my last name and the fact that the Leader of 
the Third Party's grandfather's name was a McCaskill, and her 
newest granddaughter's name was McKenna . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry, but the member's time has elapsed. 
 

Saskatoon YWCA Women of Distinction Named 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 
Saskatoon YWCA held its Women of Distinction awards 
banquet. The Saskatoon Y is one of 14 in the country to hold 
this dinner. Others include Regina and Prince Albert. The 
objective of the dinners is to honour women in several 
categories who make a distinctive and recognizable contribution 
to their community. 
 
Last night there were 23 nominees in 6 categories. I should 
stress, Mr. Speaker, that the banquet was held in honour of the 
23 not just the 6 winners. However, for their outstanding 
contribution to the betterment of Saskatoon, I want to mention 
those who were given the awards — 90 seconds is insufficient 
time to list their achievements. 

Tina Bertoncini was given the youth award. In the community 
enhancement category, Mildred Kerr was named. Audrey 
Atchison received the fitness and lifestyles award. Susan Lamb 
was honoured in the business and professions category. Miriam 
Hills was given the arts and culture award, and Linda McCann 
won the leadership in the workplace award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to receive one of these awards a 
number of years ago, so I understand the feelings of these 
women, just as we all appreciate the appropriateness of their 
recognition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Living Conference 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, the ninth annual rural living 
conference is taking place today in Young, my hometown. This 
conference is focused on farm couples, rural and urban 
individuals. 
 
Several speakers will present information including on a variety 
of topics. These include Bruce Elke, an ADD (agriculture 
development and diversification district) board technician, who 
will talk about used oil recycling projects sponsored under the 
green plan and how farmers can access it. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Roberta Windrum, of the Saskatchewan 
Pesticide Container Management Association, will talk about 
her association and its work with the RMs (rural municipalities) 
on the proper disposal, collection, and recycling of used 
pesticide containers. 
 
Two new videos would also be viewed and promoted. These are 
farm safety videos and the children safety videos. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, Bill Cudmore and Ted Schisler of Crop 
Insurance will present a panel entitled "People Under Pressure." 
This panel will help people to analyse their own personalities 
and the way they deal with other people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rural living conferences have been very 
successful and serve well to educate and improve the quality of 
life in rural Saskatchewan. I want to commend the Watrous 
Rural Service Centre, the town of Young, and all those who are 
making presentations, for what will surely be an excellent 
event. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tribute Paid to Southey First Responders 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
would like to pay tribute to two first responders in the Southey 
region. The value of having first responders provide the first 
link in an emergency was demonstrated recently in my riding. 
These two first responders are being credited with saving the  



April 6, 1995 

 
1408 

life of a 78-year-old man from Southey on March 25. 
 
The man collapsed at a drug store in Southey, and when first 
responder Shirley Gerrard arrived on the scene, she discovered 
that the man had no pulse. Immediately she began 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Another first responder, Mark 
Ollinger, arrived to assist Gerrard. They monitored the man's 
vital signs and administered oxygen until Cupar Ambulance 
service arrived. Mr. Ollinger called ahead to Regina EMS 
(emergency medical services) to ask for a paramedic unit to 
meet the ambulance because of the man's serious condition. The 
paramedic unit joined the first responders near Southey and 
treated the man until he was taken to hospital in Regina. He was 
stabilized and then was moved out to cardiac care unit of the 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this example demonstrates how the first 
responders program is working in Saskatchewan, and I 
congratulate all the people who gave this man the care that he 
needed to save his life. 
 
Thank you. 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Firearms Legislation 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are directed at the Minister of Justice. 
Mr. Minister, I've heard your comments about how you're going 
to resume your opposition to the Liberal gun registry. That's a 
very curious comment because I haven't seen any opposition 
from you so far, other than a few speeches. 
 
Mr. Minister, very simply, what exactly have you done? Other 
than making statements in Ottawa, what are you planning on 
doing, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — This is an incredible statement for that 
member to be making. This government, this government, has 
opposed the federal provisions, particularly the registration 
provisions, from before the time that they were announced. 
 
More than any other government in Canada, we have taken a 
lead role in drawing to the attention of the public the defects 
with the federal proposals. We have fought this battle at every 
level, including at the level of federal-provincial Justice 
ministers. And at every opportunity we have highlighted this 
issue, not only provincially, but nationally. 
 
Now this is an initiative, Mr. Speaker, of the federal parliament, 
and therefore this matter has to be fought out at the federal 
level. We have to unite all of our forces in Saskatchewan and 
put all the pressure on the federal government that we can, not 
to proceed with these matters. 
 
And that's what we're trying to do, that's what we've done  

consistently, and that's what we'll continue to do, and the 
member knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, indeed 
you've paid a great deal of lip service to this, but you have done 
nothing in terms of legislation in this hall, Mr. Minister, and 
you know that. We, on the other hand, have done a lot more 
than just talk. We have acted with petitions and legislation 
which protects the rights of gun owners. 
 
You, sir, have done nothing, and you know that. In fact you've 
done worse than nothing. You've duped some people in this 
province into thinking that you're their friend and that you are 
helping. You remind me, Mr. Minister, you remind me of the 
rain-maker who goes around promising rain to all the farmers 
only to come forward with nothing but a bunch of wind. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are already starting to receive dozens of cards 
of support from Saskatchewan citizens who are calling on you, 
calling on you to act instead of talk. They want legislation that 
will protect their rights, Mr. Minister. Will you do that today? 
Will you protect the rights of the Saskatchewan gun owners of 
this province today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I and the government of 
which I'm a part, have done everything and continue to do 
everything we can to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I ask members on 
both sides of the House to please calm down. I'm not going to 
have a repeat of yesterday's question period. I want to hear the 
questioner, and I also want to hear the minister answering the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as to whether or not 
my performance in trying to lead the fight against Allan Rock's 
provisions has been effective or not, I just challenge that 
member to go out and talk to the groups in Saskatchewan who 
are opposed to this legislation and find out from them what 
their opinion, what their opinion is, of the fight that I've put up. 
 
I could care less, Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the 
Opposition thinks of my performance. I do care about what the 
lawful gun owners, the hunters and the shooters in 
Saskatchewan, believe about my performance and I challenge 
the member to go out and do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Now as to the legislation that the 
opposition has put before this House, Mr. Speaker, I don't want 
to be unkind, but the only adequate characterization I can give 
for that effort is silly and childish. Silly and childish. 
 
Talk about windbags, Mr. Speaker . . . 



April 6, 1995 

 
1409 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I ask members to 
please refrain from language that has really no bearing on the 
calibre of the debate, on both sides of the House. I don't think 
that that term referring to any minister or any member of the 
House is necessary. 
 
Next question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the same 
minister, I find it very disturbing that he would refer to the Law 
Clerk's opinions as silly and childish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. I think the 
member from Souris-Cannington knows that that is not in order 
to bring an official of the Legislative Assembly into the debate, 
and I wish he would refrain from doing so. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the public of Saskatchewan are calling for action on this, not 
just hot air. But we're getting nothing but cheap talk from the 
members opposite, from the minister opposite, and that's true to 
form. 
 
The member from Regina Churchill Downs, now the former 
Justice minister, said that it was a stay-the-course episode on 
firearms legislation for this government. He did nothing; the 
former minister, when he was in there, did nothing and he 
continues to do exactly the same thing. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's obvious that you intend to do nothing but pay 
lip service to the Liberal gun laws. You have no real interest in 
protecting Saskatchewan people. You intend to sit there and let 
this Bill pass. 
 
I'd like to know what you're planning to do once the gun 
registry is in place. Your own polls show that the majority of 
people don't want gun registry. What will you do with respect to 
prosecutions in this province? Is it your intention to fully 
prosecute all those who do not register their rifles and 
shotguns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 
focusing our efforts in trying to prevent this law from being 
passed. We are making no plans at all as to what we will do 
down the line. We'll have to cross that bridge if and when we 
come to it. But we want to view our efforts here as positively as 
we can. And we want to go with all of the groups in 
Saskatchewan to fight this battle until it is won. Now if it is 
lost, we'll face that problem when we come to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I regret about these questions and some of 
the debate over the last few weeks is that we're fighting each 
other on this issue. We should be united. We have gone to 
extraordinary lengths, we have gone to extraordinary lengths, 
along with the various groups who have such an interest in this 
matter, to keep a united front in Saskatchewan. 
 

The member and I, and the Leader of the Opposition and I, have 
appeared on common platforms with other political leaders, and 
we have joined forces and we have fought this as hard as we 
can. And we should continue to do that and not let this descend 
into some kind of partisan bickering like the members opposite 
are trying to introduce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister wishes some 
joint action out of this House, then join us in supporting some 
legislation, not just talking about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are the chief legal official in this province. 
You're the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General. 
Prosecutors seem to believe that they have enough latitude to 
refuse to prosecute individuals because it's not in the public 
interest. That's how you were excused, Mr. Minister. 
 
I'd like to table a Department of Justice document in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Will the member from 
Humboldt please come to order. Order. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to table 
a Department of Justice document entitled "Practise and Policy 
Directive" on prosecutions and laying of charges. The document 
lists 18 factors that may be used to waive prosecutions due to 
the fact that they're not in the public interest. 
 
In addition to wondering which of these you fell under, Mr. 
Minister, I'm wondering if you would give us your opinion as to 
whether it would be in the public interest to prosecute those 
who haven't registered a hunting rifle. Because the prosecutor 
most takes into account, factor: 
 
 12. Whether the alleged offence is of considerable 

public concern;" 
 
Can you give us your learned opinion, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — As I have just said, Mr. Speaker, we are 
concentrating our efforts on fighting these provisions of the . . . 
proposals of the federal government. And we're going to 
continue to fight them with all of our energy. We're not giving 
up the battle now. We're not giving up the battle and starting to 
publicly announce what we're going to do when this legislation 
is passed, because we're trying to prevent it from being passed. 
And that will continue to be our provision. 
 
Now I characterized as kindly as I could the efforts of the 
members opposite as silly and childish when they come with 
the provisions they come with. That's not going to help at all. 
That just plays into Rock's hands. That gets us fighting each 
other instead of standing shoulder to shoulder, as we tried to do, 
to fight these gun laws with the united effort of the people, the  



April 6, 1995 

 
1410 

parties in this Assembly, and all of Saskatchewan, and try and 
head off this law and stop it in its tracks, and not try to gain 
cheap political advantage in the way the member is trying to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Polling 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Deputy Premier, the minister in charge of 
pension and polling. Mr. Minister, an election must soon be 
upon on because you're taxpayer-funded polling is getting more 
and more political. You ask the same set of questions just one 
month apart, just before and just after the budget, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, that's nothing more than political tracking and you 
know it, and it is paid for by the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think taxpayers should be paying to do the 
NDP's (New Democratic Party) pre-election polling? Do you 
think they should be doing that, Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
respond to the member for Thunder Creek and tell him that this 
is something that's been going on for just about four years. It's 
nothing new or nothing different. 
 
If the member knows anything about surveys and polling, is that 
if you want to get a true sampling of public opinion — and 
from the point of view of any government acting responsibly, I 
think it's important for government to know what people think 
about the issues that affect them — then you have to do polling 
which has some consistency to it. Otherwise it is a useless 
expenditure of money. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, this government is not interested 
in making useless expenditures of money. We want to get value 
for the dollar that we spend and that's what we're doing with the 
polling today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well 
that it is a useless expenditure of the taxpayers' money when the 
respondents on both of those polls tell the minister the same 
thing they've told him for years and that is on job creation 
you're doing a lousy job; 55 per cent say no. So what happens? 
Your government starts to trot out the taxpayers' money in 
announcement after announcement after announcement, to try 
and make up for the lack of job creation which the polls are 
pointing out to you, Minister. 
 
Now you've created a lot of work for pollsters. You've asked 
questions about the overall approval rating of the federal 
government. Mr. Minister, why do you need to know what the 
overall approval rating of the federal and provincial 
governments is so that you can set public policy? Give me a 
break, Mr. Minister. What you're doing is spending the  

taxpayers' money on political polling. Why don't you just admit 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, with regard to the 
things that the member from Thunder Creek is talking about, 
surely it is important for the government to know — and I think 
the people of Saskatchewan to know — what their view is of 
the federal government with respect to the kind of devastating 
budget which they brought in. And I mean devastating from the 
point of view of how it affects Saskatchewan unfairly. 
 
I know that the Liberal members of the House don't agree with 
that because they claim that the federal government is very fair. 
 
Now I want to talk also to something else the member raises. 
He raises about expenditures. I want to remind the member 
from Thunder Creek that when they were in government, they 
didn't release any polling. All of their polling was political, and 
they made it for the Conservative Party, which is something we 
don't do in this government. 
 
And in the last year of their administration, 1991, they spent 
$939,000 on polling, mostly political. This government, in 
1994-95, spent $331,000 in polling — one-third as much and 
none of it is for political purposes, because we have said to the 
party, you do your own polling; the government will do the 
polling it needs in order to decide on good policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier is up to his 
hips in it, and it's squishing around, and the taxpayers don't like 
it any more. 
 
Believe this, Mr. Speaker. They ask a number of questions, they 
ask a number of questions about the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan in the polling, but no questions about the Deputy Premier's 
pension plan, no questions about the $65,000-a-year pension 
that the Deputy Premier is going to get when he retires, and yet 
they've got the gall to ask questions in here about the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. It's an interesting theory, Mr. 
Deputy Premier. Why don't you test it out? 
 
Next month, when you're doing your political polling at the 
taxpayers' expense, just ask a question to the taxpayers and see 
if your pension is fair or not. Will you do that? Prove to us it 
ain't political. Next month, ask that question, Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this is an open and 
accountable government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
the member from Estevan says hah! Well he is the last one who 
should be talking about open and accountable government 
because he used to run a government which is anything but 
open and accountable. 
 



April 6, 1995 

 
1411 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in probably the 
history of Saskatchewan, any polling that is done by 
departments under this omnibus polling is released quarterly so 
that the members opposite can know what the questions were 
and the answers were; so that the media who reports from the 
Legislative Assembly . . . so the public can know what has been 
reported in the media. I make no apologies for that. 
 
In fact I'm rather proud of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
done that and that we have provided the kind of government 
which has made people of Saskatchewan feel positive and 
optimistic, not only about themselves and about their province 
and — I might add — about their government. Their only 
disappointment is the lack of appropriate opposition in this 
Legislative Assembly during this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, I simply have a 
supplementary for the Minister of Justice this afternoon. Mr. 
Minister, you've indicated in the media that you are more than 
willing to take a delegation to Ottawa early in May to put 
forward our united opposition on gun control to the federal 
government. Is this indeed a formal offer, and if so, Mr. 
Minister, will you agree that we should work to arrange for a 
meeting as soon as possible before this Bill progresses any 
further? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. I want to say first of all that it was a 
great disappointment that the standing committee is not coming 
here, and I wonder if the Leader of the Third Party will use her 
influence with her colleagues in Ottawa to get them to come out 
from under the insulation of Ottawa and get out in the country 
where the real people are and hear the real people's opinion as 
to what this legislation is. 
 
I have spoken to a member of your caucus just before question 
period, talking about having a meeting later today to get this 
committee idea rolling, and I will do that. I think it's very 
important that we try and maintain a united front here and stop 
picking at each other over a provision that we all detest and we 
all want to oppose and not try to get any advantage from it. So I 
want to say that we'll follow through on that today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there are growing concerns about the new Crown tendering 
policy that requires companies to use union workers or pay 
union rates. Today one more significant employer in our 
province is on record opposing this policy. I table a letter from 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool today that states that while they 
do not tender their jobs to government, the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool expects the cost of construction for all projects in  

Saskatchewan would rise. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Labour. Given the growing 
number of employers that this policy is going to hurt and the 
fact that it will increase construction costs in Saskatchewan, 
will the minister agree to end this Crown tendering policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I thank the hon. member for his 
question. I take exception to his allegation that this will hurt all 
construction in the province. It will not hurt all construction. 
 
What the Crown tendering policy does is only affects Crown 
corporations under certain conditions. I wish the member would 
sit down and study the document. It's a public document. We 
feel it levels the playing-field for all of those companies in 
Saskatchewan who bid on construction contracts that are put 
out by the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of the question he asked  will we withdraw the 
Crown construction tendering policy?  the answer to that is a 
distinct no. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that's not my 
allegation. That's the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool alleging that 
point. Mr. Speaker, this new Crown Tendering Agreement is 
just one more example of how this NDP government leaps 
before it looks. 
 
We have seen hospitals closed with no plan. Gambling has been 
expanded with no plan. And now we see union preference 
agreements with — you guessed it — no plan again. They must 
not have put much thought into the policy that would cost more, 
interfere with current legislation, and worst of all, cost local 
workers valuable jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Labour. Why would you 
want to implement a program that will cost taxpayers more and 
penalize local workers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well in answer to that, I would answer 
the question with a question. Why do you continue to spread 
negative information which is unfounded in a case where 
Saskatchewan is doing quite well? Working people are doing 
quite well in Saskatchewan. The construction industry is doing 
quite well in Saskatchewan. 
 
I pointed out to the member opposite that the first contract has 
just been awarded under the new Crown construction tendering 
policy. And to show that this is a level playing-field, it's a 
SaskTel contract. The contract was awarded to Westridge 
Construction of Regina, a non-union company, and they were 
low bid in the contract. 
 
I don't know why the members of both opposition parties in this 
House spread information for their own political gain but to the 
demise of the people of Saskatchewan. I don't know why they 
do that. We have Cargill coming in. We have Bourgault  



April 6, 1995 

 
1412 

Industries expanding. There's a long list of examples about the 
Saskatchewan economy recovering after 10 long, lean years 
under the Tory administration. I ask members opposite to join 
with us and help spread the positive news within this province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition party is 
not looking for political gain. We're raising the concerns of the 
businesses in Saskatchewan — Saskatchewan Wheat Pool that 
you disagree with. Mr. Speaker, there is no plan but I think 
there is a motive. It is no accident that this policy caters to the 
NDP's labour support just weeks before an election. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Labour: the Wheat Pool 
has nothing to gain by expressing their concerns — will you 
finally admit your tendering policy is purely political and will 
come at a great expense to taxpayers and Saskatchewan 
workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We've always appreciated concern 
expressed by those in the business community of Saskatchewan, 
those in the cooperative community of Saskatchewan. And the 
Wheat Pool are in fact one of those groups. 
 
I would say that the concerns of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
are unfounded. First off, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is not 
affected by this particular policy. The only companies that are 
affected are those companies who do business in terms of 
bidding on contracts for the Crown corporations who are 
signatories to the agreement. 
 
The companies who have signed on to the agreement in 
Saskatchewan are represented through their employer 
association. It is an agreement that has been put into place that 
will serve all Saskatchewan people well. 
 
And I'm not questioning anyone's motives, other than the 
opposition party who continue to preach doom and gloom on 
policies that have been worked out in consultation with a broad 
cross-section of Saskatchewan's population, whether it's the 
working people of this province or the companies that create the 
jobs and make the economy of this province run under the 
guidance of a government who has brought Saskatchewan's 
economy back and put our government's financial house in 
order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Discrimination 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, do you 
believe that it would be discriminatory to refuse employment or 
to refuse to rent an apartment to someone because they carry a 
union card? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — I sort of had prepared myself for  

question period as carefully as I could, Mr. Speaker, but I didn't 
think I was going to be questioned in detail about my 
knowledge of human rights legislation. I'm going to have to 
take notice of that question, Mr. Speaker, and bring the answer 
to the House for the member. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, you 
have taken notice and that's fine, and we'll be happy to receive 
your information on what you think later. But maybe I can put 
this another way in order for you to be able to grasp it. 
 
Would you agree that it would also be then perhaps 
discriminatory to refuse employment or to refuse to rent an 
apartment to someone on the basis that they do not carry a 
union card? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that's the same 
question, so I'll get back to the member. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Massload Technologies Expansion 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say how 
pleased I am to announce the expansion of a rapidly growing 
company in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, the company is Massload 
Technologies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this company started as Prairie Systems & 
Equipment and was in the business of repairing and assembling 
truck scales. Massload has greatly expanded its horizons since 
then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the company has developed the capability to 
manufacture load cells which are the weighing sensing devices 
in electronic scales. It now designs and manufactures a full line 
of electronic weighing equipment for commercial vehicles 
including a legal-for-trade, on-board weighing system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Massload is a good example of what a 
Saskatchewan-based company can do with a little ingenuity. 
Solid research and development have led to the production of 
products that are in demand around the world. Massload has 
used an aggressive marketing plan to capture a major portion of 
the western Canadian marketing for the non-electronic 
assembly products like truck platform and cattle scales. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Massload's president, Bill Elliott, also sees great 
prospects for international sales, particularly in the United 
States and China. Massload is in the process of obtaining 
approval in the United States for its legal-for-trade load cells. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Elliott is also part or was part, of the team 
Canada trade mission to Asia Pacific last year. He credits that 
trip and our Premier's support for helping the company win 
contracts there, including an agreement to have Massload's 
weighing equipment distributed throughout China. 
 
(1415) 



April 6, 1995 

 
1413 

Mr. Speaker, this ingenuity and hard work have resulted in the 
company's doubling of sales over the past year. It's expanding to 
meet that growth and the demand for the product. 
 
This morning the Premier attended, Mr. Speaker, the opening of 
the company's new facility in Saskatoon, which is about double 
in size what the previous building had been. Massload has also 
modernized and upgraded some of its equipment. 
 
This expansion and modernization will allow Massload to 
further increase its export sales. That's very good news for 
Saskatchewan and Saskatoon because increased exports are 
vital to our economic growth and to our expansion of job 
creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Massload now employs 22 people and it's already 
predicting that it will hire 10 more during the coming year, and 
likely more as its business grows throughout the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these high-tech jobs are essential for our 
manufacturing industry and we must nurture the climate here to 
make it possible for private sector to create such jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've helped Massload indirectly by recently 
announcing that we will provide $175,000 toward the cost of 
Canadian load-cell testing facility which is being established in 
Humboldt. This facility will allow companies like Massload to 
test their products in Canada to attain Canadian and 
international standards. 
 
Accessibility to this facility means a great deal to Massload. Its 
products will gain the credibility needed for increased sales into 
the larger markets such as United States, Europe, and China. 
That could also lead to more jobs at Massload in the near 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I 
want to congratulate Massload Technologies of Saskatoon for 
this expansion. And we all wish them every success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm 
pleased to be able to respond to the minister's remarks, and I'm 
very, very pleased that there are some extra jobs being created 
in this province. And I certainly would say to Massload: 
congratulations and continue on the good work, and we 
certainly need you. 
 
Now we have 10 jobs being created, Mr. Speaker. Because we 
have had a net loss of 1,000 jobs since 1991 because of the 
policies of this government, we only have 990 more left to go, 
Mr. Speaker, in order to get back to the starting point. 
 
It's interesting to note how selective this member is, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of ministerial statements. When he made the 
ministerial statement . . . or when the announcement was made 
of Cargill canola crushing plant east of Saskatoon, of course we 
were very pleased with that, Mr. Speaker. And we commend  

Cargill on its innovativeness and its ability to hang in there. 
 
But did you notice, Mr. Speaker, the member . . . the minister 
did not get up? He did not get up at that time because he was 
too embarrassed to because their words and their terminology 
used prior to 1991 is coming back to haunt them. All those evil 
things that the former administration did, and most of them, Mr. 
Speaker, are the very same ones that they are piggy-backing on 
now. You are piggy-backing on Cargill that we established back 
in the late '80s, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now what you're doing is you're talking about Massload as if 
this is something wonderful that your government has done. 
Mr. Minister, Massload was in my constituency in the town of 
Rosthern while we were still in government. 
 
These load cells that you're talking about are nothing new. We 
have a situation in Rosthern where load cells are being 
manufactured right now. Admittedly there were two jobs being 
created — that was all at that time in Rosthern — but the 
people of Rosthern are very appreciative of that fact that the 
company decided to move in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister also talks about the fact that we must 
nurture a climate in this province that is conducive to business. 
Well I wish their actions would not belie their words, because if 
you talk about a nurturing climate for business, Mr. Speaker, I 
would question very much whether that is indeed the fact. 
 
Now granted, we have had Crown Life come in and we're very 
pleased for that. We've had the . . . what was the other company 
that moved in? The telephone . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce). 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — CIBC moving in, and we're very appreciative 
of that. But those jobs, Mr. Speaker, are here because they are 
aloof of the laws of Saskatchewan. They're under federal 
legislation or CIBC wouldn't be in here. There is not a nurturing 
climate in this province, Mr. Speaker. The tax loads of this 
province are turning many, many potential businesses away. 
 
Mr. Minister, I welcome your announcement; the people of 
Saskatoon welcome your announcements. I'm proud of 
Massload doing what they're doing. But again I question you, 
Mr. Minister, what if — what if — you did not have such a 
negative atmosphere in this province towards business? What 
would we have been able to accomplish? We would not be 999 
jobs short, I assure you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for your 
indulgence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Liberal caucus is absolutely delighted with the expansion of 
Massload Technologies and want to extend our congratulations 
to them this afternoon. This is not new to anyone in this 
Assembly who listens to members' statements, Mr. Speaker. In  



April 6, 1995 

 
1414 

fact the member from Humboldt some time ago, several days or 
perhaps even a couple of weeks ago, made a member's 
statement precisely about Massload Technologies. 
 
The Liberal Party is fully supportive, fully supportive of the 
entrepreneurs of our province, and they are indeed the job 
creators and would have a much, much easier time in creating 
jobs for the people of our province if they would be able to do 
what they do best without interference. In other words, if they 
didn't have to deal with the unpredictability of their bottom line 
changing, whether it's because of increased utility rates, 
changes to their costs of workers' compensation, and all the 
hours and hours that people of this province had to spend in 
trying to determine what impact in fact the labour standards 
amendments would mean to their particular businesses. 
 
If in fact this government understood about free enterprise, Mr. 
Speaker, and understood what small-business people have to do 
in the ways they should be spending their time, what they would 
do would be to make it far, far easier for them to do what they 
do best. 
 
All of that having been said, Mr. Speaker, we again reiterate our 
great pleasure with the expansion of Massload Technologies 
and wish them even greater success in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
I'm sure the Liberal leader didn't mean to mislead the House, 
but what the member from Humboldt announced last . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I think the Government 
House Leader knows that that's not a point of order. That's a 
point of debate. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 27 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we're going 
to discuss a series of three Bills that deal with municipal 
government and some of the changes that have been proposed 
for them. Most of the amendments that the minister's proposed 
are technical and non-controversial. 
 
Some of the things, though, that are uniform through these three 
municipal Acts, Mr. Speaker, cause a fair bit of concern with  

various business groups, and indeed with the very councillors 
and mayors that make up both SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities). And it's those concerns, 
Mr. Speaker, that are causing us some degree of consternation 
when dealing with the changes proposed in Bill 27, Bill 28, and 
Bill 29. 
 
For instance, you're going to now see property assessment 
changes phased in rather than brought on at one period in time. 
You're going to see the use of user fees far more prevalent by 
municipalities if this legislation goes through. 
 
So rather than being restricted to just a few narrow areas as they 
have been in the past, Mr. Speaker, municipal government 
under this legislation could use a whole host of user fees. And 
that causes some people a great deal of consternation. Because 
as we've known recently, Mr. Speaker, the provincial 
government have raised every conceivable fee and service, 
almost, known to man — everything from marriage licences 
and you can go on and on and on. And recently there was a 
whole list of them that were raised again. 
 
So when you extend that same power to municipal government, 
Mr. Speaker, where you can now go in and put a user fee on all 
manner of things which we in the past have not paid municipal 
fees for, you can understand why people have some 
consternation about what is going on. 
 
And I guess the final area, Mr. Speaker, that should require I 
think a lot of debate and a lot of thought before we jump into 
this, is the minister is proposing, the minister is proposing that 
municipal government have the ability now to become involved 
as shareholders in business. Okay, Mr. Speaker? That municipal 
government not have the restrictions of the municipal 
government board, okay, in the way that they raise money and 
the way that they participate. They can now get directly into the 
share ownership, and ownership directly, of business ventures. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that poses some problems because, are we 
going to then have one city competing against another more 
than they already do? And we all know the lobbying that takes 
place between Regina and Saskatoon over various business 
ventures. You know, they both try and stake out some turf. 
 
In Regina's case they've said, we are going to be the electronic, 
technological centre for the province and that Saskatoon will 
become the agricultural bio-diversity, those types of initiatives. 
And they're both trying to carve up spheres of influence in 
direct competition many times with other centres who have 
universities attached to them or whatever. 
 
This proposal, Mr. Speaker, takes this a whole lot further. It 
means that municipal councillors could in effect use the 
taxpayers' money in their jurisdictions to get into active bidding 
wars with one another; take share ownership in concerns. And I 
think that is something, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of people would 
like more thought about. And I know at the recent . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No. The minister over across the  



April 6, 1995 

 
1415 

way says, let it go. 
 
But at the recent SUMA convention, the very people who this 
Act, this change, was aimed at, voted it down. They voted it 
down. And it has been voted down also on the rural side. The 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business have polled their 
members in all of our urban jurisdictions and it has come back 
emphatically  over 80 per cent — all people who pay 
business tax, who pay property tax, and who are taxpayers have 
said no, we do not want urban and rural government as 
shareholders in business in direct competition to the 
entrepreneurs of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I reread the minister's comments on this Bill 
very carefully because I would have thought that the minister 
responsible for Municipal Affairs in this province would have 
done enough consultation, and would have listened to the votes 
of the organizations she is supposed to represent, before 
bringing in legislation, to see if this particular matter meant 
anything to her. 
 
And after rereading those comments, Mr. Speaker, it is glossed 
over, it is passed over. The minister does not key in on it at all 
as being a concern of the very interest groups she represents. 
That's simply inexcusable, Mr. Speaker, inexcusable for the 
minister responsible to not know that SUMA voted against it, 
that the city of Regina led the debate against it. And the 
minister knows it's true. And in her remarks, no mention of it at 
all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, until this issue . . . until the government, I 
think, can prove to the people of this province and particularly 
to municipal government, can prove to the people that pay the 
taxes in our cities and our towns and our villages, that this 
move is a wise move, I think it would be inappropriate for us to 
go any further down the road with this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm in active consultation with a number of business groups and 
also with members of both urban and rural government on this 
particular issue, because it is absolutely fundamental to the way 
that they will do business in the future. And if they move 
beyond being simply the regulatory and the taxation agent to 
being an active, shareholding participant in business ventures, 
then we have diametrically changed the role of urban 
government. 
 
And I don't think it would be appropriate for this Legislative 
Assembly to make that diametric change until there has been 
more discussion on this issue. And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I 
move adjournment on this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1430) 

Bill No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 28 — An Act to 
amend The Northern Municipalities Act be now read a  

second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
sure that the comments being directed at me from members of 
the government will be increasingly shrill in the days to come 
because they seem to have an agenda that precludes, Mr. 
Speaker, us having an honest and thorough debate in this House 
on certain issues that are before it. And I understand, I 
understand the anxiety, Mr. Speaker, that members of the 
government exhibit because they get closer and closer to the 
day when the Premier will read his entrails and decide to call an 
election or not. 
 
But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that we cannot, because of our 
political wishes, simply dismiss the issues that are before the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker, and therefore municipal 
government is something that we should take time to discuss. 
And I think members opposite, instead of ignoring those 
wishes, should be more than willing to listen to the remarks of 
members of this Assembly, whether they be government or 
opposition, in regards to the level of government that by the 
way I would remind members has been the most prudent 
through the years — the most prudent in setting its budgets and 
probably the most prudent when it comes to being responsible 
for the taxpayers' money. 
 
They do not run deficit budgets. And I think it's incumbent 
upon all of us, Mr. Speaker, when we're debating issues dealing 
with municipal government, be cognizant of the fact that if we 
tinker, if we tinker with a situation which has proven itself, a 
system of government which has proven itself through 90 years 
in this province, then we should do so at our peril because the 
record of the senior levels of government has not been good 
when adhering to the principles of fiscal responsibility and 
passing legislation — passing legislation, Mr. Speaker, which 
has gotten government into business instead of out of business. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this province there has been a long history 
of government interference in the business place, a long history 
of it; pieces of legislation in this very Assembly which in fact 
legislated expropriation, which saw whole sectors of our 
economy expropriated and legislated for government, senior 
levels of government, to interfere in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have never seen that at the municipal level. 
You have never seen municipal councillors, aldermen, mayors, 
in this province get into that type of game. And it's incumbent 
upon us, Mr. Speaker, that we tread very carefully before we 
pass legislation that would allow that. 
 
Now as far as Bill 28 goes, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say that I 
commend the minister. I commend the minister for recognizing 
the advancements made in northern Saskatchewan in northern 
municipal councils since they were allowed to become 
self-governing entities in 1983. 
 
Since that time we've seen tremendous changes. We have seen 
the treaty land entitlement process, Mr. Speaker, move forward 
that has allowed northern municipal government to have at its  



April 6, 1995 

 
1416 

disposal many of the things which we in the other parts of the 
province have taken for granted ever since our inception as a 
province. 
 
And the minister did point out in her speech that these northern 
municipalities are now brought into line with The Urban 
Municipality Act with many of the recent changes afforded to 
them as a matter of course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us who have had the opportunity to serve in 
this Legislative Assembly have always understood the 
uniqueness of some of our northern communities. And I really 
look with fondness upon those days and those months and 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, when I had the opportunity as minister 
responsible for Indian and Metis Affairs in this province to 
travel in northern Saskatchewan and discuss with them the 
changes that were coming where they would assume control of 
hospitals, where they would assume control of schools; that 
there was the transfer from the province to the federal 
government, from the federal government to the Indian bands; 
to go and visit the various communities in the Peter Ballantyne 
Band and discuss with them the changes that the Northern 
Lights School Division would be making. 
 
And everyone, Mr. Speaker, who has travelled in northern 
Saskatchewan in the last few years understands that that process 
is rapidly moving ahead. 
 
I always listened with great fondness to the words of the former 
lieutenant governor, Sylvia Fedoruk, who travelled extensively 
in that part of the world and always talked about how at the 
local level, at the local municipal level, there was so much 
advancement being made. 
 
And I'm glad to see that some of the things that the minister has 
brought in in Bill 28 will in fact recognize that uniqueness and 
not impede it. 
 
Now some of the concerns I have, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 27 are 
legitimate to northern Saskatchewan, but the circumstances, I 
don't believe, Mr. Speaker, from asking the various interests 
groups, mean that Bill 28 at this point in time cannot move on 
to the next stage of debate, to the committee stage. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would recommend that we move 
to that stage and those questions which pertain to the specific 
areas can then be discussed in Bill 28 when the minister comes 
in with her officials in that area. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 29 — An Act to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 be now read a 
second time. 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
mentioned before, this series of Bills — 27, 28, and 29 — they 
all have some similarities. They also deal with some things that 
are very unique to their own particular area. 
 
One thing that was very evident in Bill 29 — this deals with 
rural government, rural municipal government, Mr. Speaker — 
is the area of emergency services, if you will, emergency 
responses that, because of distance and size, naturally differ 
from what we would find in urban areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I commend the fact that the minister and her officials have 
done enough consultation to ascertain that in rural 
Saskatchewan you have to have, in fire protection, a different 
set of rules than you do in an urban area. 
 
Now urban government mostly has the ability, either through 
paid or volunteer fire departments, to have most of the 
requirements of occupational health and safety, labour 
standards — those types of issues — wrapped up in contractual 
arrangements. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, with the rural areas, was that 
volunteer fire-fighters who may be hooked up through a 
telephone system to each other — they may or may not have 
much in the way of equipment — were not covered with 
adequate protection for the service that they were offering to 
their fellow ratepayers. 
 
So what the minister has done — and we wholeheartedly agree 
with . . . is that the protection from liability that these people 
now have was absolutely fundamental for people to volunteer 
and in some cases risk their own lives in the protection of their 
fellow citizens. Very inappropriate for someone to go out and 
do everything they could — to take their own equipment, their 
tractor, their disc and other things — and then all of a sudden 
have a lawsuit thrown on them because they happened to 
cultivate up some part of a neighbour's field that he didn't like. 
And the fact is they were doing the job that was assigned to 
them as a volunteer fire-fighter. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, like Bill 27, there are a number of areas 
in this Bill that seem to have caught the attention of rural 
councillors and of business groups who increasingly, Mr. 
Speaker, increasingly are doing value added and value added 
processing in rural areas of the province. 
 
Because what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, it extends the 
assessment powers of municipalities, particularly when it comes 
to the improvements on property. Mr. Speaker, if one takes this 
the wrong way — and some already are — what it amounts to is 
a blank cheque for municipalities to squeeze further tax dollars 
out of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
What you often have, Mr. Speaker, in the case of a family 
farming operation who decide to go into the seed cleaning 
business — they're going to clean lentils, different things like 
that — it's very easy to invest a half a million in infrastructure 
costs. Very easy these days, Mr. Speaker, in a lot of farming  



April 6, 1995 

 
1417 

operations, to have that much tied up in capital assets besides 
the tractors and combines and everything else you might have. 
 
If a blank cheque is extended to the way that assessment is 
done, you will soon see those who have proven to be extremely 
successful, Mr. Speaker, being looked upon as perhaps — and I 
say perhaps because the vast majority of rural councillors in this 
province, I think, respect initiative, Mr. Speaker . . . but you 
could possibly have the opportunity where you had an unfair 
assessment being done on improvements. And I don't think 
that's something we want to take lightly, Mr. Speaker. We don't 
want to take that lightly. 
 
Any time that we pass these amendments to one of these 
municipal Acts, we have to understand that what is applicable 
in one RM is just as applicable in 390-some other ones, okay. 
It's not one province; it's 3 or 400 other jurisdictions, Mr. 
Speaker, all with elected councils, all responsible to the 
ratepayers, but a whole host of jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, who 
may or may not apply these changes uniformly. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is something that we have to think about 
very carefully, that we do not pit one part of this province 
against another; we do not pit one RM against another; that we 
do not have RMs in the business of competing more than they 
are at present for business and business ventures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those things should be on a level playing-field, as 
level as possible, given the natural attributes that may be in one 
place or another. And by doing that, Mr. Speaker, we will have 
the opportunity to rejuvenate rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Heaven knows what the population loss and some of the 
changes that have been hoisted upon rural Saskatchewan by 
government, both federally and provincially, and particularly in 
the last three or four years provincially, Mr. Speaker. The ability 
to keep ratepayers in place and keep our populations in place is 
very much incumbent upon us having municipal legislation 
which does not create inequity more than what we have today. 
 
And the same provisions go with home businesses, Mr. 
Speaker. These are areas where you get government red tape, 
you get taxation applied unevenly, and you get senior levels of 
government meddling in municipal affairs way beyond what is 
absolutely necessary. 
 
And you review the minister's speech, as I did again, Mr. 
Speaker, because I wanted to clearly understand if she had 
keyed on these particular areas. If there are areas of concern that 
are brought to the official opposition, if business groups, RM 
councillors and others, business agents, recognize these areas, 
then I would think that the officials in the department and the 
minister would also recognize them. 
 
(1445) 
 
And because these things are concerns that people like, once 
again, the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent  

Business), who in my own area, within a five or six mile radius 
of my farm, have 12 farm members signed up — all farmers 
who are into value adding and doing new things — when those 
members are polled and asked questions pertaining to this 
legislation, they have concerns. 
 
And I think until we clearly understand, Mr. Speaker, and have 
done our consultation, any member of a senior government who 
would change municipal law without a lot of thought, and not 
simply concentrating on whether we're going to have a 
provincial election or not, should do so at their peril. Because I 
believe people should clearly understand the changes that are 
presented to them. 
 
And I don't think that's apparent yet, Mr. Speaker. At least the 
RM councillors I've talked to don't really know what is 
happening with what the minister is proposing. And I think it's 
prudent that this Legislative Assembly take the time, Mr. 
Speaker, to debate these issues in a way that will give that time 
and understanding to the people we affect most, and that's the 
ratepayers of municipal government in this province. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on Bill 29. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting Private Vocational Schools 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
Minister of Education, Training and Employment to please 
introduce to us the officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, beside me is Lily 
Stonehouse, assistant deputy minister of advanced education 
and employment services. Behind Ms. Stonehouse is John Biss, 
director of institutional liaison unit; and directly behind me, 
Darlene Heska-Willard, private vocational school liaison. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to 
welcome the minister and her officials in today. This is a very 
important Bill in my belief. There has been a number of 
problems over the last few years with the vocational schools. 
 
A number of people have been hurt, in particular those that 
have been hurt have been the students. They've either lost part 
of their educational term and have had to then turn around and 
try and find the location someplace else, or they may have lost 
that portion of the year and then still had to try and find another 
institution to go into. Or the other manner in which they've been 
hurt is the loss of their monies that they have put into that 
education — their tuition fees that they have paid up front and 
then received no benefit for. 
 
So while that is what I see the main purpose for this Bill, I 
wonder if, Madam Minister, you could give us an outline of the  



April 6, 1995 

 
1418 

reasons behind this Bill and what you hope to accomplish with 
it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The intent of the new Bill is to provide 
the legislative framework for translating into practice a number 
of the key recommendations that came out of the Private 
Vocational Review Committee's work in 1993. 
 
The new legislation and the regulatory changes that will result 
 regulations come out of the legislation  will improve 
consumer protection, will place greater emphasis on program 
quality, and will share responsibility and accountability through 
partnerships between the government, the private vocational 
school industry, for the development and administration of 
private vocational schools. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Before we get on to the consumer protection, I wondered if you 
could give us a run down on what you see happening in the 
program quality. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In order to deal with program quality 
— and obviously this is an issue that came out of the private 
vocational school review process — there will be an industry 
advisory committee struck whose job it will be to review all 
private vocational school programs existing every five years and 
to approve of all new private vocational school programs. So 
the industry, along with the department . . . and when I say 
industry, I'm not just talking about the private vocational school 
industry, but I'm talking about the industry that private 
vocational schools train people for. Employers and industries, 
they will be involved in the process of approving and 
monitoring program quality in private vocational schools. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. This 
committee that you're talking about, will it be a standing 
committee, an ongoing committee, or will it be a committee 
that's struck every five years with new people on it? What 
experience and qualifications is necessary for these people to 
have that would sit on the committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This will be an ongoing committee. 
There will be representation from the department. There will be 
representation from the private vocational school industry, as 
well there will be some revolving seats that will represent 
industry where we will have industry experts that can guide us 
in approving and looking at programs that are being offered by 
private vocational schools. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — This committee, Madam Minister, who 
will choose the representatives on the committee? Will they be 
chosen by the Department of Education? Will they be chosen by 
the vocational schools? By the industry that they're serving? 
Who will make the choices as to who will sit on these 
committees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It will be a minister's committee, which 
means that the appointments will be made by OC (order in 
council). It means that there will be recommendations made  

from the private vocational school industry. There will be 
recommendations made from industry, and of course 
recommendations from the department as to who should sit on 
the committee from the department. 
 
But it will be a committee that is not . . . that represents industry 
and represents the private vocational school industry and also 
represents the Department of Education, Training and 
Employment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — How large of a committee do you 
envision, Madam Minister? What length of terms would the 
people sit on there for? Would they sit from review to review so 
they'd be on for five or more years, or are they on there just for 
a review that would take place, say, for six months to a year at 
that five-year point? How would the committee structure work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This committee will come through the 
regulations. As I said, the Act is the legislative framework, but 
then of course there will be regulations that are drafted to help 
us administer and implement the Act. And those kinds of details 
that you're asking us for will come in the regulation process and 
we are now just reviewing that with industry. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I think it's very 
good that the vocational schools would have someone on the 
committee, that industry whom they're serving would have 
someone on the committee, and the Department of Education. 
But there's one group here that's being missed out, Madam 
Minister, and that's the students. Should the students not have 
someone who can sit on this committee? 
 
When I've received phone calls from students dealing both with 
the consumer protection side but also from the program side, 
they have made a number of recommendations that students 
should be allowed some input into the system because they are 
the ones who are going through it. Your department people are 
in there observing at times, but they're not living it. The 
students are living what's happening within the vocational 
education system. 
 
And so I think, Madam Minister, that they should have an 
opportunity to also be represented on these committees. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't disagree with the member. The 
point I would make is that often private vocational students are 
only attending private vocational schools for eight months, ten 
months a year, maybe six months. So there would be some 
difficulty in terms of an ongoing five-year appointment for a 
particular student to sit on a committee, the advisory committee. 
But what I can commit myself to do is to take a look at how we 
might involve student representation on program quality 
advisory committee to the minister. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, perhaps a means 
of doing that would be in consultation with the student 
councils. I'm not sure that the vocational schools have a student 
council, but I'm sure that they have some form of organization 
for students within their structure. And perhaps they could  



April 6, 1995 

 
1419 

make the recommendations as to who would be an appropriate 
person or an appropriate structure for them to have some input 
into it. 
 
Quite often you'll have a student who may have been through 
the system for a year and is graduating, and they might be the 
type of person that would do well to sit on this kind of a 
committee for a certain period of time — a one-year or two-year 
term or something along that line — depending on how 
intensive this review would be. 
 
And I'm not sure if you're talking about having a committee that 
would be sitting eight hours a day five days a week, or if it's 
sort of a thing where they would meet once a month, you know, 
Madam Minister. But I think there is an opportunity there for 
the students to have some input and I think that input would 
have a considerable amount of value to the system. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I said earlier, that certainly is 
something that we could consider. I know that at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) on 
the board of governors there are past students that sit on the 
board of governors, and that might be one route to go  that 
we could have graduates from private vocational schools sitting 
as advisers to the government when it comes to program 
quality. So I certainly will take the member's comments, 
recommendation, into consideration when we're drafting the 
regulations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you mentioned that this Bill comes out of the study on 
the vocational schools, and that study cost I believe $69,000. 
Was this cost directed to the people who did the study, or was it 
in accommodations and touring and travel and those types of 
things? What was the $69,000 spent on, Madam Minister, that 
was part of the study that brought forward this legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask the member to ask me that 
question when the Department of Education, Training and 
Employment estimates are being done. I don't have the 
appropriate officials to help me answer that question. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well perhaps, Madam Minister, later 
this day we'll get to this. Madam Minister, part of this 
legislation deals with an annual return of financial statements 
from the schools. Now what kind of a financial statement will 
the department be looking at? Is it the financial statement as 
provided by the auditors of that institution or does the 
department somehow monitor that financial statement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm told that there's two ways that the 
financial information can come. It can come via an audited 
financial statement, or it can come by an unaudited financial 
statement but certified by an accountant. 
 
And I am advised by my officials that for some of the very 
small private vocational schools, an audited financial statement  

would be cost-prohibitive. So in that case, what we do is we 
take an unaudited financial statement but certified by a certified 
accountant. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. From your 
understanding of the audited financial statements or the 
certified ones, if that had been in place in the past three or four 
years, what impact would that have had on the losses that were 
incurred by the vocational schools with the result of some of 
them closing? Would you have been able to monitor that and 
determine that there was a problem there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer is that yes, this will help us 
because we will become aware of the issue ahead of time. And I 
should tell you that after the private vocational schools review 
process was completed and the report was given to the previous 
minister, that the department did move to put some of these 
checks in place. But we didn't have the legislative authority to 
do this, and so now we will have the legislative authority. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Do you think though, Madam Minister, 
that it will have a significant impact on the determination as to 
whether institutions are getting themselves in trouble and that 
you would be able to prevent that in some means by having 
advanced warning of it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It will enable us to have earlier 
intervention. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Madam Minister. If you 
determined that a school is reaching a crisis circumstance, what 
kind of intervention are you talking about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Basically what we will be able to do is 
put a school on probation. So we'll be able to work with them in 
terms of the terms and conditions that we will allow them to 
continue. We can get them to work with a financial consultant 
to assist them — those kinds of things. With this particular 
piece of legislation we'll be given advanced warning and we'll 
be in a better position to work with private vocational schools 
to work their way through the plan or to look for some 
alternatives for students. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When 
you're examining their audits, what kind of markers or measures 
would you be using to determine whether or not they're entering 
into a crisis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Peat Marwick Thorne has developed a 
standardized test instrument for the department to use when 
assessing financial statements from private vocational schools. 
And this test instrument gives us some indicators based on the 
financial information that's provided to us as to the financial 
health of the private vocational school. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. Madam Minister, once a 
school has been placed on probation what kind of restrictions 
would they be facing? Would there be restrictions on new 
students entering the system? Would there be a necessity to  



April 6, 1995 

 
1420 

monitor their ongoing programs to determine that students are 
receiving the proper course curriculum, that in the prescribed 
time that they would have purchased their tuition, their 
program, that they would have completed it within that sort of 
time? What kind of a probationary system do you envision? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Obviously it would be dependent upon 
the issues, but all of the comments that you've just made might 
apply depending upon the issues that that private vocational 
school is facing. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I would suspect 
that a school would have to be in a very serious critical position 
to not allow new students in. 
 
It's my understanding that these vocational schools sort of have 
an ongoing entrance time; that a program doesn't start in 
September and finish in April, it starts in September 1, October 
1, November 1 and so forth. If you were to put a probation on 
the school that they were not going to be allowed any more 
students, say, as of January 1, I would almost think that would 
tell the rest of the students it's time to abandon ship, that this 
school is in serious trouble and to get out. 
 
If that was the circumstance, Madam Minister, I think it would 
be very incumbent on the government then to be finding 
alternatives for those students and to basically be telling the 
school that it's time to wind it up. If the students are no longer 
going to be allowed to participate in their courses, I think that's 
going to send out a very powerful message to the other students 
that are already in the institution. 
 
I think it would be very important that the department ensure 
that that is the message that they want to send out. Or that some 
other message is sent, that it's very clear that  say, students 
who are not going to be brought into the system for the next 
three months — we got a problem here, we're going to 
straighten it out in that period of time and then new entrants 
will be allowed in. 
 
So do you see it working something like that, Madam Minister? 
Or are you prepared to say that if we cut off new students 
coming in that we are basically winding the school down. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Certainly with this legislation, we will 
now have the option to close a school if the school is not 
solvent or if the quality of the program is no longer there 
because of the financial difficulty that the private vocational 
school operator is experiencing. 
 
As well we will have a training completion plan for each private 
vocational school with the . . . I believe it will be the regulations 
so that there will be a . . . we will have a quick response if we 
deem that a private vocational school is no longer capable of 
functioning because of its financial instability. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, if you were to 
cut off new students entering the system, are you saying then  

though that the school is going to be wound down, or is there 
some other message to be taken from a disallowance of new 
students entering the system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — With this legislation we would hope 
that we would be able to intervene early enough that we could 
help a private vocational school get back on its feet before we 
would have to make the decision to stop further enrolment into 
the school. 
 
As well, as I said earlier, it is our intention through the 
regulations to have training completion plans for each private 
vocational school so that if you were in a situation where you 
had to stop enrolment . . . And you're right, that does send a 
pretty significant message to students who are there, but those 
students would then have the option to have their training 
completed elsewhere, and that's why we will have training 
completion plans for each private vocational school. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you. Madam Minister, when 
you're talking about training completion plans, are you talking 
within that institution, or are you talking about finding some 
other institution who would pick up those students and provide 
that completion? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Each institution will have to have a 
training completion plan, which means that they would have to 
be able to show the department that there is a place, another 
institution, that these students can go to should circumstances 
arise that they can no longer receive their training at that 
particular private vocational school. 
 
So that's one of the strengths of the legislation, so that we don't 
find ourselves in a situation where all of a sudden a private 
vocational school closes its door and we all scurry around 
trying to find places for students to go. The purpose behind the 
training completion plan is to have a plan in place and we 
would know where students would go to complete their 
training. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the 
other good parts of the Bill, other than the financial returns 
from the schools, which I believe is good, there are the student 
contracts. I wonder if you could give an outline of how the 
student contracts will work and what kind of requirements are 
placed on that student. And what kind of requirements are 
placed on the institution in meeting that contract? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The contract will outline for the student 
his or her obligations and his or her rights. As well, the contract 
will indicate that there is a dispute mechanism, which is 
referred to in legislation, that students can undergo if they get 
into a dispute with the private vocational school operator or 
administration. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you'd mind outlining, within that contract, what are the 
students' rights. 
 



April 6, 1995 

 
1421 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This is a part of the regulatory process 
so it will be in the regulations. So we don't have the contract 
here. We're just dealing with the legislative framework and we 
will shortly be working on the regulations that accompany the 
legislation. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I see that as a 
problem. I like the contract, but I see not having something a 
little more concrete than we're looking at it as a problem. 
 
I think it's very important that students, when they enter into 
this contract, and even right now while it's being written, have 
an opportunity to know what they can expect to receive as a 
right. 
 
And I like the other part that you put in there too, Madam 
Minister, where you said obligations; I would call them 
responsibilities. But I think with every right that we receive, we 
receive a corresponding responsibility. And I think it's very 
important that these be included in this. But I think it's also 
even more important that they be defined so that the students 
know exactly what they're entering into. 
 
If it's put in regulations, Madam Minister, it's very easy to shift 
and change. The government changes regulations all the time. 
And they change them and make them retroactive all the time. 
So I think it's very important, Madam Minister, that some of 
these rights and some of these responsibilities be spelled out in 
the legislation so that the students have at least an opportunity 
to appeal if these rights and obligations are changed after they 
have taken out their contract. 
 
Madam Minister, we have seen it happen within this House 
with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). Every farmer 
believed he had a contract and that the government would 
honour that contract. The government had opportunities to 
change the contract within certain criteria; but when it changed 
outside of that criteria the contract was broken but the farmers 
had no appeal mechanism. 
 
I think it's very important, Madam Minister, in the case of these 
students, that both their rights and their responsibilities, their 
obligations, be at least broadly outlined within the legislation. 
And that an appeal mechanism be put in place that if the 
regulations change after they have signed their contract, that 
they have some alternative mechanism for redress if they 
believe there's a problem there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well right now we do have 15 
components that must be included in an enrolment contract for 
a private vocational school. And the components are, the name 
and address of school, title of student information, program 
information, program outline, resource materials, program costs 
— these kinds of things. 
 
Now the legislation is quite clear: no operator shall use any 
form that doesn't receive the approval of the minister. This  

legislation is the legislative framework for how we're going to 
have private vocational schools in the province. 
 
Then we will have a set of regulations. In the regulations, we 
will outline in more detail what will be needed in the student 
contracts. Private vocational schools will not be able to change 
those student contracts without the approval of the minister. 
 
So I would suggest that, in my view, students will be protected 
in that they will know their rights and responsibilities or 
obligations, because it will be stated very clearly in their student 
contract with the private vocational school operator. And the 
private vocational school operator will be informed as to the 
kinds of rights and responsibilities students will have, and those 
rights and responsibilities will be outlined more clearly in the 
regulations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I have 
to admit I have less concerns and less worry about the 
vocational school changing the contract than I do about the 
department changing the contracts. 
 
Madam Minister, when you talk about name, phone number, 
address, etc., I don't believe that is either a right or a 
responsibility; that's simply information that you would place 
within any agreement to determine who was entering the 
agreement. So I think you need to . . . we need to do a little 
more discovery on what you're thinking about when you talk of 
rights and obligations. So can you give something more 
definitive, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I would like to say is that the 
Department of Education, Training and Employment, the 
minister, is not a party to the contract. The contract is between 
the student and the private vocational school operator. 
 
The role of the department is to insure that included in that 
contract is some information — information on refunds, for 
instance; information on student appeals, for instance; 
information on school policies as it affects students; 
information on the fact that there is an Act and there is 
regulations so students have some sense of where they go if 
they need to get further information as to what Act governs 
private vocational schools and what regulations govern private 
vocational schools. 
 
I think so often people think that private vocational schools are 
like SIAST and like the universities. They're not. Private 
vocational schools are private businesses that provide 
vocational education or a technical education to persons who 
wish to attend private vocational schools. I guess the point I do 
want to make is that this is a contract between the student and 
the private vocational school, not a contract between the student 
and the Department of Education, Training and Employment. 
 
Our job is to ensure that there is appropriate legislation, 
appropriate regulations, and to ensure that there is proper 
student consumer protection, proper monitoring of program so 
that we in fact know that the programs students are receiving is  



April 6, 1995 

 
1422 

appropriate in today's economy. 
 
And our other job is to ensure that the school is financially 
viable in order to protect students from private vocational 
schools going under. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I may have 
been operating under the delusion that you were indeed going to 
be a party to this contract. From your explanation, I gather that 
you are going to monitor it and ensure that nothing untoward is 
in the contract that might harm either party. Would that be a 
safe explanation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, it would be. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
When the contract has been signed by both parties, how is the 
department going to monitor the terms of the contract and to 
ensure that there's compliance to the terms of the contract? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department visits the private 
vocational school at least once a year. The department will have 
knowledge as to the kinds of programs that are being offered in 
the private vocational schools because they will be sitting on 
the advisory committee on program quality. 
 
The department will certainly . . . The student will be made 
aware of the department's involvement should they wish to 
launch some form of student appeal or if they have an inquiry, 
because in the contract it has to be stated that inquiries will be 
directed to the Department of Education, Training and 
Employment so that students know that the department does 
have a role to play in monitoring private vocational schools in 
the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm glad 
you brought up the last part because that's what I had written 
down as a note for myself. Would there be an ongoing contact 
for students within the department if they had a complaint or a 
concern. 
 
I know that in the past there has been someone within your 
department who has been responsible basically for the 
administration and compliance with the regulations of the 
vocational schools. I've received complaints from students that 
when they complained to this person within your department 
that very little seemed to happen — that they were sloughed off, 
that there wasn't a positive response towards the student who 
had a concern. And I think that that area, Madam Minister, 
needs to be somehow strengthened; that whoever in your 
department is in charge of looking after these contacts does do 
so in a positive manner and investigates any concerns that may 
come forward. 
 
Some of them will be valid and some of them won't be. I mean 
if the student gets an F on a course, some of them will complain 
that the vocational school was treating them wrong. And I 
suspect that that happens from time to time. But there are some  

complaints that do come forward that are legitimate, and we've 
brought some of those concerns to you, Madam Minister. 
 
So I think there needs to be within your department someone 
who can be held responsible for the complaints. And not 
responsible in the sense that they will be punished if there is a 
problem, but somebody who can be held responsible if nothing 
is looked at; if the complaint isn't taken seriously and isn't 
investigated  someone who is responsible to do that 
investigation to determine whether or not the complaint is valid. 
Madam Minister, would you care to respond on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well in the department we think it 
important to follow due process. What we want is a complaint 
in written form. It's very difficult to deal with complaints over 
the telephone when you may not have all the nuances of the 
case or of the complaint, so we ask people to put their concerns 
in writing. 
 
And having had some experience myself with constituents who 
have concerns and contact the constituency office — and you 
have lots of them — it is . . . you think you might have their 
problem if you take it over the phone, but when you get into it 
you really haven't caught the essence of the problem, or you go 
back and they said, you didn't get it at all. And so sometimes it's 
very helpful to get these complaints in writing. 
 
And then what you have to do is you have to go and talk to the 
private vocational school operator or the administration and 
work through some of the detail and get a response from them. 
And I know that people are often frustrated by the length of 
time it takes government to respond, but it is important, 
particularly when the department plays a monitoring, regulatory 
role, that we get both sides of the story and to be even-handed. 
Not to be an advocate for one, you know, set of concerns over 
another set of concerns. 
 
So I would say that with this legislation, what we have done is 
strengthened our ability to respond to the private vocational 
school industry who are very concerned about the numbers of 
private vocational schools that have gone under in the province 
in the last several years; and also to respond to students who 
have been the victims of some of those private vocational 
schools that have gone under. 
 
I can say, I think with some strength and some conviction, that I 
have met private vocational school operators that want to 
provide a good quality of education and they become extremely 
concerned and extremely upset when we have complaints about 
private vocational schools, because they think it reflects on their 
school. And they think that they're doing a good job, and they 
are. 
 
And so I guess I would say to the member that I think it 
important that the department, because now we have this 
legislation, will be in a better position to act quicker and to 
address some of those student concerns. But they also will have 
the partnering with the private vocational school industry that 
will assist the department in addressing student concerns. 



April 6, 1995 

 
1423 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. And I 
can understand the concern that the industry has whenever a 
complaint comes forward. I don't know the operators within the 
system, but I would suspect that most of them are very good 
operators, have a great deal of concern for their students. 
 
But what seems to happen is when you have one or so bad 
apples, they float to the surface and are the ones that are visible. 
And so the public sees those, whereas they don't see the others 
that are doing their job properly. 
 
One of the concerns that has been brought forward to me is 
when a student may have an interest in bringing forward a 
complaint. And you've said that you really need to have 
something in writing, that you need a name. 
 
Some students, Madam Minister, it's been brought to our 
attention, are being threatened by either the operator or the 
administrator or someone within the institution system, that if 
they bring forward a complaint, they could face either course 
penalties  they could face financial penalties  or they could 
even face lawsuits. 
 
So if there is a problem out there, Madam Minister, that a 
student wants to bring forward, can they do so with anonymity? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by my officials that 
students are never identified. They are not identified when they 
go and meet with the various private vocational school 
operators. 
 
The one thing I want to say is that on the contract they will have 
to outline the internal dispute mechanism, and if that doesn't 
work, then there's a mediation process. And if that doesn't work, 
included in the legislation is advisory committees, and through 
regulation we are going to have a complaints and ethics 
committee to deal with the whole issue of student concerns or 
private vocational school operator concerns that can't be 
resolved through the dispute mechanism or mediation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, it sounds like you're 
building a whole new bureaucracy here. 
 
Madam Minister, some place within this new structure that you 
have just outlined, if a student has a concern about the official 
within your department that the complaint may be going to, is 
there some other course that they could take? Is there another 
official within your structure that they could go to as sort of a 
safety-valve outlet? 
 
Now perhaps within the mediation process or the advisory 
committee or the complaints and ethics — I had to write these 
very fast and I don't know shorthand — perhaps there is 
someone within there who could take this as a safety valve 
system. Because I know it is a concern with some students that 
have had a problem, both with their vocational institution and 
then in trying to deal with an individual within your  

department. They would prefer to have had the opportunity to 
deal with someone else. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The chairman of the ethics and 
complaints committee could certainly serve that role. 
 
I just want to be clear: the internal dispute mechanism is 
contained in the student contract of the private vocational 
school, and the private vocational school has to outline how 
they plan on resolving internal disputes. 
 
If it can't be resolved there, and the student still isn't happy or 
the private vocational school operator isn't happy, there can be a 
mediation process, where there's a third party that tries to 
mediate the complaint. 
 
If it doesn't work there, then there is an advisory committee 
which is part of the advisory committee to the minister, where 
there would be an ethics and complaints committee that would 
deal with these conflicts that arise between students and 
operators, or conflicts that could arise in some other way that 
involves private vocational school operators and students. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. My 
whole experience with the vocational schools deals with 
complaints with one institution. And I don't know how many 
institutions there are in the province, but they all deal with one 
institution. And I know you're aware of it, Madam Minister. 
 
And so when you have the contract in place . . . And I'm 
thinking of this particular institution. I don't think going 
through the complaint mechanism that would be outlined 
internally would have solved the problems that these students 
felt were there. So you need something else outside of that, so 
the mediation process, the advisory committee . . . But the 
students in this particular case had gone to your department and 
felt that there was a concern that they had with the individual 
they were dealing with, and this is why I was inquiring about 
some sort of a safety valve for them. 
 
Would it be possible to put a contact number both for the 
mediation services, if they couldn't get a settlement through the 
internal mechanism with the school, plus the number of a 
secondary safety outlet? And I don't know when that would be 
necessary to do that, whether it would be necessary to put it into 
the contract. If you put it into the contract, students are apt to 
phone it first, and I think that would be circumventing. And I 
don't have a problem with going to mediation services on it or a 
mediation process. I believe in most cases that would probably 
solve the problem, and some perhaps not. But I think there's 
still a need for the student to somehow gain the information that 
there is a safety outlet for them in there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We certainly could include the ethics 
and complaints part in the student contract. We'd have no 
difficulty doing that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Perhaps 
that would handle the majority of the problems. 



April 6, 1995 

 
1424 

One of the other . . . I've got three good parts written down here 
for this legislation. The other one was that no operator of a 
school shall engage in false advertising. I'm just wondering how 
you're going to monitor that, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have to approve the 
advertisements, and we have guidelines for the advertisements. 
As well the ethics and complaints committee will be able to 
deal with, you know, faulty advertising. And the reason for this 
is because there appeared to be some marketing that had gone 
on in the past where they were marketing a program that really 
was questionable, and so now we will have these guidelines. 
We'll have to approve the ads. And if there's still a problem, it'll 
go to the ethics and complaints committee. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Will you 
also be carrying out any monitoring of the local advertising 
mediums to ensure that all of the ads have come to you? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, if an ad has been 
placed that doesn't meet your approval, what kind of sanctions 
can you take against the institution that has done such a thing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The private vocational school would 
jeopardize their licence. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So the only sanction you could take 
against them would be to revoke their licence. And that would 
put a considerable strain then on the students that would be 
there. Surely there must be some other mechanisms other than 
simply yanking their licence. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We could put them . . . I was talking 
about the ultimate action the department could take. But 
certainly they could be put on probation, they could be given a 
warning — maybe they made a mistake — they could be fined, 
they could go to the ethics and complaints committee. 
 
There is going to be more involvement of the industry in this 
whole process. And I think that industry involvement will assist 
the department in ensuring that private vocational school 
operators are operating in an appropriate and legal manner. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I'm 
sure that any industrial partner with a vocational school is not 
going to want to have their name besmirched because an 
operator of a school was not doing it properly. Neither would 
they want the students coming out of that institution not being 
properly prepared to enter their workplace. 
 
So it . . . there would be some safeguards there. But I have some 
lack of faith in one or two school operators, Madam Minister, 
that they may somehow try to circumvent the safety measures 
that are in place. 
 
Madam Minister, it's still a concern though for some of the 
students . . . Well I'll come back to that. The mediation process,  

the advisory committee, and the complaints and ethics 
committee, who would make up these committees, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — This will come by way of regulation. 
But I can assure you that we could look at the involvement of 
students on this committee as well. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay thank you, Madam Minister. 
Would that also include the same groups as the previous one 
where you would have the department, the school, and 
industrial representatives? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Not necessarily industrial 
representatives. Industrial representatives would be employers 
who are hiring students and we would have those folks 
represented on the program committee. Complaints and ethics, 
we would have the industry, private vocational school industry, 
represented on that committee along with the department and 
perhaps some other experts like a lawyer, an ethicist, students. I 
mean there are some possibilities there. 
 
But this will be framed in our discussions with the private 
vocational school industry and will be framed through 
regulation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How soon 
do you envision the regulations coming into play should this 
piece of legislation pass the legislature? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The regulations have to be in place 
when the Act is proclaimed. We'll assent to it, but then it has to 
be proclaimed. 
 
So what will now happen once the Act is passed, the 
department will begin to work with the Department of Justice 
and the private vocational school industry in drafting the 
regulations that will accompany the Act when it's proclaimed. 
And I can't give you a time line as to when the Act will be 
proclaimed because we have to draft the regulations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm 
wondering what kind of input the public could have on the 
drafting of those regulations, what kind of input the students 
could have on this particular sections that are dealing with the 
committees in which they could be a part of — would there be 
any opportunities for them to have any input? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We're working on the regulations, I 
understand, and we have had meetings with students and other 
people. There is input. We're not going to be sending the draft 
regulations to everyone in the province, but certainly all of the 
interest groups. The draft regulations will be shared with them 
and they will have input into the final regulations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. One 
of the students that I brought to your attention last session, Ross 
Joorisity, I know has talked to your department and to you 
about some of his ideas that could be incorporated into this Bill.  



April 6, 1995 

 
1425 

Would it be possible for him to have some input into that? 
Because he has indeed volunteered to do that as of, you know, 
his own time because he understands some of the problems that 
he went through and some of the other students have gone 
through, and he has volunteered to be available as a resource if 
it would be possible to be used that way. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that he was 
involved in the process last week. The department has consulted 
with Mr. Joorisity, along with others, and they were involved in 
the consultation last week, and the department appreciates his 
input into the process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Within the Bill, you've talked about the training continuation of 
the students' enrolment. How much of a disruption do you 
envision having in place if the school gets into trouble and 
closes. Now they've got a continuation plan in place, so that's 
fine if the school continues on. There's some mechanism for 
them to carry on for a period of time perhaps as the school 
reorganizes their finances or as they wind down. 
 
But if the school closes abruptly, what kind of considerations 
are going to be given to getting students into another program? 
And what kind of a time frame are you looking at as being 
acceptable for that student to be outside of their program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Our experience with Reliance was that 
within two days, students were in alternative programs, or 
alternate programs. With the training completion plan that will 
be in the legislation, and all private vocational schools will have 
to have them, hopefully we'll be able to have students placed 
the next day — the day after we know that the school has gone 
down. But we worked very quickly with the private vocational 
school that went down some months ago and got those students, 
within two days, into alternate training arrangements. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well under this new Bill, Madam 
Minister, do you foresee reciprocal agreements between schools 
that if my school gets into trouble, then the member from 
Shaunavon school will pick up the slack and vice versa? Is that 
the kind of arrangements that will be coming into play? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Where that's possible, I think that will 
happen. With the students that were left in the lurch after the 
last school went down, the private vocational school operators 
who were providing training in that particular field moved very 
quickly to accommodate those students. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Part of the 
legislation deals with a training completion fund. Now what is 
the training completion fund about? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The training completion fund is about 
paying for students to complete their training as quickly as 
possible. 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well who provides this fund, Madam 
Minister? How is it administered? Where does the money come 
from? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The money will come from the 
operators. And we're still working with the operators through 
regulations to determine how that is going to be done, but the 
money will come from the operators. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — What extent of a fund do you envision 
here, Madam Minister? Are you looking at a fixed, flat fee per 
student with a maximum cap perhaps? What is this fund? How 
large is it going to be, and who is going to administer it? Will it 
be the department that administers it? How is it allocated out 
after that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department will administer the 
fund. The fund was suggested by the private vocational school 
operators. And the department is working with the private 
vocational school operators to determine exactly how we're 
going to realize the fund. So that is presently in process. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, you must have 
at least a ballpark figure that you're looking at when it comes to 
how large you want this fund to be. Perhaps you can answer 
how many vocational schools there are in the province and how 
many students are there at any one time within the vocational 
school system. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are 36 schools. Last year's 
figures, approximately 2,500 students. And we're anticipating 
— but this is just anticipating — that the maximum fund would 
be about 1 per cent of tuition. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. I 
missed the number of schools . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
36, the minister says. 
 
Okay, 1 per cent of tuition, what kind of dollars would we be 
looking at there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, we anticipate that there will be 
an annual contribution of about $35,000. It's going to take a 
number of years to get to where we want the fund to be. But at 
this stage, there is nothing available to do training completions. 
And we anticipate that within some years we would be in a 
position where we would have the fund where we'd want it to 
be. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. The 
$35,000 represents the 1 per cent. Now how large do you want 
the fund to be? You say it could take a number of years to reach 
that point. 
 
So are you looking at 10 years' worth, which would be 
$350,000 of principal plus any accumulated interest. What 
volume of dollars are you looking at as having in this fund as a 
protection for students? 
 



April 6, 1995 

 
1426 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It's our intention that we work with the 
private vocational school operators to work through the process 
of what would be an appropriate level for the fund. We have 
not yet worked through that detail, so I can't tell you with any 
precision what the cap should be on the fund. 
 
But we do believe that it will be about $35,000 for a number of 
years. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You must 
have at least some ballpark figure in mind of a million dollars 
or less, or a million dollars or more. You must have something. 
I mean this thing just can't keep growing like Topsy. I think 
there has to be sort of an upper limit to it. 
 
Is it going to be . . . And how is it going to be judged when it 
reaches that magic cap level? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that one 
school closing could cost up to $130,000. Obviously we want to 
work with industry to determine what an appropriate cap on the 
fund would be. If you had two or three schools go down in one 
year you could be looking at $400,000. That's why the officials 
are reluctant to put a cap on it because they're still negotiating 
or working and cooperating with the industry to determine what 
would be an appropriate level of fund for the numbers of 
students and the numbers of schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I do 
have a concern with this one that it's adding a 1 per cent fee 
onto all the tuitions of students. And what happens to the 
money? Does it simply sink into that big, black pit known as the 
Consolidated Fund, never to be seen again? And that at the end 
of the day when you're supposed to have 400,000 or a million 
dollars sitting in there, all you actually have at the end of the 
day is an unfunded liability. 
 
Is this money going to be dedicated to that purpose, going to be 
left within a trust account to accumulate any interest for the 
purposes of the students? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well the fund will be left in a trust 
account for the purposes as described in the legislation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Will the 
department or will the minister have any access to those funds 
other than for the purposes of training completions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In the Act, the training completion 
fund is established to pay for any mediation pursuant to section 
14, to compensate students who've entered into a student 
contract with an operator, to pay for the expenses of 
administering the fund, and to do any other thing as prescribed 
in the regulations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm not sure that 
a training completion fund should actually be paying for the 
mediation costs. I mean that's an ongoing argument between an  

operator that currently is in operation and the student. The 
training completion fund is in place for when the students no 
longer have an institution to attend, and I believe that's what it's 
there for. It's not for ongoing complaints as the school 
progresses down the road. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think right there there is a problem. But 
that's not the largest problem. The other items as determined by 
regulation leaves it wide open to anything you want to do, 
Madam Minister, anything that you want to do. 
 
I think those funds need to be tied up so that they're there for 
the training completion. Now you can work within that criteria 
to provide that, but it's not for the training — let's say — of 
department people to do evaluations. It's there for training 
completions only, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You can have that view. We don't 
believe that there will be many cases of mediation that will go 
to the minister. We don't believe that there will be that many 
cases. We think that within the internal dispute mechanism, that 
a lot of the disputes, most of the disputes, will be settled at the 
local level. 
 
It is not the intention of government to pay for mediation. The 
fund will assist operators and students in resolving concerns 
that can't be resolved at the local level. And it will be there to 
assist students who require training out as a result of a school 
becoming insolvent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I think the last 
one is what it should be there for: for the training of students 
whose schools are no longer operating, and they have to go to 
another institution. 
 
If they paid their tuition fees to a school that becomes insolvent, 
those monies are gone. So now they have no education. If they 
wish to carry on, now they have to provide new tuition fees. So 
that's what those funds should be there for, is to provide those 
tuition fees or to provide for perhaps more educators within the 
system at the new school that they may go to, to provide that 
education. 
 
I don't understand or see any reason why it should be to do any 
other thing that is prescribed in the regulations. That just leaves 
it totally wide open for anything that any minister of Education 
or any Department of Education wishes to utilize that money 
for. It could be pulled out to balance the Education budget one 
year. And if a school goes under at that time, where's the money 
gone? 
 
I think, Madam Minister, that section (d) needs to be removed 
from the Act on clause no. 18. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Because this is a new piece of 
legislation and because we're doing some things differently than 
we have done in the past, we can't anticipate what may occur. 
And this allows us a little flexibility to anticipate the 
unexpected. It is not our intention to misuse this fund. This  



April 6, 1995 

 
1427 

fund is going to be used for what is set out in the Act — it's to 
assist students and operators. And we still have some 
discussions that are ongoing with private vocational school 
operators. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, if that section, 
part of clause 18(4)(d), were removed, it would not prevent you 
from carrying out the duties for the fund as outlined. It would 
prevent you from doing any things that aren't included in here 
without coming to the House. You can still change the Act and 
still the change the regulations, but first you would have to 
come here to do it. That's the only difference, Madam Minister. 
You would now have to do it in the public view and explain 
why it's necessary to do something else with these funds that 
have been paid in by the students of the vocational schools. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I believe that this section should be 
removed. All it does is give you as the minister, or your 
department, the discretion of how to use those funds. The funds 
should be dedicated to the students who paid the money in. 
 
I would even go further, Madam Minister, and say that only the 
interest off of the funds paid in should be used to cover any of 
the administration expenses or any of the mediation. I don't 
believe the mediation should be part of it, but if it has to be, 
then it should only come out of the interest on those funds, not 
out of the capital, the principal, that's put into it, Madam 
Minister. 
 
But clearly section (d) in there serves no purpose other than to 
allow you somehow to gain access to those funds without 
having to come to the public to explain why. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that the 
private vocational schools are going to be involved in how the 
fund . . . they're going to be involved in administering the fund, 
that there will be a training completion advisory committee, 
along with the ethics and complaints committee, along with the 
program quality committee. There will be three advisory 
committees to this legislation. Well the member shakes his 
head. But what we're try to do is partner with people. We're 
trying to partner with the industry. What we had before didn't 
work very well, Member. It's not our legislation. It did not work 
well. 
 
What we have is a partnership between the department and 
industry to ensure a few things. We want to ensure that students 
have access to quality, private vocational school programing. 
We want to make sure that students have access to a training 
completion plan and fund because they don't have now. This is 
your legislation, not ours. And we want to make sure that 
students have access to a dispute mechanism where real 
problems can be resolved, and that's why we have the ethics and 
complaints committee. 
 
There's three committees to deal with three problems. And we 
found in our three and a half years in government that often 
times you solve problems when government and industry sit 
down and work in a collaborative way. And that is the purpose  

behind the advisory committees. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, if we keep 
discussing this Bill pretty soon we're going to have more 
committees than we have students. We've already got the 
mediation process committee. We've got the advisory 
committee. We've got the complaints and ethics committee. 
And we got the training completion committee. Well, Madam 
Minister, says that there's three committees. Where does this 
training completion committee fit in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There's a program approval advisory 
committee. There's an ethics and complaints advisory 
committee. And there's a training completion advisory 
committee. There are three committees, and they will be 
described in regulation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well what about the mediation 
committee, Madam Minister? Who are they? Somebody is in 
there for mediation. Who is it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It's a service; it's not a committee. A 
mediator . . . I don't know if you know about third-party dispute 
resolution, that's mediation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . right. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, while the 
committees may have an opportunity for some oversight in 
these funds, where is it going to be stated that these committees 
cannot use the funds for anything other than what they were 
designated training completion funds, under section (d), to do 
any other thing than is prescribed in regulations? So, Madam 
Minister, who is going to write the regulations? Is it the 
advisory committee? Is it the program development committee? 
Or is it the training completion committee? Who's going to 
write the regulations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are presently in the process of 
drafting regulations, and we consulted with one of the students 
that you brought to our attention. We're consulting with the 
industry. We're consulting with other interested parties. The 
department is working with the interested parties and the 
Department of Justice in drafting the regulations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, when you say we, who 
is we? I mean we always hear about the mythical we or the 
mythical they: they did this, and they did that; we did this, and 
we did that. So who is we? Is we the vocational schools: the 
students and industry as well as the department. Or is the we 
that is drafting regulations the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well let me explain the regulation 
process to you. We have a piece of legislation that we're 
debating, some framework for how we are going to handle 
private vocational schools in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
legal framework. 
 
Along with the legislation go regulations. Regulations describe  



April 6, 1995 

 
1428 

how the Act is going to be administered or implemented. 
Regulations are drafted by the Department of Justice. The 
Department of Education consults with the various interest 
groups on the regulations, and the Department of Justice works 
with the Department of Education based on the feedback they 
get on the regulations, the draft regulations to draft and frame 
the regulations. Regulations are public documents once they 
have been approved by Executive Council. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, at the end of the 
day then, it comes down to cabinet making the decisions as to 
the regulations; therefore cabinet is now being given access to 
the training completion funds. So, Madam Minister, I just have 
to say that that is not acceptable. There is no reason why anyone 
other than the students . . . to complete their training should 
have access to these monies. You shouldn't have access to 
them. Your department shouldn't have access to them. The 
cabinet shouldn't have access to them and neither should the 
vocational schools. 
 
I know Madam Minister is not happy with this train of 
questioning, but nevertheless that money has to be dedicated to 
the education of the students and not to any other purpose. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well let me say this. When you talk 
about executive government or cabinet ministers interested in 
this fund, I have to tell you once you get here, Member, once 
you become a cabinet minister, this will be the furthest thing 
from your mind. You have department officials to work with 
industry on training completion funds and training completion 
plans. You simply do not have time to mess around in how the 
training completion fund is going to be administered. You don't 
have time. You rely on your officials to help you. So I think I 
can assure you, with a great deal of precision, that the cabinet is 
not interested in the training completion fund. 
 
What we are interested in is having a piece of legislation that 
properly protects students. We want to ensure that the 
department has access to sound financial information, so we 
know the financial status of private vocational schools. We 
want to make sure that each private vocational school has a 
training completion fund in case that private vocational school 
is insolvent. We want to make sure that students can actually 
resolve complaints because right now we have no authority to 
resolve complaints, à la the frustration of your students, the 
frustration of constituents that have come to me. 
 
So this piece of legislation is about financial accountability, 
financial information. It's about a training completion fund to 
ensure that students are protected so that they're not left holding 
their student loan  no money, no place to go. And that 
happened before. We don't want that to happen anymore. 
 
This is about program quality because a lot of students feel that 
they attended private vocational schools, some of them, and 
they didn't get the kind of program that they needed in order to 
get an adequate job. We want to have program quality. 
 
So I guess I would say to the member that I think that this is an  

appropriate piece of legislation. It's sound, and it's going to give 
the department the tools that it needs to work with industry in 
order to make sure that we have private vocational schools that 
are sound financially, deliver a quality program, and we can 
resolve disputes between students and private vocational school 
operators. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm sure that the 
people within your department have the best interests, as you 
do, of the students. I'm sure that's the case. But I don't feel that 
comfortable with the member from Saskatoon, who looks after 
the Finance department and her officials. 
 
They are always looking for another penny to get their mitts on 
from someplace. We've already seen what happened with the 
farmers. They just sucked up $188 million out of the farmers' 
program because it just happened to be sitting there. If there's 
$400,000 or a million dollars sitting here that the Minister of 
Finance can get her mittens on, she'll suck it up like a great big 
Hoover, and you'll never see it again. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think it's very important within this 
legislation that nothing interferes with that money being 
available for students. And when it says that it could be taken 
out of there as prescribed by regulation, the money can 
disappear as if it was sucked into a black hole which is the 
Finance department. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We will put into regulation the tabling 
of the trust account to this Legislative Assembly so that 
legislators will know how the trust fund is spent, so you will 
know whether or not this will . . . you will know how that fund 
is being spent. You will know what's being spent on 
administration, what's being spent on completion of training, 
what's being spent on mediation, and what's being spent in 
other areas. 
 
So you will have access to that information. I can assure the 
member of that. I make that commitment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Will it 
show up then in the Finance department books under Education 
as some form of a revolving fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In clause by clause, 18, it talks about 
the Provincial Auditor or any other auditor or firm of auditors; 
at (6), they may appoint . . . shall audit the records, accounts of 
each fiscal year of the department in accordance with The 
Tabling of Documents Act, 1991; shall prepare and submit to 
the minister a financial statement; the financial statement will 
be in the form required by treasury; and in accordance with The 
Tabling of Documents Act the minister shall lay before the 
Legislative Assembly each financial statement received by the 
minister. 
 
So it will be tabled. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
believe that there's also tabling of documents regulations  



April 6, 1995 

 
1429 

dealing with the teachers' pension fund, and yet there seems to 
be . . . that's another one of these big black holes where there's 
no money sitting, with a big debt, $3 billion of unfunded 
liability. 
 
It shows up in the books. It's there — plain, black and white. 
You know we've got that much money. Only thing is, there ain't 
no money there. 
 
The same thing can happen here, Madam Minister. You'll still 
carry 400,000 or whatever the number might be on the books, 
as having been deposited into the fund, but there's a loan gone 
off some place. 
 
So that's why, Madam Minister, I think it's very important that it 
just be dedicated for training completion. And I'd like to see 
something happen with that to ensure that that is indeed what 
the funds are for. 
 
Madam Minister, we'll keep going. I think I've beat that one to 
death long enough. 
 
Madam Minister, in your second reading speech you stressed 
how much more protection students are going to receive under 
this legislation. Yet I'm wondering, in the case where a school 
does become bankrupt, insolvent, ceases to exist, and there are 
debts outstanding — there could be debts to suppliers, debts to 
mortgage holders, debts to employees, debts to students — who 
will receive priority, and what will be the order of those 
priorities, to receive compensations back? And will that money 
come out of the training completion fund or out of a bond 
posted by the vocational school, and how large would that bond 
be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The bond will only be for students. 
That will not come out of the training completion fund. It 
comes out of the bond; it's for students. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How large 
will this bond be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Depending upon the size of the 
vocational school, it could be between 10 to $50,000. Because 
we have the training completion fund, we're not going to be 
increasing the bond. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What 
impact on this particular bond would legislation dealing with 
preferred payments, where an institution or an individual may 
decide to make a payment to a creditor at the expense of a 
different creditor . . . Here you have a fund set up that is owned 
by the school who are going to pay it out to what could be 
considered a preferred clientele. Now what are the legalities 
involved? 
 
I know that within industry, if you do this kind of thing, if a 
farmer goes ahead and pays his fuel dealer, and you happen to 
have a bank loan or you have a vehicle loan or some other form 
of mortgage, that mortgage holder can go back after that person  

who received the money and have it brought back into the 
receivership, and then it's distributed out to the preferred 
creditors. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In order for a private vocational school 
to be registered, you have to have a bond. And the bond is for 
students. You couldn't get registered without the bond. So I'm 
advised by the officials that some other creditor could not go 
after the bond because that bond is for students. The bond is for 
students; otherwise that school would not have been registered. 
They have to put up a bond in order to be registered. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Has that bond been challenged in the 
court by any creditors? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have paid out the bond in the form 
of student fees in the past, I'm advised by the officials. And to 
their knowledge, the bond as we've structured it has never been 
challenged in court by other creditors. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
wonder if you would have any legal opinions on that bond 
position. And I'm reluctant to suggest the Justice department 
after listening to their constitutional arguments. But perhaps the 
Department of Education has a legal entity that could . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . not Justice. My faith is shaken in 
their abilities with constitutional arguments. 
 
But, Madam Minister, do you have any legal opinions that 
could be tabled to deal with the bond? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, we have no legal opinions. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What 
other types of financial commitments would a vocational school 
have in place to ensure that employees perhaps would receive 
some form of compensation if they were to become insolvent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That has nothing to do with the 
Department of Education, Training and Employment. Our job is 
to deal with students. We do not deal with employees. If they 
had a problem, they would go to the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What's the 
process of accessing this bond if a student has a concern about 
lost tuitions or student loans? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If there's a closure, what the 
department does is send to the insurer a claim against the bond, 
and then we gather all the information on the students who 
would have access to that bond. I'm advised by the department 
that it could take up to a year, and in fact does take up to a year 
for students to get payment from the bond. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I 
mentioned Ross Joorisity earlier, and Petria Racette were two 
students that came forward because of Reliance, and then they  



April 6, 1995 

 
1430 

went on to Avant-Garde and had problems there. They still have 
not received their money for their student loans, Madam 
Minister. 
 
As it was explained to us, and as we talked to you about it both 
in question period and outside of that, that the student loans that 
they had paid in initially would be the Canada student loans, 
were to be returned to their financial institution by the 
institution when they were no longer part of that institution. 
 
And it didn't happen, Madam Minister, and those student loans 
are still outstanding. They're still being pressured by their 
institutions to make payments on monies that they actually do 
not owe. They owe part of it, but not the entire amount. Part of 
that should have been returned to them by the vocational 
institution, and that still has not happened. 
 
Been informed that Ross Joorisity is expecting to receive his 
money shortly but this has been over two years, Madam 
Minister, that he has been in the process of . . . September of '92 
is actually when he started. And I believe he attended the school 
until some time in October — so for about perhaps six weeks 
— and he dropped out. But his student loan has still been 
hanging there, still building interest against him on a portion 
that should have been returned by the vocational school. 
 
So in those kind of cases, Madam Minister, a year is going to be 
a long time in the life of that student when they're trying to pay 
back a student loan. Because the financial institution doesn't 
have any pity for them because it's owed to the financial 
institution. They don't care who pays it; it's got to be somebody. 
And if the school isn't doing it, then the student is stuck with 
the bag. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all I understand that the case 
that you're dealing with, that he had left the private vocational 
school before the vocational school went under. And the bond 
. . . you cannot make a claim against the bond until the school 
goes under. So that's what we're dealing with at this stage. 
 
I guess the other thing, not in terms of this case but just to make 
the point to the member and to anyone who is listening, that 
these are in fact private businesses. They're called private 
vocational schools and it's the old adage, buyer beware. 
 
If you want to get . . . if you want to go to a private vocational 
school then you need to check it out. You need to know who 
the owners are, the primary shareholders are. You need to know 
about their track record. You need to do all of those kinds of 
things that you would do if you were buying a house. 
 
You know, if you're buying a house you go through the process 
of ensuring that the house is structurally sound — the shingles 
on the roof, the plumbing is good, the furnace is good, 
electricity is good. You go through all of that process. You're 
buying a piece of property. In this case, these folks are buying 
an education that will lead to — hopefully — a job. And it's a 
private vocational school, and you need to go through the same 
kind of processes that you go through if you were going to buy  

a car, buy a house, purchase a consumer item, because this is a 
private business. This is not a public institution. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. If, in 
the vocational school world, it is caveat emptor, then why are 
you even becoming involved in it? Surely within the system, 
because you as the minister license that institution, you bear 
some responsibility to make sure that the car the student is 
going to buy has tires and a seat and a steering wheel and an 
engine that is going to carry him through the entire course. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I think that you as the Minister of 
Education, and your department bear a considerable amount of 
responsibility when you issue a licence to the ABC vocation 
school — and hopefully there isn't an ABC vocational school. 
Madam Minister, you're the one responsible. You have allowed 
that institution to set up in Saskatchewan and have validated it 
by giving it that licence that you talked about pulling a while 
back. 
 
So, Madam Minister, while the student should investigate that 
the school can provide them with the necessary accreditation if 
they complete the course, it's up to you as the minister to ensure 
that that is a viable and proper school, or else it shouldn't have a 
licence. And that's where your responsibility lies, Madam 
Minister, and you cannot avoid that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I guess in response to the member I 
would say this, that, you know, people are licensed to sell cars. 
Businesses are licensed to sell cars; they receive a licence from 
the state. Businesses are licensed to sell clothing. Businesses 
are licensed to sell houses. These folks are receiving a licence. 
 
Now just in terms of your comments, Member, it was not this 
administration that brought in the previous piece of legislation 
that did not do the trick. Your government's previous legislation 
was a problem -- hard to administer, hard to enforce — a 
problem. 
 
This administration is bringing in a piece of legislation based 
on the Private Vocational Schools Review Committee's 
recommendations. We don't know if we've solved all the 
problems. I doubt it. But we think we've gone some way to 
solving some of the problems. And I just would like to reiterate, 
it's true the state, through the Department of Education, 
Training and Employment, will register private vocational 
schools. And we will do everything to ensure program quality. 
We'll know whether or not that institution is financially viable, 
based on the financial statement, and we have a dispute 
mechanism now in the legislation. 
 
But if you're asking the state to guarantee the world to these 
students, that's not going to happen. What students have to do is 
look very carefully at the program, very carefully. Look at who 
owns the private vocational school. Look at what kind of record 
that private vocational school has in terms of ensuring that 
students get jobs once they complete their training. 
 
That's what I would suggest to students that are contemplating  



April 6, 1995 

 
1431 

training in a private vocational school. And if they're not 
prepared to take the adage, buyer beware, then they need to 
look to other institutions where they are offered more 
protection. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well if 
you go and buy a car and it turns out to be a lemon, there's 
legislation in place to protect you. But it seems under your 
description that what we have here for students in the 
vocational system is, as the minister in charge of gambling and 
sin calls it, a difficult learning experience. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, I think it needs to be something a little 
better than a difficult learning experience. 
 
Madam Minister, were there any vocational schools in this 
province prior to April 26, 1982? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There were private vocational schools 
in this province prior to April 26, 1982. I remember that fateful 
day with vivid . . . whatever. Places like Saskatoon business 
school, Robertson business school, Reliance business school — 
old, old established business schools with a long history of 
family involvement . . . yes, there were. 
 
We're not aware of any having gone down before April 26, 
1982. I can tell you, in the late '80s lots went down. And your 
government brought in a piece of legislation that was supposed 
to solve the problem; it didn't. And now we're trying to bring in 
a piece of legislation that we hope will solve most of the 
problems. But there's no guarantees it's going to solve all of the 
problems. 
 
What you have to do is ensure that people who are involved in 
private vocational institutions have sound financial footing. 
And we'll see, based on financial reports that the government 
will have to receive every year from these schools. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. The 
reason I brought that up, because you made it sound like as if 
there were no private vocational schools in the province prior to 
1982 when the former administration brought in some 
legislation dealing with it. 
 
There was indeed, Madam Minister, private vocational schools 
here. My wife attended one of those that you named, and I 
believe it did her very well. 
 
But, Madam Minister, I look at the legislation that's coming 
forward in this House every session. And last time we had Bills 
dealing with particular subjects, and they come back again this 
time — same subject, same clauses. 
 
So, Madam Minister, legislation is always being changed and 
upgraded, and there are always points that are missed. And in 
your particular piece of legislation, somebody will change it 
sometime. 
 
So, Madam Minister, simply to say that the previous  

administration legislation was totally flawed is incorrect, 
Madam Minister. It would have been an improvement on the 
legislation previous to that, as your legislation is an 
improvement on the piece that's there now. So, Madam 
Minister, it's an ongoing building process. 
 
Madam Minister, we've talked about Ross and Petria. How is 
this current legislation going to affect those that are in the 
system now and drop out, where they have a problem in having 
their student loans paid back by the institution, the institution is 
reluctant today to pay them, and perhaps at some point down 
the road they become insolvent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Your question is, is this retroactive 
legislation? No, it's not. Okay. So Ross and Petria are under the 
old piece of legislation. 
 
I just want to make one point for the member. I followed 
private vocational school legislation with some interest in the 
'80s. I'm familiar with the history of what happened in this 
province. I was in opposition in '86 to '91 — Education critic. 
Your government in the early '80s changed the legislation; it 
opened it up. We had huge growth of private vocational schools 
— topsy-turvy, unbelievable. Unbelievable number of private 
vocational schools. 
 
And then you got yourself into some trouble and you tried to fix 
it — I believe it was in about 1988. It didn't work. And what 
we're trying to do is fix as many problems as we can. Will it 
work? I think we've gone some ways in solving a lot of the 
problems. We've tightened it up. You can't just be a 
fly-by-nighter and put a shingle up and say I'm a private 
vocational school operator. You can't do that. 
 
So I just want to remind the member that if he's going to quote 
history in the legislature, he needs to have a bit of a long 
memory. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well the minister has a bit of an 
advantage on me in that, that she was elected in '86 and I was 
only elected in '91. So she had, as one of my colleagues pointed 
out, she was a lot more ruthless in this kind of questioning than 
I am. 
 
But, Madam Minister, you didn't answer my question as to what 
happens to the student who drops out of the system today — 
let's back up — under this legislation, drops out of the system 
today, their student loan is not returned to them by the 
institution. Can they get access to some money some place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. First of all, I just wanted to say 
to the member that I think he's a very good questioner, very 
good. I think you're one of the best in the legislature. And I 
know a little bit about questioning and I think you're good. So a 
compliment to the critic. 
 
Number one, in terms of refund, in the contract, student  



April 6, 1995 

 
1432 

contract, there will have to be some indication of the process 
that students go about in order to get refunds. So it will be put 
into the student contract. 
 
If the private vocational school operator does not meet the 
deadline, they can come to the department. And through this 
dispute mechanism if they can't resolve the problem internally, 
through the dispute mechanism mediation we'll be able to assist 
them in solving their problem. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. I was 
looking through my questions here; I found an interesting one 
that relates back to our topic we were discussing about earlier 
when you were in opposition. 
 
Madam Minister, my notes here say that when you were the 
opposition critic you said that it was government's 
responsibility to reimburse students who were owed funds as a 
result of a closed private vocational school. Do you still share 
that opinion, Madam Minister, or has it changed since you're 
now sitting in that side of the House rather than this chair over 
here? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I can't remember what I said. It's 
possible I said that. But I would want . . . do you actually have 
Hansard or some one just doing some research? Do you 
actually have a real quote there? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Okay, I'd love to see Hansard on that one. 
 
That's why we have the fund now, the training completion fund. 
There was nothing in those days. I sound as though I'm a bit 
long in the tooth, I'm not that long in the tooth. But in those 
days there was nothing. And with this legislation there will be 
the training completion fund which will help students who are 
caught when a school goes down. That's the whole purpose 
behind the training completion fund, so that students aren't left 
holding the bag. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — But, Madam Minister, that doesn't 
answer the question though where the operator of a school 
doesn't want to return the money, where the student loan has . . . 
the student has paid their student loan to the institution, they've 
dropped out of the course after a certain period of time and 
they're eligible to receive a certain portion of those monies back 
but the school refuses to return the money that is owed to the 
financial institution. How do those students get that money 
back? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Under the new Act, the department will 
have more ability to put pressure on the school to pay. So there 
will be . . . through regulation and the legislation, the 
department will have more power to intervene and assist that 
student getting the refund. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well is there some way for the 
government to actually get their hands on the money, or is it 
simply going to be moral persuasion that, you know, you really 
shouldn't ought to do this and if you carry on this way, we're 
going to have to review your licence or something. Or is there  

some mechanism to actually access the monies from that 
institution? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well there's fines for violating the 
legislation. There's the whole issue of relicensing the school, 
putting the school on probation. There are some measures I 
think that we can take with the legislation, and the regulations 
that are going to accompany the legislation, to assist the 
department in being more able . . . or enable the department to 
intervene on behalf of students that aren't being reimbursed for 
legitimate reasons or being . . . getting reimbursed for legitimate 
expenses. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister, 
because there are some circumstances where that seems to be 
happening at the present time. Some students are having a great 
deal of difficulty under the current legislation — not under the 
new legislation but under the current legislation — are having a 
great deal of difficulty accessing the monies that were paid out 
on student loans. 
 
When an operator has been operating a school that has run into 
these financial difficulties, has become insolvent, are they 
allowed to be involved in another school? Are there some 
requirements there and some form of a watch put on them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — If you look to 5(1), decision to issue or 
refuse certificate, it indicates that, under (b)(ii), the minister or 
the department can: 
 
 refuse to issue or renew a certificate of registration 

where the minister is not satisfied that: 
 
 . . . it is in the public interest to issue or renew a 

certificate of registration because of the past conduct of 
the applicant or, if the applicant is a corporation, the 
past conduct of any of the directors or officers of the 
applicant. 

 
So we think that covers off the concerns that we've had 
collectively about people who've gone under and then started up 
again. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — If those circumstances were to occur or 
be presently occurring, how would this legislation affect those 
that might be involved? 
 
What I'm wondering is, is there a grandfathering clause here, 
that if a person had been involved with a school that has 
become insolvent, or there has been some other conduct that 
may have been questionable, would they be allowed to carry on 
with a school that they might be involved with at present? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that 
because they have to be relicensed every year, that yes, we 
could. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Sorry, Madam Minister, I was thinking 
about something else. I wonder if you could repeat that, please? 



April 6, 1995 

 
1433 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm advised by the officials that 
because private vocational schools are relicensed every year that 
we could in fact look at a person's past conduct if they are 
presently licensed. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When 
you're talking about the officers, whom exactly are you referring 
to? Are you talking about the, say, a president of an institution 
or the manager, or just how broad is the definition of officer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — When we talk directors and officers, 
we're talking about the owners; people who would show up on 
the certificate of registration . . . corporation, under the 
corporations Act; those people who are there as officers of the 
corporation or directors of the corporation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What 
about other employees perhaps of the institution, or someone 
who may have been involved with an institution at some time 
which became insolvent but is not at arm's length from a current 
owner-director? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think that this, as I understand from 
the officials, this would just apply to people who have the . . . 
that own the company and have the financial responsibility of 
the company. Those people we could certainly not . . . or make 
a decision not to renew a certificate if there was some conduct 
problem. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So if 
someone who was not at arm's length, so they have an intimate 
relationship with an owner-director, could still be operating or 
managing the school — let's say. They would not fall under 
these regulations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — You're correct. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I think that causes a bit of a problem, 
Madam Minister. The circumstances that we were both alluding 
to earlier, I think, applies in this situation where we have 
someone who has been involved with a vocational school that 
did run into difficulties and is now very involved with a current 
vocational school which . . . while that name does not appear as 
an owner-director, someone who is an intimate relation to them, 
their name does appear as an owner or director on that school. 
So is it possible, Madam Minister, that some place within these 
regulations there could be some connections here that could be 
reviewed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think what we should do is probably 
talk about this privately, and we could have a private discussion 
about what you're trying to get at. Okay? 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, I have to go 
back to the compliment you paid me earlier, and I was 
wondering what it was going to cost me. 
 
Madam Minister, we talked earlier about the students that could  

be involved in this, and the student had suggested that a panel 
of vocational school students be organized to evaluate . . . and 
advise the minister. Would that perhaps have more value to you 
than an individual student that could be a part of one of your 
committees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I indicated, we're just in the process 
of drafting the regulations. That's something that we certainly 
could consider. 
 
I know that as the Minister of Education, Training and 
Employment, I meet with the Kelsey Students' Association or 
the Wascana Students' Association, Moose Jaw, Palliser; 
Woodland, U of S (University of Saskatchewan), U of R 
(University of Regina). So there are, through their student 
councils, avenues for students to meet with the minister, and 
perhaps private vocational schools could form some association 
that would make it possible for the minister to have input from 
students that are in private vocational school settings. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister, we're 
almost to the end of my questions here. 
 
When it comes to dealing specifically with industry and their 
partnership, just how do you see this involvement, Madam 
Minister? What real inputs will industry have into the 
administration of the vocational schools and their programing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I said, we're intending on having 
three committees. We're intending on having a program quality 
committee; an ethics and complaints committee; and a training 
completion fund committee. So we think that the industry will 
have real involvement. 
 
As well, I should mention to the member that the industry has 
been involved in . . . or certainly has been consulted in the 
drafting of this legislation. And I'm advised by the officials that 
they think this legislation goes a long ways to assisting the 
industry in improving its image, because we're addressing some 
issues that have come about in the last several years. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, you had the $60,000 committee that we were 
going to talk about in estimates; what other monies were spent 
on advice or acquiring advice on the changes to the vocational 
school Act? And who else did you consult with? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I guess the only other cost would be the 
time the department spent on it, the time that the Justice 
department spent on drafting the legislation. There's no other 
cost like the privatize . . . or the committee that looked at 
private vocational schools. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay thank you, Madam Minister. I 
think I have exhausted my questions here and probably 
yourself. Now if we can only get the attention of the committee  



April 6, 1995 

 
1434 

chairman, we can perhaps proceed. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 18 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This 
amendment deals with what we were discussing earlier about 
the removal of "to do any other thing that is prescribed in 
regulations" when it comes to dealing with the training 
completion funds. 
 
Madam Minister, I think we have been over all of the arguments 
and I believe it is a valid and worthwhile amendment to the Act. 
While not changing the Act substantially in any way or form, I 
believe it would be of benefit to the students to have this 
amendment put in place to ensure that those funds would 
remain in place and available to students. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would move that we: 
 
 Amend clause 18 of the printed Bill: 
 
 (a) by adding "and" after "who has become insolvent;" 

in clause (4)(b); 
 
 (b) by striking out "; and" after "administering the 

fund" in clause (4)(c); 
 
 and 
 
 (c) by deleting clause (4)(d). 
 
The Chair: — Can we take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 18 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 19 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and her officials for coming in today and 
for providing some very good answers and one compliment. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I want to also thank the 
officials and I also want to thank the critic for a series of very 
good questions. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting Private Vocational Schools 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:54 p.m. 
 
 


