






















































March 29, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 29. 1995 

 

 
1207 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of Dr. T.S.B. Crawshaw from Maple 
Creek, and I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocated adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the town of Maple Creek and the 
surrounding area, and I'm happy to present them today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights), which will benefit all property 
owners in Saskatchewan and specifically firearms 
owners, in order to halt the federal Liberal government 
from infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Carlyle, Manor, Lampman, 
Storthoaks area of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition and would like to read the prayer for you: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating those funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the Maple 
Creek, Richmound areas, and Fox Valley, of this province. 

Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
petitions to present today on the same subject. I will just read 
the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating those funds towards capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these also come from the area of Maple Creek, 
Tompkins, Richmound, all along the highway — Walsh, 
Golden Prairie, and on down through Consul. Quite an 
extended area, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to table these now. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions about 
highway construction as well. 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
And these petitions are from the Maple Creek area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions 
today from Saskatchewan citizens. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 
monies available from the federal infrastructure program 
toward double-laning No. 1, rather than allocating these 
funds toward capital construction projects in the 
province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and today I have citizens from the communities of 
Maple Creek; Tompkins, Saskatchewan; Maple Creek; many 
others. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to add the 
weight of these citizens of Saskatchewan to this project: 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1208 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these folks come from areas like Golden Prairie, 
Maple Creek, Fox Valley, Regina, and Saskatoon. It's my 
pleasure to present them today. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions, 
and the prayer says: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds toward capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitioners are from Maple Creek, Piapot, Consul, 
Golden Prairie, Tompkins, and throughout the south-west part 
of the province. I so submit. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions as well 
to present this afternoon to the Assembly. And the prayer is as 
follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projects in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the Maple Creek, 
Eastend, Consul, Shaunavon areas of the province. And I'm 
pleased to present them to the Assembly today. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to  

 ppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

funding toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 26 grade 8 students from Wilfred Hunt School that 
are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied 
today by their teacher Bryan Hicks. 
 
I'm looking forward to meeting with them after question period 
for a photo and to have a visit with them in room 218. 
 
I'm sure all members will want to conduct themselves 
accordingly as the school group watches on and so that I won't 
have to answer as many questions as I might have to if the 
proceedings get fairly emotional. I know that they'll have a lot 
of good questions ready for me following the question period 
today. 
 
And I'd like to ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, two 
gentlemen that are seated in your Speaker's gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. We have from the Saskatchewan road builders 
association, Mr. Leonard Wellings, who is the past president, 
and we have Mr. Bruce Drake, who is the present president of 
the association. And we're happy to have them here today to 
watch the proceedings, and I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Maple Creek in welcoming the two 
members from the road builders association — Bruce Drake, 
the current president of the Saskatchewan road builders, and 
Leonard Wellings, the past president. And they're gathered in 
Regina this week, Mr. Speaker, for their annual spring meetings 
and I wish them good deliberations. Please join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation 
 

Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
pay tribute to Saskatchewan people working for international 
development. And I'm referring to the Saskatchewan Council 
for International Co-operation, which is a coalition of 33 
agencies. Its goals are to enhance the dignity and  



March 29, 1995 

 
1209 

self-determination of all people, environmental protection, and 
promotion of global understanding, cooperation, peace and 
justice. 
 
Members will recall that SCIC (Saskatchewan Council for 
International Co-operation) was here last Thursday and put on a 
display for us in room 218. They undertake many overseas 
development projects, Mr. Speaker, providing staff, training, 
resources, and coordination. 
 
Last Thursday was their 20th anniversary. The next day they 
learned that the federal government is cutting off their funding 
completely. So it's a very challenging time for Saskatchewan 
people working on world development. And we wish them well 
and our thoughts in this Chamber are with them. 
 
I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan government 
was able to increase SCIC's . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. There's . . . I didn't quite get 
what the member was stating but I wish the member . . . I'm not 
going to take off the time from his talk but I'd like to hear what 
the member has to say. 
 
Mr. Cline: — I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that I'm very pleased 
that the Saskatchewan government was able to increase SCIC's 
funding this year. It marks the first time in 10 years that the 
organization has seen an increase. And for the 20 years of 
service of these people and their organizations and their 
continuing role in enhancing life here and abroad, I wish to 
congratulate SCIC, its staff, and its member agencies. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Television Report on SaskPower 

 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
usually members' statements relate to happenings or events in 
their constituency. The event that I want to relate to has not 
happened yet and involves all Saskatchewan and TV listeners 
from all over Canada. 
 
Mr. Goldhawk has recently came out to Saskatchewan and 
interviewed a constituent of mine, Mr. Ray Derdall of Outlook, 
Saskatchewan, and interviewed SaskPower relating to a 
SaskPower problem on the Derdall farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to listen to 
Mr. Goldhawk's remarks pertaining to SaskPower and Mr. 
Derdall on CTV (Canadian Television Network) and BBS 
(Baton Broadcasting System) on national news tonight at 11 
p.m. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Yorkton Regional Science Fair 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past  

weekend, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of attending the 
Yorkton Regional Science Fair. The Yorkton Regional Science 
Fair is one of nine fairs sponsored by SaskEnergy along with 
local supporters and corporate foundations. This year's fair, 
which is the 4th annual, saw 54 projects from the region which 
included schools in the area from Theodore, Pelly, Langenburg, 
Foam Lake, and Yorkton. Science fair set as their objective, 
opportunities which encourage students to promote their 
experimental skills, promote the opportunity for young people 
to explore science, and to support discovery and innovation of 
science and technology. 
 
Displays included many projects such as on the greenhouse 
effect, acid rain, the water cycle, mystery of DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid), and one important one on whether 
you're right- or left-brained. I suggested to the students that this 
would be a most revealing exercise for us to experiment in this 
environment. The response was that we would really need to 
expand the options of choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the overall winner of the regional science fair 
receives $1,000 plus a trip this year to Whitehorse where 
Saskatchewan regional winners compete against students from 
across Canada. This year the Yorkton Regional Fair winner was 
Mr. Robin Blazeiko from Foam Lake on a project entitled: 
"How and why did the Titanic sink". 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. 
Robin Blazeiko and all students who participated in the science 
fair in Yorkton, and to wish Robin and all of our Saskatchewan 
students the very best at the national competitions in 
Whitehorse. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Livestock Breeders’ Spring Season 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
acknowledge the hard work and dedication of a group of 
individuals across this province as they enter the spring season. 
And I'm talking about the cattlemen and especially the purebred 
livestock breeders in our province. Certainly in our neck of the 
woods, if you will, the south-east part of the province, the last 
two or three weeks have been difficult in the calving process 
because of the weather conditions and the wetness that we have 
received. However no one is complaining because moisture is 
always welcome. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, there are many breeders in my 
corner of the province, in the south-east, who are presently 
involved in bull sales. 
 
We've just experienced a bull sale here in Regina this past 
weekend, or the previous weekend. And I would like to 
acknowledge their hard work, dedication, and wish them well 
as they enter this season of bull sales around the province, not 
only in the area, the constituency, I represent, but right across 
this province. 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1210 

If I were to try and list the purebred breeders in the cattle sales, 
it would just take too much time, unfortunately. So I'll just give 
a blanket good luck in your bull sales this spring. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Pilot Butte Skating Club's Spring Carnival 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Sunday I 
enjoyed being present at the Pilot Butte skating club's annual 
spring carnival. I hasten to add that I came as an enthusiastic 
spectator and not as a participant. For those of us who 
remember being members of the Barbara Ann Scott fan club, 
we gave up our figure 8's a few years ago. 
 
My appreciation of skating, however, has continued. And as I 
said the other day, Mr. Speaker, my admiration is very strong 
for communities that work to create a pleasant environment for 
all its citizens, especially its children. Pilot Butte is such a 
community. 
 
This event took place at the community centre which houses the 
library, senior centre, town offices, and rink. The Pilot Butte 
Lion's Club paid the expenses so the skating club could put on 
the show. 
 
There were several volunteers who worked in many capacities, 
from assistant coaches to ticket takers. There was a very capable 
MC (master of ceremonies), the current MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, who lives in 
Pilot Butte. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it appeared that every young skating 
enthusiast in Pilot Butte and several from elsewhere took part in 
the show. 
 
I comment on this particular afternoon because it's a specific 
example of what many communities across our province do to 
make living more attractive and to recognize the 
accomplishments of their youth. In a time when so much 
attention is focused on the bottom-line issues, it's refreshing to 
note that another part of our life is not being ignored. 
 
I congratulate all members of the Pilot Butte skating club for a 
successful spring carnival. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CAA Award of Excellence 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to recognize a business in my riding which has won an award 
for providing excellent service to the motoring public. This 
business in Lashburn, called Lash-Berg Paint & Body, is one of 
eight Saskatchewan businesses to win a Canadian Automobile 
Association award of excellence. 
 
This firm provides 24-hour emergency road and towing service, 
accidental retrieval, and other services which are critical to the  

motoring public — something which I appreciate and respect 
because of all the highway driving I do in Saskatchewan. 
 
In order to be considered for this award of excellence, a CAA 
(Canadian Automobile Association) contractor must provide 
prompt, efficient, courteous emergency road service in the 
region regardless of the season or time of day or night. Mr. 
Speaker, only 8 out of a total of 240 CAA emergency road 
service firms receive this award each year. This kind of service 
is critical for motorists because of our Saskatchewan winter 
weather. 
 
I would like to congratulate Terry Berg, who is the owner and 
operator of Lash-Berg Paint & Body, and his staff for winning 
this award and providing professional service to the motoring 
public. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cable TV Award 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate a media personality in my riding who has received 
special recognition for his professional work in the 
broadcasting field. 
 
Wade Walz is the host of a weekly cable TV program in 
Melville which focuses on the Melville Millionaires of the 
Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League. This half-hour show 
includes locker room interviews with players and coaches, 
game highlights, a game of the week, and post-game interviews. 
The program, called Money Talk, was judged the best sports 
program in the western region by Canadian Cable Television 
Association, the organization that presents the award. 
 
This sports program, which is produced by North Eastern 
Cablevision Ltd., will now be forwarded for the national 
competition. Wade is also a sports reporter with the Melville 
Advance community newspaper and also does SJHL 
(Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) hockey play-by-play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this award comes at a good time because this year 
the Millionaires hockey organization will be holding a reunion. 
It will be held August 4, 5, and 6 at the Melville stadium. The 
reunion includes players, coaches, trainers, and anyone who has 
been involved in the hockey organization since 1969. 
 
Congratulations to the Millionaires and to Wade Walz. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Tax Increases 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today we 
see another example of the NDP (New Democratic Party) tax  



March 29, 1995 

 
1211 

machine kicking into high gear. Saskatchewan's cities and 
towns and villages are preparing their budgets, and as a direct 
result of the NDP offloading, Saskatchewan families will be 
faced with further tax increases. 
 
In Regina, residents will see 3.3 per cent increase in education 
taxes, a 2 per cent increase in the library levy, and a 6 per cent 
increase in utility charges. In Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, water and 
sewage rates went up 8 per cent in January and last night a 
proposal for a 2.7 per cent increase in education taxes was 
tabled at city council. This is on top of massive tax and utility 
increases imposed by the NDP Premier and his government 
MLAs. 
 
My question is to the Premier: your offloading has been the 
anvil on which municipal tax increases have been forged. You 
and your Finance minister have the gall to stand in this House 
and claim that your budget contained no tax increases. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you now admit that these taxes are a direct 
consequence of your government's ill-advised policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to thank the member for his question. As the member 
probably knows, last year we indicated to school boards across 
the province that there would be no funding increase in the 
1995-96 budget cycle. 
 
We have done this for some time, giving school boards advance 
notice of what funding they can expect to receive. This year 
we've announced that for the budget cycle of '96-97 school 
boards can expect to receive a 2 per cent increase. We do this to 
allow school boards and third parties to plan for their own 
budget cycle. 
 
I am pleased to report to the member that because we have 
successfully balanced our budget in 1994-95 and will 
successfully balance our budget in '95-96 and because we have 
a balanced-budget plan for the next several years, school boards 
and third parties across this province can expect to see a more 
reasonable level of funding because we finally have gotten the 
mess you people left us under control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I address 
my question not to the Minister of Education but to the Premier 
of the province. Mr. Premier, this scenario has been played out 
all around Saskatchewan. Municipalities are having to increase 
fees and taxes because of your budget and you continue to 
arrogantly wash your hands of it. 
 
It's not working, Mr. Premier. Every time a taxpayer pays his 
income tax, every time a home-owner pays a utility bill or 
property assessment, it's your name on the cheque — pay to the 
order of the member from Riversdale it should say on all 
cheques. 

That's what Regina councillors are saying. The paper said today 
that trustees were quick to blame the need for tax increases on 
the provincial government. That's you, Mr. Premier, that's you 
they're speaking about. 
 
Mr. Premier, instead of you and your ministers firing up your 
blame thrower, why not recognize that municipal tax increases 
are your responsibility? And maybe you'd like to stand up and 
take a bow for the people of Saskatchewan with regard to tax 
increases in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to once again thank the member for the question. 
 
What I want to say to the member is that if you look at the way 
we fund education in the province of Saskatchewan, we have a 
formula that has been agreed to by school divisions across the 
province. The formula relies primarily upon school enrolment. 
 
And in the case of Regina, the trustees have acknowledged that 
their grant reduction is attributable largely to an enrolment 
decline of some 260 students over last year. In the case of the 
Regina Catholic school system, in fact their grant went up 
because they have seen enrolment increases in their system. 
 
So I guess I would just like to say to the member, as I said 
previously, we have given school boards and third parties 
across the province advanced warning of what they can expect 
to receive in the next budget cycle. We have said because we 
finally have this mess that was created by the previous 
administration — of whom that member is now the leader of — 
that we have this mess under control, we successfully balanced 
the budget for the first time in this province since those . . . 
since we were last in office, and so I can report to the member 
that we anticipate a funding increase in '96-97 of 2 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again I 
address, again I address my question to the Premier, the man 
sitting right directly opposite from me here. 
 
Mr. Premier, you're going to have to press the down button on 
your elevator in the ivory tower. Come out from behind your 
desk and see what your taxes are doing to the real people of this 
province, because your usual arrogance is beginning to cloud 
your vision once again. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatoon and Regina municipal tax increases 
are just a few examples, and they may get worse. Regina has 
taken $3.4 million out of their reserve fund since you took 
office to minimize the tax increases you are forcing on them. It 
may even get worse next year. 
 
This is happening all over the province, Mr. Premier, and you 
had choices — you had choices, Mr. Premier. You could have 
reduced spending. You could have started with your own  



March 29, 1995 

 
1212 

million dollar pension and the pensions of your colleagues in 
the cabinet, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps taxpayers should write on 
their cheques: pay to the order of the member from Riversdale, 
the Premier's pension fund. That's maybe what they should be 
writing on their cheques. 
 
Mr. Premier, when are you going to get it? When are you going 
to realize what the people of this province want with respect to 
taxation? When are you going to do something about your own 
million dollar pension? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, to the member, 
for the question. I guess I too want to talk about choices. Your 
party had choices in the 1980s. It was your choice to spend $5 
million on GigaText. It was your choice to spend hundreds of 
millions of dollars on Rafferty-Alameda. It was your choice to 
waste hundreds of millions of dollars. And because you made 
the choices that your party made, we were stuck with a $15 
billion deficit. 
 
Now, Mr. Member, when you're stuck with a deficit of . . . or a 
debt of those proportions, you obviously begin to look at 
deficits and interest on that debt. And because of the choices 
you made in the 1980s, we had no alternative but to get our 
fiscal house in order. And because we have our fiscal house in 
order, we can say to third parties like school boards, you could 
expect a 2 per cent increase in 1996-97, au contraire to what 
provinces are doing across the country. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I address my 
question to the Premier of the province, not the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Mr. Premier, please answer the question that's directed at you 
this afternoon. The taxpayers of the province would like to 
know what your thoughts are on these issues. Mr. Premier, 
you've said everybody made sacrifices — that's what you've 
said. You raised every tax imaginable, dreamt up a few new 
ones, raised every utility tax, offloaded onto the cities and 
towns, villages, such that they have to raise taxes. And you keep 
your own million-dollar pension because, as your deputy said, 
you work so hard. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Premier, we brought forward a resolution to 
remove, to remove your obscene pension. You and your 
colleagues voted to retain that arrangement, helped out — 
helped out, I might add — by none other than the Liberal 
leader. What roller-coaster of logic she is riding these days, I 
can't figure out and I don't think the people of this province can 
either. 
 
But you, Mr. Premier — you, Mr. Premier, were not there to 
vote on that piece of . . . that resolution. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I would draw the 
Leader of the Opposition's attention to two things: one, he's 
going on much too long and he should be asking his question.  

Secondly — order, order, order — and secondly, the member is 
not to refer to the presence or absence of members in this 
House. I want the member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. The people of this 
province want to know your thoughts on this resolution that 
was brought forward yesterday, Mr. Premier. Today, Mr. 
Premier, maybe you'd like to tell us: would you void your 
million dollar pension, your million dollar pension to show the 
taxpayers that you're robbing today that you are willing to start 
at the top and reduce your own pension rather than just simply 
asking for taxpayers to pay more all of the time, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to respond to the question and the speech made by the 
member from Kindersley, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
He makes reference to the position of the Liberal leader in the 
House on this issue, and he makes reference to the debate that 
took place here yesterday. And because that's part of the 
question, Mr. Speaker, I have to respond to what he raised. 
 
I want to say that in this House yesterday this matter was dealt 
with and members voted on the question. And it is true that 
some people in the House voted to reaffirm the province's 
commitment to honour its pension obligations to all those who 
contributed in good faith to the formula-based plans. 
 
This was in 1978-79, Mr. Speaker, when the pension systems of 
this province were reformed well ahead of anywhere else in 
North America, and certainly well ahead of Canada. 
 
Now why did members of the House support this resolution? 
Because it is a logical resolution based on the knowledge . . . 
the Liberal leader supported it and so did one of her colleagues 
support it. But it's based on the knowledge that in 1979 
pensions were negotiated with a wide sector of people — 
teachers, public service people, people who work for Crown 
corporations. And it was decided at that time . . . there was 
something like 8,000 people involved here who were in the old 
plan, some of whom are receiving benefits. And it was decided 
then that it had to be reformed. It was reformed. We have a 
money purchase plan since then. People who were in the old 
plan are still in the old plan, and that's the appropriate way for it 
to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Newspaper's Young Offenders Act Conviction 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, an open letter to you 
appears in today's Battleford Telegraph. The Telegraph's editor 
is calling on you to conduct a thorough inquiry into The 
Telegraph case. 
 
The letter says, and I quote: 



March 29, 1995 

 
1213 

 Our newspaper finds itself in an almost identical 
situation as Mr. Mitchell. The results of these two cases, 
however similar in nature, have had dramatically 
different conclusions. 

 
It also says: 
 
 . . . an extremely unfair playing field is being created 

because of the exoneration of (Bob) Mitchell. 
 
 . . . Mr. Mitchell is being protected, but others . . . do 

not fall under the same umbrella of respect. 
 
 I call for your intervention on the basis that all people in 

Saskatchewan are equal under the law — including both 
the Saskatchewan Justice Minister and The Telegraph. 

 
Mr. Premier, will you conduct a review of The Telegraph case 
to ensure that all Saskatchewan people are indeed being treated 
equally? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan is not a fit and proper place to 
determine whether or not a person should be prosecuted. No 
civilized society does this, and I'm a little surprised that 
members opposite want politicians to determine prosecutions. 
 
The public prosecutions branch, who are independent — in 
spite of the best efforts of members opposite to politicize it — 
public prosecutions branch look at each set of facts 
individually. They determine whether or not a prosecution 
should proceed, and it is best left there. 
 
This is not the place to determine whether or not someone 
should be prosecuted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Prosecutors don't 
make the laws; this Assembly makes the laws. We have heard 
that no public interest would be served by prosecuting the 
former minister. Well, Mr. Minister, the Battleford Telegraph 
wants to know, and I quote: 
 
 What public good has been carried out as a result of our 

conviction? 
 
We have heard the minister and a Crown prosecutor say the 
cases are different. The editors of The Telegraph say, and I 
quote again: 
 
 . . . if you investigated the differences in these two 

cases, you would find few. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you answer these questions  how are the 
two cases different; and what public good was served by the 
conviction of the Battleford Telegraph  as they are asking  

you to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I am not sure what end the 
opposition think they're serving by attempting to politicize the 
justice system. It really does escape me. But it's precisely what 
you're trying to do. We have had an independent public 
prosecutions branch. To your credit, that remained largely the 
case when you people were in opposition, and that's the way it 
should stay. And I suggest to members opposite, leave the 
justice system independent and let it do its work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I have a further question to the 
Minister of Justice. Hopefully the minister will answer this 
question a little more straightforward than the last two. Mr. 
Minister, yesterday you named the independent prosecutor who 
will review the Phoenix case. Unlike the McIntyre 
investigation, you failed to release the letter which provides the 
prosecutor with his mandate. But judging from the news 
release, the mandate seems to be very, very narrow. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the prosecutor finds irregularities in any aspect 
of the case outside of this narrow mandate, he will not be able 
or allowed to investigate further. Are you actually putting a 
strait-jacket on the independent prosecutor before he begins his 
work? 
 
Mr. Minister, will you make the independent prosecutor truly 
independent by removing the strait-jacket you have placed on 
him so he is free to investigate any irregularities he may find. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The prosecutor isn't under any . . . 
isn't in any strait . . . the special adviser isn't in any strait-jacket. 
He has precisely the same information the prosecutors have, 
and the special adviser is going to have the same material and 
will advise us on the decision. He's going to review the very 
thing that you people put in issue, which was the prosecutor's 
decision. That's what you put in issue. That's what we're going 
to review. 
 
I can well understand why members opposite are becoming 
uncomfortable with your allegations. I can see you're becoming 
uncomfortable with them, but that is what he's going to review. 
He's going to review what you asked for. 
 
There was a request made yesterday for the letter. At the time 
the request was made, Mr. Martin was not in his office; he had 
not received it. It seemed only common courtesy to let him have 
the letter before we release it to the media and members 
opposite. 
 
Apart from such simply courtesy, there's no reason why the  



March 29, 1995 

 
1214 

letter can't be released. And when Mr. Martin has had a chance 
to review it, it will be released. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Taxation 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's 
become very apparent from the lack of response from the 
Premier earlier today that perhaps he just doesn't get it. 
Saskatchewan families have lower average incomes than 
families in neighbouring provinces, but our tax rates in this 
province are higher. That means taxes are much tougher on 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
After paying annual taxes, a Saskatchewan family of four has 
almost $6,000 less to live on than a family in Manitoba and 
almost $10,000 less than a family in Alberta. The only defence 
that the government offers to its unfair taxation is that housing 
prices are cheaper here. 
 
My question is to the Premier: Mr. Premier, will you admit that 
Saskatchewan housing prices stay low due to one fact, and that 
is that people do not care to move to the province of 
Saskatchewan — the province of high taxation and low average 
incomes, which make it profoundly difficult for people to have 
any money left in their pockets at all on which to live? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am more 
than happy to respond to the Leader of the Liberal Party who I 
would suggest if she were to spread less gloom and doom in the 
province of Saskatchewan with the approach that she takes, I 
think the whole province would be better off. The other day I 
was listening to the member talk about her defence of the 
federal government, and I was really thinking to myself, this is 
truly the member for Ottawa-Parliament Hill rather than the 
Liberal leader of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today I listened to the Liberal member, and it's clearly a case of 
the member in charge of misinformation because here is what 
the correct information is, Mr. Speaker. Using the same criteria 
as other provinces use, when you take a look at the cost of 
living in Saskatchewan, including taxes and utility rates and 
automobile insurance — and I'm going to use the example of 
her own city of Saskatoon — in Saskatoon the costs to a 25,000 
income earner is $5,877 a year. In Calgary it's $7,738 a year, 
and in Winnipeg it's $6,706, and in good old Saint John, Liberal 
New Brunswick, it's $8,142 a year. 
 
Now let's be honest, Mr. Speaker, and use all of the facts 
instead of flip-flopping around from misinformation to 
misinformation in order to try to make a political point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
very, very interesting indeed how selective they are with their 
statistics. What in fact they are not doing, Mr. Speaker, is 
dealing with overall provincial levies, overall taxation — both  

direct and indirect — and including all of the different kind of 
facts because indeed objective information proves them wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day individuals and families in 
Saskatchewan face the reality of trying to stretch their pay 
cheques further to make ends meet, and obviously they don't 
relate to the average citizen in Saskatchewan. Reginans this 
morning stood up and looked in their wallets and said, oops, 
$32 more is missing. 
 
This government has launched an unpredictable but sustained 
attack on family budgets, and I remind the Premier that ordinary 
working people did not have the luxury of the $1,347 raise in 
pay that he gave to the average member of his personal staff of 
88 to ease the pain of his NDP tax policies. 
 
My question to the Premier: why should ordinary people make a 
sacrifice when your double-standard government keeps 
spending more on itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me just respond to 
the Liberal leader this way. Who is she to speak about not 
relating to the Saskatchewan taxpayer when she is the leader of 
a political party in the province that chooses to run around the 
province at the expense of the taxpayer, because of the travel 
expense of a Liberal senator, in the back seat of a limousine and 
try to pretend she knows how to relate to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer. 
 
And the other point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, this is the 
only politician in this legislature, this is the only politician in 
this legislature who received a massive increase in her own 
personal pay, a major increase in her own personal office, 
without even blinking an eye, by inviting into her caucus 
someone who used to sit on this side of the House. And that 
was for one simple reason: to get this major injection of money 
for which she did not even blink or blush, Mr. Speaker. She is 
hardly the one to be talking about being in tune with the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer with that kind of a double standard 
which she brings to this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, the king of hypocrisy has just 
spoken, Mr. Speaker. The king of hypocrisy has now spoken. 
For 20 years these were the people who put in the rules of this 
legislature. If they didn't like them, they had an opportunity, 
with the Conservatives, to be able to change the rules of this 
legislature. 
 
It's the Premier of this province and every minister on the front 
benches that has a car provided by the taxpayers of this 
province, which the gas are paid for, Mr. Speaker. Every day 
the people see a bigger cheque . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
shall try this again. Every single pay-day, Mr. Speaker, the  



March 29, 1995 

 
1215 

people see a bigger chunk of their income being sent to 
government. They see taxes, utilities, licence fees; they've all 
gone up. People pay more, and they get less from government. 
They get less health care, less education, less insurance 
coverage. But today, after all the sacrifices that the people have 
coped with, they wake up to the news that the government 
needs more money. Today school boards say that they'll pass on 
the costs of their increased utilities and gasoline and wages to 
— guess who? — the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Premier, once again, you were right in 1991 when you said 
that people cannot afford to pay more taxes. You were right. 
Will you please admit that your government's fixation with 
taxation is the wrong solution for the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this is an amazing day 
in this Assembly, as it has been for the last recent while, as we 
listen to the Liberal member from Greystone, happens to be the 
Leader of the Liberal Party. Yesterday she was in the House 
speaking about a resolution on pensions. She spoke against the 
resolution, and then she stood up in this House and voted for it. 
 
Now that's a flip-flop which sort of runs on and on from issue 
to issue. Today the Liberal leader talks about her need for a car. 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, I say, Mr. Speaker, I suppose for some 
people, getting accustomed to riding in the comfort of a 
limousine with a chauffeur, might find it very difficult to accept 
the fact that you have to drive an ordinary car. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, and finally I want to this. I want to say this, 
and I want to say it with some clarity. When the Liberal 
member speaks of the opportunity to change the rules in the 
Board of Internal Economy, I want to say that's the height of 
hypocrisy that I have ever experienced in this Assembly 
because, Mr. Speaker, she does it on a very selective basis. 
Change the rules, she says, but not when they affect me. And I 
remind her she is on the Board of Internal Economy, and she 
did not propose that the amount of increase she got should be 
decreased. She never once proposed it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Upgrading of the Province's Credit Rating 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to rise in this Assembly to inform 
my colleagues that Saskatchewan has today become the first 
province in the country to receive a credit rating upgrade by any 
agency in . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — DBRS, Dominion Bond Rating 
Service, has just announced that it's upgrading the province's 
credit rating to a BBB high, confirming Saskatchewan's  

economic and financial turnaround. 
 
Members will know we started with a budget deficit of 842 
million in 1991 and worked our way to a budget surplus of 119 
million in 1995, a turnaround of almost $1 billion in just three 
short years. It took hard work and some tough decisions and the 
ongoing support of Saskatchewan people, but the trend of the 
1980s where Saskatchewan's credit rating fell from one of the 
highest among Canadian provinces to one of the lowest, has 
been finally turned around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as DBRS notes in its statement today, and I quote: 
 
 The rating increase was made due to the admirable 

strides which have been made to restore the fiscal health 
of the province. 

 
In addition, DBRS cited the long-term improvement in the 
province's debt to GDP (gross domestic product) ratio, quote: 
good program expenditure controls, in the words of DBRS, and 
the commitment to maintain balanced budgets as positive 
indicators. 
 
The firm also pointed out in its public statement that this 
upgrade is an isolated event, Mr. Speaker, among Canadian 
provinces. And that, unlike others, the agency continues to have 
fundamental concerns regarding the finances of other provinces 
but not the case of ours. In fact yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the 
Dominion Bond Rating Service revised its long-term outlook on 
the federal government's debt downwards from stable to 
negative. 
 
While Saskatchewan's upgrade by DBRS today provides further 
confirmation of the view already held by investors that our 
credit worthiness has improved, this view has resulted as well 
in an immediate benefit of reduced borrowing costs to the 
province and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I close by saying this is a day of some pride for 
Saskatchewan people, as it is an important and independent 
confirmation of our province's economic and fiscal turnaround, 
which has been dramatic indeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while it is 
good news that a province receives a credit update — any time 
that happens it's good news — we have to wonder, and the 
taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker, wonder how it was 
done. The Premier of this province knows how he's done it. 
He's raised every tax, every conceivable levy in this province. 
 
Every taxpayer in this province knows how it's been 
accomplished, Mr. Speaker, because they are digging deeper 
and deeper and deeper into their pocket every day to satisfy the 
needs of that Premier opposite. Even his personal need for a 
$1.8 million pension is being satisfied by the people of this 
province out of their wallets each and every day. 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1216 

Mr. Speaker, 3.3 per cent increase in education taxes; 2 per cent 
increase in library levies; 6 per cent increase in utility charges, 
just in Regina alone, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatoon, 8 per cent, 
water and sewage rates going up; 2.7 per cent increase in 
education taxes. And that's on top of all of the downloading this 
government has done to all other urban and municipal 
governments across this province, Mr. Speaker. Massive tax 
and utility rate increases are how it's been accomplished, Mr. 
Speaker — on the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
A hundred and eighty-eight million dollars from the farm 
families of this province, Mr. Speaker, is one of the ways that 
you accomplished the balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. A hundred 
and fifteen million dollars next year from the farm families of 
this province are going into things like your pension plan, sir. 
 
So don't tell the people of this province . . . and stand up and 
brag to all of the people who will listen, to the people of this 
province. You should be standing and apologizing for the levels 
of taxation you have hoisted on the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Even Newfoundland has balanced its budget, Mr. 
Speaker, but they've done it without taxation, without increased 
taxes. 
 
So while you're standing bragging, sir, about that, I would ask 
you to tell the people of this province the entire story with 
respect to taxation and what you have done with respect to that, 
sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bond 
rating agencies are more or less in the moneylending business 
and governments are in the money-spending business, and 
hopefully this will mean lower interest rates and more money 
being applied to the debt. I hope that the NDP does not see this 
as a licence to spend more money. 
 
I think what is very, very interesting, Mr. Speaker, is how these 
people continue to applaud themselves without looking at some 
of the things that have come to Saskatchewan from other 
places. They always fail to acknowledge that $125 million was 
put forward for the NewGrade upgrader; that $58 million for 
infrastructure improvements which produced a total investment 
of another $173 million in projects for this province from the 
federal government; an investment in technology, particularly 
agricultural technology, from the federal government to this 
particular government, which is 12 to $15 million just in the 
past year alone. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, what they've failed to acknowledge are the 
equalization payments that were fixed last year, bringing yet 
another $60 million to the province of Saskatchewan. They 
don't talk about that anywhere as well. 
 
They don't talk about the total more of $864 million to the 
17,360 different loans from FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) — 
that 25 per cent of all of those loans were to Saskatchewan  

farmers as a result of the federal government. 
 
They don't talk about new lending instruments, the 
equity-building lease which was specifically tailored for this 
provincial . . . province's needs. 
 
They don't talk about the family farm loan program for 
intergenerational transfer of land. They don't talk about all the 
assistance that was given to POS (protein/oil/starch) and so 
forth. 
 
What they like to do, Mr. Speaker, is act as though somehow 
they themselves, and only they, have done this on their own. 
 
What they've done is to raise taxes, have fat government, and 
what they've done, Mr. Speaker, is to gain revenues by 
promoting nothing but gambling, utility rate hikes, and every 
other kind of thing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1430) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
first reading of a Bill to amend The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. 
Protection Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to consideration of clause 1, 
I would ask the minister to . . . Order . . . I would ask the 
minister to please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm 
pleased to introduce the officials who are with me. On my right 
is Mr. Scott Banda; he's the associate general counsel with the 
Crown Investments Corporation. And immediately behind me is 
Mr. Peter Wyant; he's project manager with the Crown 
Investments Corporation as well. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could 
you provide us with an update of how the upgrader is doing 
today, and how you see it operating; and generally the economic 
status, the financial status of the upgrader in the 



March 29, 1995 

 
1217 

 province; and perhaps give us a bit of a forecast on what you 
think that the upgrader will do, how it will do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 
the member from Estevan to his question because it's I think a 
good question in light of the upgrader and other situations that 
we have. I can't be too precise because to some degree it would 
be crystal gazing, but I can give a little report on the present 
situation. 
 
It is certainly not a case in which the NewGrade upgrader at this 
point is making money. It's not at this point making money. 
And I think it's well known that the first reason for this is that 
the differential between the price of heavy and light crude oil is 
still extremely low. I think the last time I looked it was below 
$4 a barrel. And that's barely enough to cover the day-to-day 
operating costs of the enterprise. 
 
And the second reason is that even after the debt repayment and 
the restructuring that took place recently, NewGrade still has 
about $400 million worth of debt. And with this low differential 
between heavy crude and light crude, it's not earning enough to 
cover the cost of carrying this debt charge. 
 
But the restructuring has had a significant difference because it 
has reduced the cost of interest by some $20 million a year. And 
that helps the bottom line. And it is still our hope that, as more 
production in the heavy oil field is brought about and the 
exploration on the drilling continues, that the spreads between 
the two qualities of oil will increase and that some of the hoped 
for return will be there. 
 
But at the present time, it's still not making money, and the 
main reason is because of the narrow spread in the differential. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well could the minister tell us what the loss 
would be on an annual basis under his restructuring? He said 
he's reduced the cost of interest by $20 million, so what is the 
financial picture of the upgrader today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can give the whole picture, Mr. 
Speaker, with the help of my officials who have given me this. 
In 1989 the loss at the upgrader was 59.6 million. In 1990 it 
was 102.7 million. In 1991 it was 79.5 million. In '92 it was 
58.6 million; '93, 63.2 million. And in '94, which is the year in 
which it has just been completed, it's 69.8 million. And of 
course 1995 is just beginning. 
 
It is anticipated that the loss will be less in 1995. I'm not sure I 
can project right now what it will be, but it will be less than it 
was, has been, in the last year, in 1994. 
 
And then it is indicated that hopefully these losses will continue 
to decrease each year. And if the differential between light and 
heavy crude spreads out, then we'll be breaking even. But that is 
not anticipated to be able to happen in 1995. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Could you break that $50 million down that 
you forecast, or say $65 million in '94 or 55 million in '95, can  

you break that out in terms of operating, interest, combinations 
of expenses? And maybe the minister, if he's got a breakdown 
there, he could send it over, or get a copy made if he's able to 
share that, so we could take a look at it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'll give the member from Estevan, 
Mr. Chairman, a short summary and then we'll prepare some 
information and we'll give it to you in writing. Okay. I don't 
think what we have here would be useful, but I'll give you . . . 
because some of it is scribbly. 
 
In 1994, which is the last year, the gross revenue was 381.8 
million. The cost of goods sold was 288.4 million. This is the 
cost. Direct operating expenses were 61.5 million. Gross 
operations, 18.4 million. Third party interest expenses were 
48.4 million. 
 
And you had to subtract from that total . . . Then there's less 
total operating expenses, 128.3 million. The net operating 
margin was 34.9 million. There was other adjustments of 13.1 
million, which was a negative. And depreciation, amortization, 
48 million. Preaccrued interest earnings, 69.8 million, for a loss 
of . . . well that's 69.8 million for the loss. 
 
But we'll make sure we put this together in understandable 
language and we'll get it to you. There's no problem. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay. Would you . . . at the same time, could 
you give me a ballpark, what the differential was . . . I mean, 
you gave me the losses from '89 to '94 . . . ballpark what the 
differentials were? 
 
And then secondly, under your restructuring, what would the 
differential have to be to break even? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I can provide the member the 
answer to this question. The break even — not the break even 
— the differential that is needed in 1995, in 1995 needs to be 
$4.07. That's the differential needed in 1995 for it to break 
even. And the company's projected differential or spread is at 
$4 in their business plan for this year. But right now the spread 
is $3.50, today. 
 
Now historically, the differentials have been: 1989, $5.07; 
1990, 6.57; '91, 8.52; '92, 6.06; '93, 5.59; and '94, 4.24. But we 
are told that in today's restructured operation a differential of 
$4.07, where it's not right now, would break it even. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I wonder if the minister could give me a 
breakdown of his restructuring. You said the restructuring is 
saving about $20 million in interest a year. Could he give me a 
breakdown of who contributed what in that, and what that cost 
of that restructuring is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. As the member from Estevan 
knows, there was fairly extensive negotiations that took place. 
And in the end, I think we could probably push the upper limits 
as to what we could do, but nevertheless there was an 
agreement. 



March 29, 1995 

 
1218 

And what happened is that the federal government agreed to 
contribute $125 million, which they have done to CCRL 
(Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.). The Crown 
Investments Corporation contribution is 75 million, and 
CCRL's contribution is 75 million. And the money has been 
used to pay down NewGrade's $635 million debt, bringing it 
down with that amount. 
 
The other provision that is in the agreement that in the original 
agreements, there were no provisions for cash shortfalls. And as 
a result, the Crown Investments Corporation paid these and it 
basically did it in order to prevent a default on the guarantee 
debt. 
 
The new agreement has a formula for these to be shared by both 
the Crown Investments Corporation and by the Co-op refinery. 
 
And the third very important item that is in the agreement is that 
prior to the agreement, there was no workable method by which 
one could arbitrate disputes, and in many cases disputes just 
never were able to be resolved. 
 
This has now been fixed by a provision in the agreement that 
will provide for the prompt arbitration of any disputes between 
the partners that may come about. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So you're saying, Mr. Minister, that by the 
infusion — I think it's $275 million, 125 and 75 and 75 — you 
have saved the upgrader itself $20 million a year in interest. So 
that's the benefit to the operation of the upgrader. 
 
Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, if we had $6 differential, what 
kind of money would the upgrader be making? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me answer the latter question 
first. I'm told that by each $1 change in the differential means 
an increase in both the income and cash flow, of $17 million 
. . . 17 — one, seven. So for each dollar betterment in the 
differential, broadening of a spread or narrowing — either way, 
it could be positive or negative — for each dollar on both the 
income and the cash flow there is an impact of $17 million. 
 
I think the member also mentioned something about the benefit 
of the restructuring. The benefit simply was, and I think an 
important aspect of it was — simply was a reduction in the 
debt. The project was too highly in debt to ever be able to be in 
the position to make money. And so this was necessary over the 
long run for the project to be viable. 
 
Quite frankly, in my personal opinion — and I shouldn't 
probably offer a personal opinion, but I think probably it would 
be supported by people who I guess one would call the experts 
— even less debt in this kind of an operation would be probably 
a bonus and a plus. But we're left with what we've got. We've 
got a certain hand of cards with which to play, and we've got to 
play them as best we can. 
 

Mr. Devine: — Well just so I understand, Mr. Minister, it's just 
a little bit confusing. You said there's a $65 million loss in 1994 
and the differential was around 424; you expect a 50-some 
million dollar loss in '95, yet you've said it would break even at 
a differential of 407. And then you said, well $1 increase in the 
differential only gives you $17 million. Well, that's still far 
short of 55 million. 
 
So how are you breaking even at 407, picking up $55 million in 
cash to do it, and only get a $17 million increase in cash flow 
with another dollar differential. There's a lot more than $17 
million than in a $1 differential. Or else there's a lot more than 
$20 million saving in your restructuring. How do you get from 
$55 million in '95 to zero or a positive cash flow at a 
differential of $4? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I guess I should 
have explained more, but let me try now. 
 
The $4.07 break even that I referred to is not a break even in 
income differential, it's a break even in the cash flow. That's 
before one considers the matter or excludes the annual charge 
for depreciation. When you apply that on top of this break even 
on the cash flow, then you come up with the projected loss that 
the operators indicate there still will be. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, you haven't quite cleared 
that up. I asked you what differential is necessary to break even. 
And a break-even analysis will include break even so that 
there's a positive balance sheet. And you said a break-even 
differential in 1995 is 407; now you're telling me but that 
doesn't include depreciation. Well that's not quite typical. 
 
What most accountants will put forward from my 
understanding, is a break-even analysis will include your 
operating costs and your fixed costs including depreciation and 
then you'll know what it is. What I'm trying to find out is what 
is the differential necessary to break even, and what is a dollar 
worth in differential to the cash flow? I think that's . . . yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I'm glad to have the 
opportunity to explain further because this is important. At the 
$4.07 differential, the reason why I use that number is because, 
once again, that's the cash flow break even. 
 
The reason I use that is because it is the cash flow situation that 
determines whether either of the partners — the taxpayer or 
CCRL — is on the hook for making a contribution because of a 
shortfall in the operation. At $4.07 differential, there is no 
requirement for the taxpayer through the Crown Investments 
Corporation or for CCRL to make a contribution. The thing 
operates and there is no shortfall there. 
 
In order for all of the considerations to be taken into account — 
and this first one is the one I explained is particularly important 
because that's the one that we've been particularly concerned 
about — that they should be able to operate without taxpayers 
having to continue to pump money into it; hopefully also CCRL 
doesn't have to continue to pump money into it. 



March 29, 1995 

 
1219 

But in order for it to break even on the basis of everything — 
depreciation, all things taken into consideration — you would 
have to have a differential of $7.60. But the $4.07 for the time 
being is satisfactory because the $4.07 differential means we 
don't have to poke out any money, of taxpayers' money, to keep 
the thing viable; it's able to operate. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, at 4.07, how much is the 
upgrader losing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Chairman — I don't want to promote you just yet. Mr. 
Chairman, at the $4.07 cash break-even price differential, the 
income loss would be approximately $55 million. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chairman, the rest of it would be made up by the 
depreciation. 
 
Now I want to remind the member again that our main interest 
at this time is to make sure we don't have to keep pumping 
money into the upgrader. At a $4.07 basis, we do not have to 
pump money into it on an annual basis. That's our main interest 
right now. That does not account for the depreciation which you 
would have to add on there in order for the thing to actually run 
at a profit. 
 
Mr. Devine: — What's the depreciation on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me get the right column here. 
Depreciation . . . Here we are. Depreciation in 1994 was 48 
million; 1993 was 48.6. I don't need to go through all of them. 
It is, in 1995, 32.1 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So at 4.07 the income loss is $55 million and 
the depreciation on top of that would be $40 million, so you're 
looking at a $95 million loss at 4.07. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think we have it. Mr. Chairman, 
at the 4.07 differential, the net-earnings loss would be $55 
million, which I have been speaking to earlier — 32.1 million 
of that would be depreciation. The remaining 23 million would 
be the net operating loss in 1995. I'm now in 1995. 
 
So let me just clarify that again — 4.07 differential, 55 million 
net-earnings loss; 32.1 million would be depreciation, and the 
remaining would be the net loss. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Devine: — The minister says that the depreciation is 
declining, right? The depreciation is going down to 32 in '95 
and probably what? Down to 20-something in '96-97 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 32.5. No, it dropped from 38 or 
something to 32 — '94 was 38, 39; '95 is 32. Is it forecasted to 
decline? Is it a declining depreciation balance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, normally that would be the 
case, and it does decline, but not for a while. The 1995 
depreciation, which I have alluded to, is 32.1. It is said that 
1996 is 32.5; 1997, 32.5; 1998, 32.8; and it doesn't decline  

substantially until about 2004. At that time it declines to 
something like 20.2 million, and then it really declines in a 
hurry. 
 
So we're still stuck with that high level of depreciation for at the 
least the next 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 . . . at least 10 years. 
 
Mr. Devine: — With that $23 million net-operating loss as 
4.07, who picks that up? You said that the taxpayer doesn't have 
to contribute that 4.07. Could you describe that? Who picks up 
that loss? Why is it at 4.07? Could you just elaborate on that? 
Does anybody pick it up other than the upgrader itself, or is this 
the feds, the province? Who . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, each of the partners, 
CCRL and CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), which is the government, the taxpayer, 
contributes equally $10 million, one time, as part of the $75 
million contribution, which is there to be used for any shortfalls 
to which we have to contribute. And then there is a line of 
credit that is in existence as well, to which CCRL could go to 
for any other shortfalls. 
 
So that's the way the fund is established to cover for any 
shortfalls that may be there. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, you'd have to explain that in a 
little bit more detail. You say the $75 million that you put in, 
you haven't really put in yet? They can draw on it up to $10 
million a crack; is that what you're saying? And then on top of 
that there's a shortfall line of credit? 
 
So there's two provisions here. One is the 75 million that you 
put in and CCRL put in, and the feds put in 125. Has that all 
been dumped in and paid down the debt, or is that something 
you draw on? You mentioned $10 million at a crack. 
 
Secondly, the line of credit, where is that from? And how does 
that access? 
 
And number three, of the $20 million net operating loss at 4.07, 
who picks that up? You said the taxpayer isn't involved if the 
differential is over 4.07. So if it's under 4.07, it is involved, and 
I want to know how they're involved. And at 4.07, who picks it 
up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, initially, right up 
front, each of the two partners — putting aside the federal 
government contribution; we'll set that aside — but each of the 
other two partners has put in $50 million each, which went to 
the debt. Then each of the two partners, CCRL and CIC, have a 
remaining $25 million that they will match which will look 
after shortfalls. 
 
This year, 1995, each of the partners will be contributing, out of 
that $25 million, $10 million each, to go to the needs for 
servicing whatever shortfall there is. That sort of accounts for 
all the money which I've referred to in my initial comments. 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1220 

Mr. Devine: — And the federal money, they just put in 125 
against the debt. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — All right. So the $23 million shortfall this year 
in operating will be picked up 10 million by Co-op and 10 
million by the province, which is $20 million, give some 
change, or 11 million a piece or something. And that picks up 
that operating. 
 
And the depreciation, what do you do — do you just 
accumulate that and try to pick it up later? Who picks up the 55 
million, and how's that broken out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, there is a provision 
by which there is an equal contribution by each of the parties to 
cover the shortfall. If that equal contribution does not fall short 
of that, then the parties or the CCRL will then take the 
remaining requirement out of their line of credit. That's how it 
will function. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, has the upgrader carried forward 
its depreciation? In other words, you haven't been making 
enough money to pay it off so you probably can carry it 
forward. Like most accounting principles and practices, you can 
carry forward that depreciation, stack it a bit. If you're making 
some money, you can start applying that depreciation against 
some of your operating profits. 
 
In other words, the bearing of this accumulation of depreciation 
is a paper figure, probably carried by the upgrader itself, can be 
applied against profits when in fact it might turn a profit. Or put 
it another way, more simply — have you been paying cash and 
accumulating cash for depreciation? I doubt it. 
 
So it's been accumulating. So really what we're looking at is the 
accumulation and, if you will, the stacking of the depreciation. 
The real numbers are on the operating side which this year you 
forecast to be $23 million. Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm told the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay, so if it's $23 million, a dollar and a half 
on the differential would pick that up. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — That's right. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay, so if we were looking at typical 
differentials over the last 10 years, we're looking at 5.50, $6, 
8.52, 6.06, 5.59, 4.24; we're looking at five and a half, $6 
differential, which is interesting. 
 
If in fact you're running at about a $23 million loss at a 4.07 
differential, then we're getting closer and closer to where this 
thing could be kicking in some . . . enough money to make it 
look like a reasonable operation as far as the upgrader itself is 
concerned. Is that correct? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Clearly the answer is correct, 
thanks to the restructuring. I mean the restructuring that took 
place was very important to bring the upgrader to the position 
where I could agree with what the member has just said, and the 
answer to your question is yes. 
 
If all of those assumptions are met, then we would be in a 
reasonable position. But without the restructuring which took 
down the debt fairly considerably, I think I would not then be 
able to agree with the numbers and the outcome as the member 
from Estevan projects. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Okay, what's the restructuring cost CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Fifty million dollars immediately 
when the deal was done. And I think that's already in October 
of '94. And the remaining 25 over a period of two years for the 
total of 75. 
 
Mr. Devine: — It's $50 million out of pocket, right, and then 
$25 million to match shortfalls as they're needed. So really what 
you're looking at is interest on $50 million — is that correct? — 
which would be the cash outlay and then any interest on parts of 
the 25 that might be there. At the outside, you're looking at 
interest on $75 million — is that correct? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well yes, if we only want to look at 
the $50 million that was put up front on which there's interest, 
but there will be interest on the remaining 25 as it is advanced. 
That's also borrowed money. But there's also the interest on the 
original debt, which is very significant. So that when you 
account for all of the interest, it's a significant amount of 
money. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I'm trying to get at your restructuring, Mr. 
Minister. You put up $50 million. Let's assume it's going to be 
75 by the time it washes out. I'm trying to get at what that cost 
you and cost the taxpayer . . . would be interest on — say — 
$75 million at — what? — 8, 9 per cent. Pick a number. At 10 
per cent would be seven and a half million. We're probably 
looking at 9 . . . you're looking at 6 or $7 million. Okay? That's 
what you're looking at? All right. To confirm, the federal 
government put $125 million — the whole thing  against the 
debt? Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — The debt went from . . . you're telling me it 
went from $635 million . . . It dropped by $175 million with 
125 from the feds and 50 by you and 50 from the Co-op. That's 
$225 million. And then the other 25 and 25 kicks in as they 
might need it. But initially it dropped . . . 125 plus 100 is $225 
million off of 635 so that's $410 million debt. Okay? 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many people are employed 
at the upgrader? 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1221 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — If you include the refinery staff . . . 
excuse me, exclude the refinery staff, it employs, I am told, 
about 180 personnel. 
 
Mr. Devine: — And I thought of just one more question, going 
back to the upgrader. That $50 million that you contribute, is 
that a loan or is that equity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — It's equity. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So you've invested equity, as we have in the 
past; and the feds, have they considered they're too equity, I 
would imagine, and the Co-op thinks it's equity. Could you 
describe who's got equity and who's got loans in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The provincial contribution is 
equity — out of the restructuring, $50 million. The fed 
contribution was an outright grant. There's no equity by the 
federal government. And the CCRL's $50 million was an asset 
purchase. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So could you tell me what other equity you 
have in the project? the people have? the CIC has? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Because of the nature of the 
project, all of the equity other than the $50 million which was 
put in in October has been written off. So our total equity is $50 
million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So on the operations of the upgrader, from a 
day-to-day basis, there's no . . . Could you tell me, in terms of 
equity participants, what they are today, and the breakdown 
between the Co-op and the provincial government and the feds, 
and the combination. So that when you put it together — and 
you gave me a budget here that had so much in terms of 
operating, so much in depreciation, and so much in terms of 
debt, and so much in terms of typical expenses of the partners 
in there — who has equity and how much, and break that out in 
terms of your normal yearly operations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — We should move the feds, the 
federal government, out of this equation because the federal 
government has no equity in the NewGrade at the present time; 
has no longer any equity in the NewGrade upgrader. The 
province has $50 million worth of equity. The CCRL has $50 
million of an asset purchase, which on their books is not shown 
as an equity, it's shown as an asset purchase. But it's 50/50. 
 
Basically I guess you can say the province has 50 million and 
NewGrade . . . CCRL has 50 million in NewGrade. 
 
Mr. Devine: — In terms of equity, you have 50, the Co-op has 
50, and there's a $400 million debt. So that's the game. 
 
So you're equal partners in equity and have jointly shared in the 
debt, because you're picking up the responsibility at least for . . . 
oh well, up to 25 million a piece . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, okay. 
 

Can you tell me that . . . there's something like 180 people work 
at the upgrader? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — And the refinery? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. Just the upgrader. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Just the upgrader. How many people work at 
the refinery? Can you just give me a ballpark of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — We don't have that precisely here. 
We'll give you an estimate. It's probably about 150, but don't 
hold me to that because we don't . . . we're not sure of that. 
Obviously that's not what we're dealing with here today. But it's 
about 150, somewhere in there. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So we've got in the neighbourhood of 330 
people working in the upgrader and the refinery; that should be 
about ballpark. 
 
I understand the refinery's profitable? Is that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me how much oil 
the upgrader uses, heavy oil that the upgrader uses on a regular 
basis and what it pays for that oil, ballpark, what it's paying for 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Eighteen million barrels of oil per 
year — 18 million barrels of oil per year. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Eighteen million barrels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. And I am told — we will have 
to check this again — but I am told in 1994 the price, the cost 
of the oil was $288.4 million. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, could you give me the royalties 
that the province would pick up on 18 million barrels of oil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, I cannot because the CIC sort 
of does not deal with that. I don't know what the royalties are. 
You'll have to ask the Department of Energy and Mines, where 
you probably will be able to get that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He told me to ask you. He said to ask 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I'll remind him that he's 
supposed to give you the answer. No, we don't have that 
information. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, pretty important to the 
financing for the province of the upgrader, wouldn't you agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm sorry? 



March 29, 1995 

 
1222 

Mr. Devine: — Don't you think it's rather important in 
financing the upgrader to know how much money that the 
province is making on 18 million barrels of oil that it uses every 
year to put into the upgrader? Isn't that relevant to the financial 
picture of the Government of Saskatchewan who's financing the 
upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well every time one looks at 
revenues and expenditures, it's all relevant. But from the point 
of view of what we're dealing with here, the Crown Investments 
Corporation dealing with the financial arrangement in the 
NewGrade upgrader, our basic concern has to be to protect the 
investment of the taxpayers' money that's there; to lessen the 
amount, if not eliminate the amount, that we have to keep 
pumping into the operation each year, and therefore we had to 
go and negotiate with the federal government, some extensive 
negotiations. We had to go and negotiate with CCRL — also 
some extensive and sometimes difficult negotiations. But in the 
end there was an agreement to which everybody is quite 
satisfied to be a part of. 
 
We have now put the upgrader in a position where, depending 
on the differential between heavy and light crude, and mainly 
that, it's in a sound financial position. But whether it's in a 
sound financial position as an entity has nothing to do with how 
much royalties the province of Saskatchewan gets from the 
production of heavy oil. So we do not have that information 
here because that's not a responsibility of the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, the argument has certainly 
been used  and I want you to either confirm or deny it, but the 
argument is used  as you suck up and use heavy oil in the 
province, it contributes royalties to the province of 
Saskatchewan. Obviously you know that that's the case, and 18 
million barrels on one upgrader and obviously probably 9 or 10 
million barrels on another upgrader, according to the Minister 
of Energy who was here, the Minister of Energy has admitted 
that, got about 25 million barrels coming in because of 
upgraders. 
 
But we'll stick to this upgrader — 18 million barrels. Certainly I 
believe when I was minister of Energy and negotiating some of 
the benefits and costs of upgrading, I looked at what would that 
do to the province in terms of royalties. So if I have 18 million 
barrels being pumped out of the ground going into an upgrader, 
I include that in my calculation. 
 
Now do you agree with the Co-op, for example, when they say 
that is a benefit? That demand, new demand for heavy oil and 
medium oil going into an upgrader to be sold as synthetic crude, 
that that demand and use and market for 18 million barrels 
generate some royalties? 
 
And we can find the number, and the Minister of Energy says 
he can get me . . . or you should get me the number and you say 
he should get me the number. But what's the royalty on a barrel 
of heavy oil? Somebody over there must know that; I mean 
you're in the business of upgrading oil and you know what oil  

costs. You must know what . . . an idea of what you make on a 
barrel of oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I know what the member from 
Estevan is trying to get at, but I want to say again that within the 
context of CIC it is legitimate to be concerned about the 
economics of NewGrade as a project. 
 
The economics of NewGrade as a project  we can get into 
that debate. I have no desire to rehash old debates. I'm now 
interested in whether . . . and neither are you. And I'm quite 
happy to accept that. We want to be looking at where 
NewGrade is today and where hopefully it will be tomorrow 
and into the years ahead. 
 
(1530) 
 
So CIC's responsibility is to be concerned about the economics 
of NewGrade. The economics of NewGrade as it was before the 
restructuring meant that it was never going to succeed. That's 
well documented; we won't need to discuss that. 
 
The restructuring helps put it in the position where it might, 
likely will, succeed. And that's okay. But that's got nothing to 
do with what the province gets in the form of royalties because 
even if there's a massive amount of new royalties which the 
Department of Energy and Mines has to tell you about, that still 
doesn't make NewGrade, as a commercial entity, sound 
financially and economically if it is not restructured. It doesn't. 
 
I know the member might argue, well that's fine; we can 
continue to lose money in NewGrade and continue pumping 
money . . . of losses into it because we're getting it in royalties. 
I'm sorry; I don't accept that economics. And we can decide to 
disagree on that right now because I don't think that anybody 
doing business on a project, a commercial project, would do 
business using that kind of rationale. There may be some 
benefits under royalties, and I accept that. But that doesn't mean 
that we should not make sure that the NewGrade entity as a 
commercial project should not be able to operate economically 
and financially in a sound way. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I mean obviously we will 
disagree. But I want to just run the concept by you and maybe a 
little bit of different . . . perhaps the reasons that you never built 
either one of the upgraders. It's fine that you can play with them 
afterward. But to think about it, you as a cabinet sit around and 
make the final decision on investing in Crown Life or investing 
in an upgrader or investing in Cargill or investing in something 
else. And you look at jobs, and you look at the economic 
spin-offs. I think in your announcements on projects, you 
mentioned jobs several times. You're happy to do that, and 
you're happy to say it generates income or it generates royalties 
or it generates some other things. 
 
Now I understand perfectly well why you don't want to talk 
about it in this upgrader. But I think the public at least deserves 
to know the whole picture. And one of the reasons obviously 
that people are encouraged to build upgraders — the Co-op was  



March 29, 1995 

 
1223 

and I was and my cabinet was and others — is it generates 
substantial amounts of jobs in the oil patch, royalties coming 
into the province of Saskatchewan, and it has some really 
interesting possibilities once you get by the start-up costs and in 
differentials at 6 or 7 or $8. And you don't want to acknowledge 
that. 
 
So I say, it would be only fair to say, in the kinds of investments 
that you are making — combinations of things that I've just 
mentioned — that aren't jobs important and aren't royalties 
important and aren't spin-offs important in terms of drilling and 
exploration; the interest in that kind of economic activity 
generally make a difference to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, all I'm asking is, can you give me the 
amount of royalty we make on a barrel of oil? And we can 
disagree about it, but at least we'll have the numbers. Can you 
give me the royalty on a barrel of oil that goes into the 
upgrader, what you make? And then we'll take it from there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is an 
interesting debate because the member opposite says you 
should not consider a project on the basis of its financial 
soundness. Well you did because you said you had to take all of 
these other things into consideration, and you take the whole 
picture. 
 
Then even though . . . what the member from Estevan is saying, 
that even though NewGrade under the previous arrangement 
would not have made any money, of anywhere near to making 
money until the year 2025, that that's okay. Well you did. Well 
if you didn't, then I want to make it clear what my position is. 
 
My position is that the NewGrade upgrader, as it was, would 
not have made any money until the year 2025 as a commercial 
entity. And I say to you, on that basis it's a bad investment. It 
had to be repaired. And it was repaired with the negotiations 
between CCRL and contribution from the federal government. 
That's why it had to be done. 
 
Now whether the NewGrade in existence has got 180 jobs, 
that's good and positive. We accept that. Whether the 60 per 
cent of the oil, heavy oil which NewGrade uses out of 
Saskatchewan  because the other 40 per cent comes out of 
Alberta, not Saskatchewan  whether all of those things are 
things that are happening because of it doesn't make the fact 
that the NewGrade was not in the position to do anything but 
suck taxpayers' money out of it . . . was still a bad situation. 
And we have now rectified that. 
 
Now that's the responsibility of a Crown Investments 
Corporation, and the Crown Investments Corporation has dealt 
with that. It's not the responsibility of the Crown Investments 
Corporation to deal with the question of oil royalties. That is a 
question that the Department of Energy and Mines deals with 
and you're going to have to ask your question there, because we 
don't have that information here because that's not within the 
responsibility of the Crown Investments Corporation. 

Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I'm just asking . . . Mr. Minister, 
you may not like the arguments but at least we could get some 
numbers. I just want the number. How much money do we 
make on a barrel of oil? I want the royalties on a barrel of oil. 
We are upgrading oil — you can tell me the price of oil but you 
can't tell me the royalties you make on a barrel of oil. 
 
Now you can tell me that, and your officials can get that. You 
could make a phone call and get the royalties we make on a 
barrel of oil, so that in fact we can determine what kind of 
economic consequences there are in building an upgrader in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Then we can talk about refinancing. 
 
But I am hard pressed to let you off the hook without giving us 
what the province makes on a barrel of oil because that 
upgrader is sucking up 18 million barrels of oil a year. And that 
means a significant contribution to the economy here. And that 
generator of 18 million barrels of oil is called an upgrader. 
 
You don't want to talk about that. Fair enough, we'll agree to 
disagree. But at least I'd like it on the record what 18 million 
barrels of oil means to us, so that we can discuss the jobs, the 
drilling, the exploration, the revenue, the royalties, and the 
refinery, and 180 jobs at the upgrader. What that means — and 
the research benefit — what that means to the province of 
Saskatchewan investing in an upgrader. 
 
Now that's what I would like to know and certainly the public 
would like to know. I can tell you the Co-op knows, that I 
certainly don't agree with the way you treated the Co-op; we'll 
get into that. I'm just talking numbers; I'm not talking politics 
here. Just give me some numbers on royalties on 18 million 
barrels of oil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the issues that the 
member opposite raises are really quite irrelevant to the 
economics of this project. We're talking about the economics of 
the NewGrade upgrader. All of the stuff that the member talks 
about has nothing to do with the economics of the upgrader 
itself. Nothing. 
 
Now you can't say how much royalty there is raised per barrel 
because the member is a member for Estevan in which there is 
oil production, and therefore he ought to know that it depends 
on a lot of things. It depends on whether it's light oil or whether 
it's heavy oil, where it might be produced, the kinds of 
production rates per well — a whole range of variables. So 
there is no one amount of dollar per barrel. 
 
If you want to know what the royalty structures are, that is not a 
responsibility of CIC, and CIC is not in a position to be able to 
know that or provide that information here. That is information 
that can be provided quite easily and quite simply by the 
Department of Energy and Mines which has not completed its 
estimates in the House and will be more than happy to provide 
you with the royalty structure, because quite frankly, that 
information is already available in the public because it's by 
regulation and public policy and has been published. Nothing 
secret about it; it's all available. 



March 29, 1995 

 
1224 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, the problem is that the 
Minister of Energy says, oh I can't possibly break it down to 
what the upgraders are using; I just deal in general numbers. 
 
And you know what? The Energy minister is probably closer to 
the truth than you are, probably closer to the truth than you are 
because I've been the Energy minister, and I know how that 
shop works. Okay? And I've had to sit around the board over at 
your operation a few times too, and I understand how it works a 
little bit too. Okay? 
 
Now you gave the member from Estevan some numbers here 
that I think are a little erroneous. And I'd like you to tell me that 
price that you quoted, okay, on heavy oil. You said it cost . . . 
there was $288 million for the oil on 18 million barrels. Would 
you tell me what time frame that's associated with, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well it's right here — 1994. They 
call it the cost of goods sold. That's the cost for the oil, heavy 
oil — $228.4 million. That's what the NewGrade people gave 
us. I'm sure that they're giving us the right information. And 
that's what the cost was. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well my arithmetic then says that if you 
divide 18 million barrels into 288, you'd get $16. Okay? Sixteen 
dollars. 
 
Now my information is, Minister, that — and this is since 
October 1994 — that your prices have been ranging, and I have 
them in both U.S. (United States) funds and Canadian funds, 
but approximately between $21.50 to a high of 23.80, which is 
a Bow River price. And depending on where they're accessing 
product from, IPL (Interprovincial Pipe Line Co.) have had 
some problems with supplying and that's probably why your 
ratio on 60/40 is the ways it is, but whether they're pulling south 
Saskatchewan or they're pulling out of Fosterton or they're 
pulling out of the North, that those prices have been in effect 
for that period of time. 
 
So that tells me . . . well you can shake your head. I did a whole 
lot of industry research before we came in here today to get the 
numbers. That tells me that they must have been paying a whole 
lot less than 16 for the majority of 1994. Is that correct? Can 
you give me those numbers? 
 
Give me the monthly averages of what they were paying for 
crude. And you, as a partner, should have that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me try to assist, Mr. Chairman. 
Just to make sure that we are clear what I said, because it's on 
the record and I will repeat it because it's accurate. 
 
NewGrade uses about 18 million barrels of heavy crude. Their 
cost of that in 1994 was $288.4 million. Now what the cost . . . 
what it might be . . . what the average might be per barrel is 
readily available, and we have no trouble providing you. My 
staff tell me they don't have it here, but that's public knowledge 
and we can get it to you if that's what you want. And I'm quite 
prepared to provide it to you, but we don't have it in hand at the  

present time. 
 
But there's nothing secretive about it. It's public information 
and we'll be quite happy to give it to you. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that's good, Minister. Now we're getting 
somewhere. I want the monthly volumes and average price 
basis 22 gravity, which is the blend that that upgrader has used 
basically since day one, okay, for the year 1994. And I would 
think that you would probably be able to get me those also for 
January and February of '95. There shouldn't be any problem 
with that at all. 
 
Because if I am not wrong on my prices — and I don't think 
that I am — of what heavy oil is selling for today . . . because I 
checked the Chicago market and I checked a few other places 
today. Okay? And basis those prices for that gravity blend . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why that gravity blend? 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Because that's why that thing works the best 
on. If you go up to 24, it doesn't work as good, Minister. That's 
why. Okay? That's where it works best at. That's where they get 
the best end-use product to put into the refinery in order to 
refine it and bring on the syncrude product that they use. Okay? 
 
At those prices, I would like you to tell me what the royalty 
figure is on a barrel of oil today in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I don't want it from a particular field — I'll 
give you the courtesy of using a field average. Okay? So that 
means it's conventional production and horizontal production, 
enhanced production — either water flood or fire flood or 
whatever they happen to be using. You can get a number very 
easily, I would think, on what a field average would be for that 
gravity of oil of production, basis those prices today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just so that we don't have a 
misunderstanding, we will get for you the monthly average 
price and volume on the heavy oil that the NewGrade actually 
uses. And you're talking about blends and all this kind of thing 
. . . I mean if what you're saying is what NewGrade uses, those 
are the prices we'll get for you. Because I think that's the only 
way you can accurately reflect of the kinds of things we're 
talking about. So I'll undertake to get that for you and there's no 
problem with that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay. Because as you can appreciate, 
Minister, the input cost of the product has a factor associated to 
the profitability of the operation over there. The more you pay 
for your product in conventional upgrading, or in conventional 
production, means that your end product has to retail at a higher 
price. The higher the price that you pay for your heavy oil, 
probably the shorter the differential is — correct? The more you 
pay for heavy oil versus conventional oil, the shorter the 
differential. The problem with the upgrader has always been, 
the shorter the differential, the more it costs to run the upgrader. 
Okay. 



March 29, 1995 

 
1225 

An Hon. Member: — The more it costs the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Right, the more it costs the taxpayer. 
 
And that's why we want to know, Minister, what the province 
of Saskatchewan is making from the use of heavy oil, 
Saskatchewan heavy oil. And you can attach any percentage 
you want. If it's only 60 per cent, that's fine. If it be 18 million 
barrels, then we're only getting about 10 million of that 
production out of Saskatchewan. And that's fair. 
 
And on that 10 million or 11 million barrels of oil that is being 
produced today at an average price of $22 Canadian, we would 
like to know what economic factor there is for the province of 
Saskatchewan so that we can assess, we can assess on a very 
tight differential, a small differential, how well you're doing 
with your project. Because you've told us the economic viability 
of this thing is directly tied to this criteria. 
 
And I think the only way that we as taxpayers and as legislators 
can really look at this thing is, say that if your differential right 
now is only $4 and we would like 5.75, which would probably 
cover off your cash flow, if you were just working on your cash 
flow costs right now, and interest, if you add in depreciation, 
you're probably looking at 6.75. But if the magic number for us 
is 5.75, which would handle your cash flow, if you need that for 
a differential, then I think it's fair for us to assess the economic 
impact of the 11 million barrels of Saskatchewan production 
going in versus the cost that we the taxpayer having to bear in 
order to finance this operation because we're a buck 
seventy-five different than where we want to be. 
 
That to me is a totally logical process for me as a legislator to 
go through in assessing how well we're doing. And I don't know 
why you're so reluctant to give us the kind of figures that we 
need in order to do that assessment. It just seems logical that 
you'd want to do that assessment. There's no skin off your nose 
in this whole thing. You've already said if there's any blame to 
be placed, it's on the former government. 
 
And it helps everyone out there understand the impact and the 
presence of this upgrader in our province, and how it works. 
Because this thing isn't going to go away; it's going to be with 
us for the next 30 years. 
 
So all I'm saying is, if our goal is 5.75, which would basically 
take us off the hook on a cash flow basis — we've only got 4 
for a differential — then we want to know at basis $22 
Canadian, what the impact is of those 11 million barrels of oil 
on this upgrader. And I think you should be prepared to provide 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly . . . 
I know that the Department of Energy and Mines will be able to 
provide you with that information, and there's no problem with 
that. The Crown Investments Corporation cannot provide you 
with that information. I will certainly speak to the minister in 
charge and see to it that he is able to provide you information 
on royalties because that is a responsibility of that department. 

What the Crown Investments Corporation responsibility is, is to 
deal with the financial and economic viability of the project. In 
this case, it happens to be NewGrade upgrader. And I have 
given you all of the information that is necessary in order to tell 
you where NewGrade was, what happened in the restructuring 
through the negotiations with all of the parties that were 
involved, and where NewGrade is today. 
 
We've given you that because that's pertinent and relevant to the 
debate of NewGrade. 
 
Now how much royalties the province gets from heavy oil or 
medium crude or light crude and all of the kinds of oils that are 
out there is in no way a reflection on the viability of NewGrade 
as a standing entity . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it's not. 
Well, Mr. Member from Estevan, maybe it's that kind of logic 
that got this project into trouble in the first place. 
 
But I'm telling you that NewGrade . . . we're here responsible 
for NewGrade; we're not here responsible for the royalty 
structure because that's a responsibility of the minister and the 
Department of Energy and Mines. They will provide you with 
that information. 
 
The information that we're responsible for, we have provided 
for you. And if you want any more information specifically 
related to NewGrade, we'll even provide that for you as well. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, let me try it this way. You said 
that the upgrader buys 18 million barrels of oil. If it didn't . . . 
and when it pays that, at 16 or $18 a barrel, it pays for, let's say, 
3 or $4 a barrel in royalties to — guess who? — the owner of 
the oil royalty package: you, the province of Saskatchewan. 
And you buy it from the producer. That royalty is built in there. 
And that royalty comes to you, the equity participant in the 
upgrader. See, you have access to the royalties on one hand, and 
you have access to equity of the upgrader. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get your attention here. You have access 
to the royalty on the oil because you set that level. And you 
have equity in the upgrader. You can make money in the 
upgrader, and you can make money in the royalty. You could 
make money in both as an equity participant. You set the 
royalties in oil, and you have equity in NewGrade. 
 
So let's take, as you pointed out, a cash flow differential that 
would make it break even. You make money on the royalties, 
and you break even on the upgrader. Now is that reasonable? 
That's kind of nice for you, the player on both sides. It's like a 
farmer having a seed plant, and he owns the land, and he also 
owns the seed mill. And he makes money selling the seed, and 
he gets something going back to his land because he grows the 
seed. And as a farmer he'd make that decision because it's an 
integrated decision. But you don't want to acknowledge it. 
 
And I can understand why you don't want to acknowledge it. I 
understand why you don't want to talk about 18 million barrels 
a day . . . or barrels a year going into the upgrader, where the 
upgrader has to pay the royalty because it has to buy it from the  



March 29, 1995 

 
1226 

producer, who pays you the royalty. And you don't want to talk 
about it. 
 
Well if you take a couple of upgraders and you take 50,000 . . . 
100,000 barrels a day coming into the province of 
Saskatchewan, you're looking at . . . in even a half of it, you're 
looking at 50,000 barrels a day in heavy oil that you're paying a 
royalty on which is probably in the neighbourhood of 20 to 25 
million barrels. And let's say you're paying 2 to $3 a barrel. 
You're looking at an awful lot of money coming into the 
province of Saskatchewan — a lot of money. 
 
And the minister says it's a weird argument. He's making 25, 35, 
45, 50 million dollars more than he would have without an 
upgrader, and he doesn't want to talk about the value. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I can understand why you don't want to talk about it. 
All I want you to do is acknowledge that there is a royalty. 
 
Let me back up. Mr. Minister, is there a royalty on heavy oil 
that the upgrader buys, and is that royalty in the neighbourhood 
of $350 a barrel? Ballpark average 1994, 1993, average heavy 
crude. 
 
Now could we get into that to know what the upgrader . . . I 
want to know a breakdown of the upgrader's cost. The upgrader 
buys oil, and when it buys oil in Saskatchewan, what per cent of 
that oil is for the oil? What per cent is federal tax? What is 
provincial tax, and what is federal-provincial royalty so that I 
have an idea of where it's spending its money. Could you do 
that? That's part of an upgrading capacity. 
 
Here's what I buy . . . is oil. Here's how much I pay in tax to one 
of my equity participants. The equity participant gets money in 
the royalties when I buy the oil — pretty logical question. What 
if we were making . . . let's say for example we make . . . 75, 80 
per cent of the cost of oil was in royalties. We'd say, oh that's 
kind of relevant, pretty interesting. I got, you know, $15 oil, and 
$10 a barrel is coming right to me, and I'm an owner of the 
plant too. 
 
That's what you got. That's the reason that upgraders are so 
good . . . is because they put lots of people to work in the oil 
patch. You get lots of royalties which you make money on. And 
you have the possibility of a reasonable differential to make 
some money in the plant as well. 
 
Now that's all we want to talk about. Certainly the co-op talked 
to you about that. They did to me. Husky talked to you about 
that. They did to me because we're generating a hundred 
thousand barrels a day in oil coming into the province of 
Saskatchewan being upgraded, and you even have value added 
because you're making a synthetic crude which gives you more 
money, selling into the Chicago market or other markets, rather 
than just have heavy crude. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you tell me, when you buy oil at the 
upgrader, what per cent of that oil is for oil? What per cent is 
for taxes, and what per cent is for royalties? Could you break 
that down for me? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, I am not going to do that 
because that's not what we're talking about here. And I know 
that the member from Estevan would like to get into that, and I 
invite him to get into that when the appropriate department is 
before the legislature, and that's the Department of Energy and 
Mines because that's the department who will give you that 
information. 
 
But let me test the logic of the member from Estevan just a little 
bit. What the member from Estevan is standing and saying is 
that he owns two stores, two shoe stores. He owns one shoe 
store that's draining money, and he owns another one that 
makes money, and therefore that's okay. We'll continue 
operating the one that's draining the money from the one that's 
making money and somehow that makes good sound business 
sense. That's what he's saying here — same kind of logic if 
applied to this project. I don't think I could justify to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want the member from Estevan to listen. The NewGrade 
doesn't pay royalties because in the comments that he was 
making, he sounds like he's suggesting that NewGrade pays 
royalties. NewGrade does not pay any royalties. The producers 
who produce the oil pay the royalties to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now just because producers pay royalties to the province of 
Saskatchewan doesn't mean that we shouldn't try to make the 
NewGrade upgrader as a self-standing entity . . . become 
commercially viable. That's got nothing to do with the royalties; 
it has nothing to do with the royalties at all. 
 
What has to do with the viability of NewGrade upgrader is the 
price differential, its financing which was bad originally and is 
now improved because of the new renegotiated deal. That's 
what we're here talking about. We're not here talking about 
royalties. If the member wants to talk about royalties, he's got to 
ask it in the right place. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I've just had it confirmed about 
what the oil royalty would be, and it's interesting that what the 
numbers we are talking about are fairly close. If you're using 18 
million barrels a day or year, pardon me, 18 million barrels a 
year of oil, and then let's say 10 million comes out of 
Saskatchewan. Seventy per cent oil royalty runs you about, on 
$22 oil, run you about 3.75. You're looking at $41 million. And 
the Minister says so what, 41 million coming into the province 
of Saskatchewan in royalties as a result of heavy oil being 
purchased by an upgrader, by NewGrade. And the Minister 
said, oh that doesn't make any difference. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, you could buy an upgrader again to generate 
$40 million in new royalties to the province of Saskatchewan 
. . . and your latest refinancing I think it cost you $7 million you 
said, $7 million. Where did that come from, that come from the 
upgrader? No. Did it come from CIC? Did it come from the 
Consolidated Fund? 



March 29, 1995 

 
1227 

You restructured this, and you said that $50 million at about 10 
per cent is 5 million bucks. Even the 25, if we add that, is 6 or 
$7 million. You're picking up $40 million a year in royalty and 
you said, well, I've restructured it, and it might cost me 6 or $7 
million, and I've done a good deal. 
 
Look, Mr. Minister, the bottom line of where I'm taking this is 
that those upgraders generate, if we're in the ballpark here of 3 
to $4 a barrel in oil in royalties, 75 to $80 million to the 
province of Saskatchewan. In fact the Minister of Finance . . . 
the minister of oil royalties and Energy and Mines said the other 
day $100 million, $100 million into the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Minister, you're picking up $100 
million because of the oil being pumped into upgraders, and 
you don't want to count that. You don't want to count that. 
 
And my point will be, Mr. Minister, is you're picking up an 
awful lot of money that you wouldn't have been getting if you 
didn't have a couple of upgraders. And the reason that you 
never built two upgraders, Mr. Minister, is because you couldn't 
see the forest for the trees. You couldn't see the forest for the 
trees. You tried and tried and tried . . . you even had a 
cooperative refinery here which saves you $700 million in 
building an upgrader because you can put an upgrader right 
beside the refinery and knit it into it. And you still wouldn't do 
it. 
 
And you wouldn't build another one in Saskatchewan financed 
by Alberta, financed by the feds, financed by Husky. You 
wouldn't do that one either. You had a chance for years to do; 
you did neither one. But you are now experiencing, as a result 
of our investment in two upgraders, $80 million in royalties 
plus at least a thousand jobs because you've got jobs at the 
upgraders, jobs in drilling, jobs in exploration, and jobs in the 
oil patch. Plus you've got the research arm of finding out how 
upgraders work, and you tell me you restructured, and it cost 
you $7 million. You know, fair enough. I give you full marks 
for your 7 million that you put into it annually. 
 
I want you to acknowledge what it's generating annually 
because if it's picking up 40 million and it's costing you 7, you 
wouldn't have had the difference of $30-some million if you 
hadn't have built it to start with. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it's interesting that you won't acknowledge . . . 
and the Minister of Energy and Mines — I'll give him full credit 
— he said we're picking up $520 million in royalties this year 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So you know the answer. Why are you 
asking the question? 
 
Mr. Devine: — I'm asking you to acknowledge and tell me the 
amount of oil that the upgrader uses and the amount of royalties 
that comes out of that oil. And you are . . . I mean it looks a 
little small, Minister, that you won't acknowledge what the 
royalty is on oil. You've been in cabinet more than once. You 
just won't acknowledge it. And that's pretty small. 
 

Your colleague says we're picking up . . . you are picking up 
$520 million in oil royalties coming out of the oil patch this 
year as a result of upgraders and oil and land sales. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well that's what he told me. And you said no. 
Well is that true? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's total royalty. 
 
Mr. Devine: — All right. Well I'll ask him. If you want to 
comment on it . . . The Minister of Energy said we're picking up 
$520 million in royalties and land sales coming out of the 
province of Saskatchewan. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — If that's what the minister said — 
and I qualify, if that's what the minister said — then it would be 
true. But I'm not here to debate that because I don't have that 
information. What I'm here to debate is NewGrade upgrader. 
 
And I want to just respond to some of the rather peculiar 
comments made by the member from Estevan which reinforces 
for me why we are in this particular difficult situation which we 
face today. 
 
The member from Estevan is saying in the House that because 
the NewGrade upgrader . . . because we get royalties from oil 
production, it's okay to build an upgrader and loses piles of 
money every year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Didn't say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well that's what your logic leads 
to. 
 
The member from Estevan now, in his usual selective use of 
numbers, hangs his hat on the $50 million that's been put into 
the restructuring and chooses to ignore the fact that $240 
million of taxpayers' money has had to be written off by the 
government because of the original bad deal that was there; 
that's costing the taxpayers interest because it's money that was 
borrowed. So you can add that to another liability of the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what I'm saying to the member opposite is that you cannot, if 
you have any small amount of knowledge of economics or 
business, say you can have royalties coming out of one other 
commodity which is a non-renewable resource which happens 
to be oil, and on the basis of that, justify soaking $240 million 
of taxpayers' dollars into a project which cannot be viable. 
There is no possible way to explain that. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that the royalties 
which are generated from heavy oil, the province of 
Saskatchewan would be able to get anyway, even without the 
upgrader, simply through the export. Because that's always been 
the case and could be the case today. 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1228 

So that's another example of why the logic which you are using, 
sir, doesn't make any sense because basically — and I say it for 
the third time in this comment — you're saying because you 
make royalties, it's okay to build a project which is going to cost 
the taxpayers money year after year after year. I disagree with 
you; I will continue to disagree with you; this government 
disagrees with you; and more importantly, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan disagree with you. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me ask you . . . change 
the slant on this to see if we can get you to admit that the 
upgraders make the province a lot of money . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well would you do the project now, Mr. 
Minister? As it is, would you do it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The member from Estevan wants 
me to rise in my place and admit that the upgrader is making the 
province a lot of money. I will not accept that. 
 
And why the member from Estevan can say that in the face of 
the following, I'm not sure. Because in 1989 the upgrader cost, 
besides the original investment on which interest has to be paid 
— the $240 million which has had to be written off — in 1989 
the taxpayer had to shell out $59.6 million in losses. In 1990 the 
taxpayer had to shell out $102.7 million in losses. In 1991 the 
taxpayer paid out another $79.5 million in losses; in 1992, 58.6 
million; in 1993, 63.2 million; in 1994, 69.8 million. 
 
If that's how the upgrader makes money, Mr. Chairman, for the 
taxpayer of Saskatchewan, it is beyond me. But if that's the kind 
of financial business sense that I would apply to a business, I 
can tell you I would not survive very long. 
 
The answer simply to the member opposite is, the upgrader as a 
commercial business enterprise loses money for the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan; it doesn't make money. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, would you give me the amount of 
money in royalties from 1989 to 1994 as a result of the 
upgrader buying in the neighbourhood of 18 million barrels of 
oil a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well as I said before, I don't have 
the number that is made in terms of royalties. We're getting it 
for you. I told you that earlier. But whether there's royalties 
coming for oil or not, doesn't make the NewGrade make money. 
We're talking here the NewGrade upgrader. The NewGrade 
upgrader, every year since you created it, has been losing 
money. 
 
Thanks to the initiative of the member from Swift Current, 
thanks to the work of the Crown Investments Corporation, and 
thanks for the leadership shown by this government as a whole, 
we have restructured the financing of NewGrade so that 
eventually it will be able to break even and take away the 
obligation of the Saskatchewan taxpayer on an annual basis, 
who has had to contribute more than handsomely in losses 
because of the losses of the upgrader. 
 

There is royalties certainly coming from heavy oil, but that 
doesn't make the upgrader make money, and we're here talking 
about the upgrader. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, you stipulated that there was the 
losses — 59 million, 102, 75, 69 million. Those are split three 
ways. Those are split. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I'm adding up is, as a result of the upgrader 
using 18 million barrels of oil a year, it can pick up in the 
neighbourhood of $40 million in royalties. And your share of 
the loss in this investment — you had 40 million times 5, 6 
years — is over $200 million in royalties. 
 
Well just give me the royalty on 18 million barrels of oil. I 
mean if you've got it, give it to me. If the Minister of Energy 
wants to respond, he can respond. He told me the other day it 
was $100 million that comes in as a result of the upgraders, on 
an annual basis. That's what it's worth — $100 million. 
 
Well if you've got them operating from '89, '90, '91, '92, '93, '94, 
'95, '96, and you're picking up the royalties on 18 million barrels 
of oil, that's a lot of money. That's what the Co-op said. 
Because you have both sides of the equation. You get the 
royalties going in and you're an equity partner coming out. 
 
That doesn't say that you don't want to finance or refinance the 
best you can, but your refinancing has only cost you $7 million 
— $7 million. But all you've done is $7 million. That's it — $7 
million you've contributed and you say you've restructured it all. 
And you're picking up 40 million a year in royalties in that 
upgrader. And you said, I restructured it; I'm putting 7 in, yahoo 
mountain dew. 
 
The feds were the ones . . . Who was the minister of Energy 
federally when you did this? Who was the Minister of Energy 
that did this, finally? Do you remember? 
 
So the federal Liberal government gave you $125 million cash? 
Well you're an equity participant so they gave it to you as an 
equity person, is that right? You have equity in a plant and the 
federal Liberal government gave you $125 million gift, is that 
right? What did they do? Who gave you that money? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take your seat if you want us to answer 
that. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well maybe the Minister of Justice wants to 
respond and the former minister of Energy wants to respond 
and the former CIC minister wants . . . I got them all interested 
here, Mr. Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don't want answers. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I just asked them to answer. I'm asking 
them what is the royalty on 18 million barrels of oil, and you 
won't answer. And I give you an answer; you say it isn't right. 
What's 3 or $4 a barrel? It's a lot of money; it's $40 million a 
year. And you've just contributed 7 and you think of yourself as  



March 29, 1995 

 
1229 

a hero. The Co-op doesn't think you're much of a hero; they 
think you're a pain. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, would you have liked them to blame 
us? 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Devine: — I didn't say that. I brought it in here and our 
cabinet brought it in here. We brought it in here and brought the 
other one in here. You can tinker around the outside like you do 
most everything else, but you've never built either one of them. 
 
And you wouldn't acknowledge what the Co-op says, and the 
Co-op will say today in public, if you go ask them, the province 
was on both sides of the deal because we got royalties on one 
side and an equity position on another. And you only 
acknowledge half the equation. That's not fair. You always said 
the taxpayer's on the hook. Does the taxpayer get the royalty? 
Yes or no? Yes. Does the taxpayer get the equity? Yes. Minister 
of Agriculture laughs; it's way over his head, Mr. Chairman, 
way over his head. 
 
But you don't seem to understand that. The Co-op understands 
it, Co-op members understand it, that the province of 
Saskatchewan got the benefit of the jobs, of the exploration, of 
the drilling, of the oil royalties, of the upgrader, of research 
attaching it to a refinery  which is profitable. And now we 
have 350 or 30 people working, paying taxes and contributing 
to society. And you said: well we just fixed all that up, we put 7 
million a year into it and it's all just hunky-dory; but oh, we 
happened to got a $125 million gift from the Liberals federally. 
Well fair enough for the gift. I mean I'd take a gift like that too. 
I used to get in the neighbourhood of a billion dollars a year for 
farmers. Right, Mr. Minister? 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what I want you to help me out with here is, is 
it true that in your restructuring what you've actually 
contributed, if you take the full $75 million, is annually about 7 
or $8 million? Is that the outsit? That's what you've done to a 
project that might lose $23 million, which you split, but 
obviously picks up net $40 million in revenues. Is that what 
you're trying to tell me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I'm 
trying to tell the House, and what I'm trying to tell the member 
opposite, is that had we applied as a government, the same kind 
of economics and business sense in the last three years as the 
member just tries to justify because he applied it in nine and a 
half years, I can tell you the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should 
never forgive us, as they will never forgive you. 
 
Now I say, I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very . . . Mr. 
Chairman, a very fascinating debate. Because we're hearing 
from a former premier who, even though he has been soundly 
told by the people who support and live in this province that he 
sold them out and so did the member opposite there and all 
those who sat on the front benches here when they made these 
kind of deals . . . Sold them out because of this kind of weird,  

voodoo economics which the member opposite just describes. 
 
I'm telling you, Mr. Chairman, I'm telling the member opposite, 
that I find it almost a sorrowful situation. Because if I thought 
that this former premier was standing here and doing what he's 
doing simply because of some sense of conscience, at least I 
could accept that. 
 
But I'm standing here, Mr. Speaker, and know that he's doing it 
because he doesn't know any better. And I find that really quite 
sad — not for him, not for me, not for any of us in this House 
— I find it sad for the people of Saskatchewan because here's 
the benefit. Here is the benefit that you left them because of this 
kind of economics. 
 
You left them the benefit of a $15 billion debt . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no. No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — You didn't? Yes you did. You left 
them with the benefit of having to pay $850 million of interest 
on that debt each and every year before they can find any 
money to put into health care or education or roads or anything 
else. That's the benefit you talked about. 
 
Now you keep coming back now all of a sudden, in your 
peculiar way, to the $7 million in the restructuring, and 
conveniently you forget to say that in total so far this upgrader 
is costing the taxpayer $315 million, $240 million which has 
had to be written off because of your bad deal and $50 million 
plus the 25 that will come because of the shortfalls when they 
come, which is $75 million, because of the restructuring which 
makes the deal more sound. 
 
But let's get honest here. Why don't you talk about the $315 
million as opposed to the $7 million cost on the interest? Talk 
about that. And you can talk about the royalties all you want. It 
does not explain the $315 million debt which the taxpayer is 
liable for, and there's no amount of royalties that can account 
for that, because on the face of it, we have to deal here with the 
financial feasibility of the NewGrade upgrader, and you're not 
prepared to talk about that. 
 
All you want to talk about is the royalties that come from heavy 
oil. And I'm saying to you, the province of Saskatchewan would 
get those royalties even if the upgrader didn't exist because the 
market is there for the oil, and it would be exported and all of 
that revenue would come to the treasury anyway without having 
to pay the interest on the debt which you accumulated because 
of your so-called economics. And I understand you're supposed 
to be an economics professor, but boy, I really feel for the 
students who you may have taught if this is the kind of 
economics you taught them. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, I've done lots of projects, and in 
the province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If 
the minister wants to branch out, Mr. Chairman, and talk about 
them, we can expand and we can talk about fertilizer projects. 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1230 

And the minister for CIC, maybe he could tell me how's the 
fertilizer project doing. What are the royalties we're picking up 
on the gas going into the fertilizer project? Is it good or bad? Is 
it positive or negative? Obviously, it's very positive. It's 
contributing to the province. 
 
The minister wants to talk about the debt of projects. Mr. 
Minister, if you look at the summary statements from the 
Provincial Auditor, page 616, the projects, Mr. Minister, in the 
Crowns are contributing $600 million net to the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that doesn't include royalties — $600 
million in projects. 
 
And this says a combination of something like 5 to $6 billion in 
debt that is contributing net $600 million to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And if you look at the next page, it'll take all the 
projects, and the long-term investments are the $1.2 billion and 
things like potash shares, Cameco shares, Saskferco, Millar 
Western contributing substantially to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think CIC can acknowledge . . . I think the fertilizer project is 
contributing something like 80 or $90 million. That's net, 
coming out of that project. So, Mr. Minister, if you want to get 
into project by project and Crown by Crown, we can take the 
summary statement by the auditors. Now 40 per cent of the 
budget that you look at isn't even included in the things you 
want to talk about. 
 
But the auditor obviously says if you look here at the 
investments in government enterprises, investments in 
government enterprises which I did most of — you didn't — it's 
$600 million net coming into the province of Saskatchewan and 
$500 million in royalties as the result of the royalty structure we 
put up. 
 
And a good part of that, Mr. Minister, is the result of upgraders. 
So, Mr. Minister, you don't want to acknowledge the fact that 
there's 18 million barrels associated with one upgrader and 18 
million barrels associated with another upgrader, and you make 
a royalty on those, and it's generating something in the 
neighbourhood of 75 to $80 million a year. 
 
And what you've contributed is $7 million. And all of a sudden 
you think it's really something else. I want to say, Mr. Minister, 
the Co-op members that you browbeat, the Co-op members 
know the benefit to a province of generating oil as a result of an 
upgrader. Everybody on both sides of the House, on both sides 
of negotiations, said yes, if you take an extra 50,000 barrels of 
oil out of the ground and you put it through an upgrader, it 
helps you in several ways. 
 
And you are reluctant to acknowledge it but I am going to go 
over it again. The Co-op people said it, and those negotiating. 
And I'm sure people on your side said yes, if you take 50,000 
barrels of oil and you process it, you get money from the 
royalties, you get money from the drilling and exploration and 
all the work and jobs in there, sales tax, income tax, gasoline 
tax. You get money that comes in from having 330 people work  

in a refinery that's very profitable, and an upgrader. And on top 
of that you get the strength of research. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Co-op knows that's the case, and that's 
why they feel so bad about this Bill — because you won't 
acknowledge it. You had to go to that very, very terrible 
hammer over their head and play by this new set of rules. You 
didn't have to do that to negotiate, or renegotiate. You could 
have been fair to them and say, well frankly, we're going to ask 
the federal government for some more money; we can put in 
some more equity. We can change the numbers on the upgrader; 
we don't have to browbeat you. 
 
And the Co-op said, just acknowledge what you're getting. 
What you are getting is hundreds and hundreds of millions of 
dollars in royalties over the life of this upgrader. And you won't 
acknowledge it. And so to play politics, you said we'll browbeat 
you; we'll bring in this Bill; we'll threaten to take you over; we'll 
threaten to run it. And you weren't fair. 
 
And that's why you've got this terrible taste in the people of the 
co-op movement's mouth and a taste in the business 
community, because of your retroactive legislation — not only 
with farmers, not only with judges, but the co-op movement. 
 
And finally, it's really interesting, Mr. Chairman, they bring in 
these Bills — Bills like this, and retroactive Bills — always on 
projects they couldn't do. Isn't that interesting? They tried for 
years to build one upgrader and couldn't do it. Couldn't do it. 
They were going to build one in Belle Plaine; they were going 
to build one in Archerwill; they were going to build one in 
Moose Jaw; they were going to build one here and one there. 
They couldn't get it done. 
 
They could nationalize some things. They could take it over. . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of Justice chirps from 
his seat — irresponsible. You took the responsibility of 
nationalizing potash mine. Was that a good idea? 
 
An Hon. Member: — It made money. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Oh and he says it made money. They made 
money by nationalizing the potash mines. We evaluated your 
nationalization of potash mines and it wasn't worth a fraction of 
what you paid for it. You paid it at the high. You borrowed 
money from your New York friends and we had to pay it all off. 
You know that. We inherited all that borrowed money from 
New York to buy . . . with an exchange rate that was opposite to 
what it is today. 
 
Yes, I mean, imagine. Yes, they borrowed at $1.05 U.S. $400 
million, bought mines that were already here, lost their shirt. 
Lost the election because they were doing those kinds of things. 
Couldn't build upgraders. It took them 10 years of promising to 
cut taxes to get back into power. 
 
Imagine, 10 years. And do you know how they did it? Do you 
know how they did it? They said, gee, if you elect the NDP 
we'll cut taxes and we'll just fix things . . . everything up with  



March 29, 1995 

 
1231 

no tax increases. Imagine, Mr. Chairman. Imagine this. 
 
And he's talking about he's just contributed $7.5 million and 
fixed the upgrader — $7.5 million, and he's fixed it. 
 
Well one, he didn't build it; two, he doesn't even acknowledge 
that he's picking up 40 million a year in royalties; and three, he 
doesn't even acknowledge all the work and all the sales tax and 
income tax and gas tax as a result of people working at the 
upgrader and working in the oil patch. 
 
And then he didn't acknowledge the atmosphere associated with 
two upgraders that is causing something like $500 million in 
royalties and land sales coming into the province this year. And 
then he doesn't acknowledge the auditor's report that says $600 
million from the Crown corporations is coming, and projects, 
coming net into the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I mean it's amazing that this $7.5 million 
refinancing is supposed to be good-knows-what's gift to the 
people and to the co-op movement. It's disgraceful that he 
would sit here and brag about it when he's got the fundamentals 
and the basis of the co-op and its refinery and the oil patch and 
the royalties and the rest of it contributing so substantially to 
the province of Saskatchewan. And this minister won't even 
acknowledge that he makes royalties on the project. 
 
(1630) 
 
He owns the oil royalty and he's got equity in the upgrader and 
be darned if we can get him to admit that he has both. He just 
won't do it. That tells you something about his mentality. He's 
been campaigning for so long, been in politics so long he can't 
even admit the fact that there is 500-and-some million dollars in 
royalties and land sales coming into him as a result of 
something somebody else did. And he just fails to acknowledge 
it. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, once again I'll ask the minister, if you've 
restructured and put 75 million into this and if you took interest 
rate at say 9 per cent, you've got say six to six and a half million 
dollars going into this restructuring. On the other hand, you've 
got 40 million coming in on oil royalties alone, and you've got 
probably another 25 million in gas tax, sales tax, income tax, as 
a result of people working at the upgrader and working out in 
the oil patch. Don't you think that that's a fairly reasonable 
project today? 
 
And if I give you credit, if I give you credit and said, look, let's 
share this. You kicked in seven and a half; the royalties and 
other money is kicking in about 50 regularly — isn't that a 
pretty fair deal for the province of Saskatchewan, and 
particularly, Mr. Chairman, for the taxpayer? 
 
Mr. Minister, would you acknowledge that the taxpayer is 
picking up a significant benefit as a result of the royalties and 
income and gas tax and sales tax and income tax coming in as a 
result of that upgrader and, to give you your credit, your 
refinancing where you contribute seven and a half million  

dollars a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think maybe 
it's important and maybe helpful in the debate to put the whole 
project into perspective, and I'm going to do that. 
 
The member tries to always steer the debate away from what the 
project was all about. Well here's what the project was all 
about. Under the arrangement that was established prior to the 
government changing in November 1, 1991, over $230 million 
has been written off because it's been put into the upgrader. 
That's an obligation to the taxpayer. 
 
There was a liability, Mr. Chairman, of 300 — on top of that — 
$360 million in loan guarantees, which is an obligation to the 
taxpayer, under the old agreement. 
 
There was a further $100 million that the province would have 
had to be responsible for of the federal government's guarantee 
because of the old agreement. So that's $230 million written 
off; $360 million loan guarantees the province was on the hook 
for; and $100 million of federal government guarantees — 275 
million. But we were obligated to pay off, pick up — well can 
you believe this, Mr. Chairman — $100 million of the federal 
government's guarantee. That's the full picture of the NewGrade 
upgrader. 
 
Prior to the arrangement to restructure the financial situation of 
NewGrade, it was on the verge of collapse and the provincial 
taxpayer would have had to pick up every single cent of those 
guarantees — federal, that portion of the provincial — and it's 
already picked up the $230 million which it has written off. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, there is no kind of argument based on how 
much royalties the province gets that can possibly justify the 
economics of that kind of project. 
 
Now I just heard the member from Estevan, who is not paying 
attention to any of this at all, I just heard him say that there 
would be $500 million worth of royalties that the NewGrade 
upgrader generated. Even more interesting, I heard the member 
from Estevan and the member from Thunder Creek, which 
surprises me because I have a lot of respect from the member 
from Thunder Creek, say that when the Minister of Energy and 
Mines was here doing his estimates, that the Minister of Energy 
and Mines refused to provide information on the amount of oil 
royalty tax revenue that we got from the oilfield. That's what 
they said. That's what you said. 
 
And I say, Mr. Chairman, that those were false statements in the 
House. Because I have here a letter . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well I know the member from Estevan may be somewhat 
embarrassed, but I'm not worried about his embarrassment. 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Chairman, that dated March 15, the 
Minister of Energy and Mines, in response to questions asked in 
this House, provided to the member from Estevan a letter giving 
him all of the information on royalties from oil in the province 
of Saskatchewan for 1994-95 and estimated 1995-96. 



March 29, 1995 

 
1232 

So, Mr. Chairman, when the member from Estevan gets up and 
says, $500 million of royalties from heavy oil because of the 
upgrader . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn't say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, you did. Your last comment 
you said that, and you can check Hansard. He says that after 
having received this letter from the Minister of Energy and 
Mines in which he pointed out to the member from Estevan that 
from heavy oil, oil royalty and tax revenue for 1994-1995 was 
$37.4 million. 
 
Now even if you take all of the royalties from heavy oil, no 
matter where it is sold or where it's used, all of that does not 
make up for the interest that the province has to pay on the debt 
incurred on this project because of the deal which the member 
from Estevan negotiated. 
 
So how in heaven's name can anybody using any kind of 
economic sense argue that it's okay to have a project which is 
bleeding money and may in the end cost you the 230 million 
written off, the $360 million in loan guarantees the province 
was on the hook for, and the $100 million that the federal loan 
guarantee the province was on the hook for. How $337.4 
million of royalties from heavy oil can justify that is beyond 
me. It's unexplainable. I shall not attempt to even try to explain 
that because I think it's unexplainable. 
 
All I can do here is say that in the face of the difficulties which 
this government found, we did the responsible thing. We said, 
this deal needs to be renegotiated. We said it has to be 
renegotiated because it has a financial crisis on its hands. We 
said that while these negotiations are being carried on, in the 
event that they fail, we have to make sure that we are able to 
have a back-up so that the thing would not collapse financially. 
And that's why this legislation was brought into the House. 
 
Now I am very happy to say the legislation never had to be 
proclaimed. I'm very happy to say that, because the deal was 
renegotiated. But had we had to use the legislation because 
some parties may not have wanted to renegotiate the deal, it was 
here, and it was here for one purpose only — and that is to 
protect the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. And that should be the 
first and foremost responsibility of any government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I don't think, other than the 
three members of the Tory party who are in the House here this 
afternoon, anybody in the public would even question the fact 
that the Government of Saskatchewan had to do this because it 
was their interest that was at stake. And we're proud of the fact 
that I'm able to stand on my feet here — and we will do it all 
over this province when the time comes — to say we did the 
responsible thing, we did the right thing. It had to be done 
because the taxpayers' interest needed to be protected and we 
protected the taxpayers' interest. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have just misled the 
House because you said that all of the heavy oil royalties used 
by the upgrader or anything else are 37 to $41 million. And you 
know the upgrader uses medium oil and heavy oil — a 
combination of the two. Medium oil and heavy oil themselves 
is in the neighbourhood of $140 million, and you know it. 
 
So the royalties that you contribute . . . The upgrader uses a 
combination and it doesn't get it all in the same place. In fact 
the minister gave me that the other day. The Minister of Energy 
and Mines says the upgrader uses a combination of heavy oil 
and medium heavy oil. 
 
So I asked him for the royalties, which he was kind enough to 
give me — $259 million for '94-95, $278 million for '95-96. 
The land sales on top of that plus the gas royalties you're 
generating, as the minister pointed out, was $520 million . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of Energy doesn't seem 
to want to acknowledge what he gave me the other day. 
 
What's the gas royalties, the heavy oil royalties, the medium oil 
royalties, and the light oil royalties, and the land sales in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Total $500 million . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, the minister shook his head and the one 
over there said yes. Well that's the problem, Mr. Chairman. 
They're not honest with the people and they misled. 
 
The minister in charge of CIC, the Deputy Premier, should 
listen to the Minister of Energy — $520 million that he told me 
when we were in estimates. And I said I want it for the upgrader 
and he says wait until you get to CIC and then you can talk to 
the minister there. You're here. The total royalties that came in, 
oil and gas and land sales, was $520 million. I just want to 
know what the royalty is on the oil used by the upgrader and 
you won't tell anybody. And that's just being small. That's being 
partisan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I want you to tell me, if it's 18 million barrels 
of oil, what kind of oil it uses and what is the royalty on the oil? 
Upgraders in Lloydminster and upgraders here use something 
like a hundred thousand barrels a day of various kinds of oil. 
Tell us what the royalty is on the oil that they use coming from 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister the other day said, they use a combination of 
heavy oils, medium-heavy, heavy-heavy, and various kinds of 
viscosity. So you tell me what kind of oil that you use in the 
NewGrade upgrader and what the royalty structure is on that oil 
that contributes to the $520 million that you're picking up this 
last year, 520 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . in the 
energy patch, my friend. 
 
Your royalties are part of that $520 million because the 
upgrader has to buy oil, or do you understand that? The 
upgrader buys oil; when you buy the oil it pays royalty  the 
royalty goes to you. 
 



March 29, 1995 

 
1233 

Mr. Minister, let me just change this a bit. This is fascinating, 
this is fascinating. Mr. Minister, listen to this. Mr. Minister, I 
want to give you an example. You want to isolate this to the 
entity, the upgrader. Right. Isolate it. Would you like to, Mr. 
Minister, would you like to isolate the money that you took out 
of Crop Insurance and GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
and put it into the Consolidated Fund? Would you like to 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan how you took . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I'll ask all members of the 
committee to come to order. If members have comments to 
make or questions to ask, there will be time to do that. I would 
ask all members to give their attention to the questions and 
responses that are before the House and the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Now I also don't need to have the ruling 
of the Chair commented on, either, and if you'd just proceed. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
wanted to leave the minister just a point of principle that he 
doesn't want to . . . or might want to acknowledge. 
 
Mr. Minister, you want to confine your financial analysis to the 
upgrader. And you say we should just leave it on the upgrader 
and not talk about the money that comes into the province of 
Saskatchewan and the taxpayers' benefit, as a result of royalties. 
All right, Mr. Minister, would you justify then taking several 
hundred million dollars out of the Crop Insurance Corporation 
— money allocated to farmers through crop insurance in GRIP 
— taking the money out of there and putting it over to the 
general account for taxpayers. 
 
How do you justify that, given the principle that you only want 
to talk about the entity under . . . in question. You used $189 
million of farmers’ money in the Crop Insurance Corporation 
and you took it over here and put it in the Consolidated Fund to 
balance the budget. And then when we come back and say, well 
you're picking up a bunch of royalties as a result of an upgrader, 
he said, oh it can't count those; they just went into the 
Consolidated Fund; that's extra money. 
 
Well you were very, very quick to pick the farmers' pockets and 
take money out of this corporation and put it over there. So 
when it comes to this Bill and the upgrader operation, we want 
you to be just as open and say there is money coming to you 
from royalties and there's money coming to you from the unit 
called the upgrader. And until you acknowledge both of those, 
you're not going to get out of here by saying, well we only deal 
in that entity. Because you don't. That's not true. Don't mislead 
the House or mislead the public. 
 
You take money out of the Crop Insurance and you put it over 
here. You take money out of this department. In fact, in fact the 
auditor will tell you, beware the transfers by the NDP  

government. Beware the transfers because they don't generate 
any income, they're just for smoke and mirrors. And you 
transfer money from here and transfer . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well we can bring them in here if you want to 
talk about transfers. 
 
The minister from Swift Current says, show me the page. I'll 
give him his lessons, okay. They come out and they give lessons 
on auditing. And he says, beware of transfers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where does he say that? 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well I'll read it to you. The minister wants . . . 
Watch for and understand transfers, says the auditor. This is his 
staff. This is what he teaches about the NDP administration, 
watch and understand transfers. You are in the business of 
transfers but you won't acknowledge it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Your transfers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
no, no, this is your budget. This is his summary statement. And 
he says, the NDP are masters at transfers, the NDP 
administration in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You are still the NDP, aren't you? Still socialist? Or what are 
you, Liberals now? What are you, johnny-come-lately 
right-wingers, left-wingers, voodooers or what is it? Does the 
member from Lloydminster want to comment on this? Mr. 
Chairman, I thought you got order in this place. 
 
Mr. Minister, you get my point? Would you acknowledge that 
you took money out of an entity, a corporation, a legitimate 
corporation called the Crop Insurance Corporation, and you 
moved it over to general revenue. Therefore, that corporation 
wasn't as financially viable as it should have been because you 
took the money out of there and you used it for something else. 
In fact your Minister of Finance said we'll balance the budget 
with it. 
 
And yet in this case you say, no we only can talk about the 
upgrader and not all the money it generates from revenue. 
 
Now do you see the inconsistency there, Mr. Minister? If you 
don't, I'll talk more about it, because certainly the co-op 
movement does, farmers do, and anybody with any degree of 
logic and understanding of any kind of finances — and 
certainly the auditor, because the auditor said, watch the 
transfers. Well you're masters at transfers, but we're starting to 
catch on. 
 
So would you comment on the fairness of the principle you've 
just talked about of just talking about the upgrader and 
confining our discussions to that, when in fact you've taken 
$189 million out of the Crop Insurance Corporation and went 
and played with it. In fact you probably took some of that 
money and put in your $7 million in the upgrader, because you 
could use it any place you like. 
 
Would the minister like to acknowledge that his principle is not 
on good grounds because he makes transfers in income to other, 
and from other, corporations every day in here? 



March 29, 1995 

 
1234 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The answer to the member from 
Estevan is no. The last time I checked, and I have it here before 
me, is that we are dealing with an Act to confirm the repeal of 
The NewGrade Energy Inc. Protection Act. And that's what 
we're dealing with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the member from Estevan doesn't want to talk about that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he doesn't. Because he 
knows that the deal as it was originally structured is 
indefensible. And that's something that I think the world is well 
aware of. 
 
And listen to the debate, listen to the talk of $500 million of 
revenues, listen to the talk of royalties from oil. In 1994-95, the 
total amount of royalties that the province of Saskatchewan 
received from light oil, medium oil, and heavy oil was $259.6 
million; $37.4 million of that was for heavy oil, some of which 
went to NewGrade, some of which went to Bi-Provincial 
upgrader, some of which went to export market — a lot of it 
went to the export market. 
 
So it doesn't matter how you break that down, it does not even 
come close to paying the interest on the expense of this project. 
Now I don't know what more can be said about that. 
 
Now the member wants to ask the question, has there been 
some benefit from the NewGrade upgrader? Certainly not on its 
financial side, there has been no benefit. There's 180 million 
people working there, and that's good . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 180 people working there. And that's good. 
And there is oil activity out there. 
 
But I say again, and I can say it a hundred times, that that heavy 
oil would have gotten us the same kind of revenue on the export 
market — if we want to just talk about revenues — as it does 
today. And a lot of it is exported; it's not all used in the 
upgraders in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don't know that there's any more to say, 
except this: prior to the reorganization of the NewGrade 
financing, the NewGrade upgrader was in severe jeopardy. It 
had been put in the position where the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan was on the hook for $240 million of written-off 
money which they're paying interest on, $360 million of loan 
guarantee which they would have had to pony up on and would 
have had to pay interest on, and $100 million of guarantee of 
the federal guarantee which they would have had to pay interest 
on. That's $700 million that the taxpayer was at risk of having 
to pay from taxpayers' pockets. 
 
This deal has been renegotiated to protect the taxpayer because 
it makes it more financially sound. I am happy about that; the 
taxpayer is happy about that. I am also more than pleased that 
we did not ever have to use the Bill that is here, because in the 
end a deal was organized and structured and agreed upon, to 
which everybody signed on. 
 
And that's the way we would have preferred to have it in the 
first place. But while those negotiations were going on, Mr.  

Chairman, we were not, as a responsible government, prepared 
not to protect the taxpayer in case the deal was not able to be 
put together. That's a responsible action; we don't apologize for 
it. The member from Estevan can debate all he wants. He 
cannot deny that one basic fact. And that's really what this 
debate is all about. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, this debate is about why you 
thought you had to bring in legislation like this, which is 
Draconian, mean-spirited, to bully a local co-op that has 
enormous amount at risk, including operating an upgrader, 
including putting it together with a refinery. And you had to use 
this kind of legislation because you wouldn't acknowledge the 
immense benefits coming to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What you'll hear from the Co-op today and what you'll hear 
from me is you could negotiate, renegotiate with them, but you 
didn't have to have this legislation. 
 
Well let me put it this way. Is the Co-op happy today with what 
you did to them, Mr. Minister? Is the Co-op happy today? Do 
they like the way they were treated? Do they think that you 
acknowledged the contribution of the royalty and the economy 
and the oil drilling and the sales tax and income tax and gas tax 
that contributes to this province? Do you think that the Co-op is 
happy, the way you acknowledged all those benefits? 
 
The fact that they put up a refinery which saved you $700 
million in building an upgrader. Do you think they're happy the 
way you acknowledged that? Do you think they're happy the 
way you treated them? Old allies, co-op people who built the 
refinery in the '30s for heaven sakes, had the courage to do it. 
And you drift into town after an election and say, oh, I'm going 
to contribute another seven and a half million; I'll redo this and 
I'll bring in some ugly legislation in case you don't pony up 
here; we'll just, as usual, retroactively take you over. 
 
Mr. Minister, that's what they don't like. And it's the fact that 
even today you won't acknowledge the contribution that the 
Co-op made and that the royalty structure made and the 
upgrader are making. That's all we're asking you to do. You can 
renegotiate. But this piece of negotiation was not unlike what 
you did to farmers and you retroactively changed all the rules. 
You rewrote the history book. 
 
People who had agreements with bankers to finance their farm, 
were . . . the rug pulled right out from under them because you 
come in here and say, I will retroactively change your life. And 
that's what you did with the Co-op. Not negotiate — I'll tell you 
what it's going to be. That's what so offensive about this kind of 
legislation and offensive about socialists that do it. 
 
You've no sense of integrity of an agreement. You did it with 
farmers and you did it with the upgrader. You did it with the 
co-op movement. You've done it even with the judges — you 
said here's a deal and then there's no deal. What's so offensive 
about this Bill is your attitude that you can run roughshod over 
the rights of people and a contract. You can openly negotiate 
and renegotiate. We do it every day. But not you; you  



March 29, 1995 

 
1235 

retroactively change or you bring legislation in that absolutely 
takes away their rights. You can't even sue them after you get 
finished with the legislation in here, which is despicable. No 
rights at all. 
 
That's the awful part of this. And you stand and defend it or try 
to defend it and then you say, well we didn't have any choice. 
No, you don't know how to negotiate. You didn't know how to 
negotiate with the farmers and you didn't know how to 
negotiate with the co-op movement. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, all I'm asking you to do today is come half 
way with me. You put in another seven and a half million 
dollars. I'm just asking you, at 18 million barrels a year, and 
assume 10 million comes out of Saskatchewan, and if it's $4 a 
barrel, that's $40 million a year. Is that the kind of royalty you're 
picking up going into your coffers as a result of the upgrader? 
 
And you can say no, it's not, it's 4.25 a barrel or 3.75 or 
whatever it is. What is the royalty benefit to the province of 
Saskatchewan as a result of you using 18 million barrels in the 
province of Saskatchewan, approximately 60 per cent from our 
ground; what's the benefit? What's the accumulated benefit of 
that kind of economic activity? 
 
And granted, you've kicked in 7 million — you did 7, the Co-op 
did their share, the Liberals gave you evidently a $125 million 
gift. Boy, you should send them a great big thank you, put it on 
a billboard: federal Liberals give NDP friends $125 million. 
You like that, is that it? Why didn't they take equity? Was that 
part of some other agreement? Was it part of some other 
agreement? Why would the federal Liberals give you $125 
million unless you had something else going on? 
 
You talk about renegotiating GRIP or what else is connected 
here. Hundreds of millions of dollars were trading hands. What 
you put up was $7.5 million. That's it — 7.5. Seventy-five 
million dollars at 10 per cent is $7.5 million. That's what it cost 
you. That's the interest on that money. You're picking up net 
$40 million in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of that 
upgrader; 40 million from the other upgrader. That's $80 
million. 
 
Plus obviously you'd get lots of benefit because of projects like 
the fertilizer plant that uses natural gas; you got land sales 100 
to $200 million a year. The Minister of Energy said $520 
million in this last year from the oil patch — gas, oil, land sales, 
light, medium, and crude, heavy. 
 
Mr. Minister, all we're asking on behalf of co-op members is 
acknowledge their contribution to the provincial economy. Just 
. . . on behalf of co-op members. Co-op members all over 
would like to say, tell the minister, advise the minister to speak 
up and say co-op members have contributed to the province of 
Saskatchewan with this upgrader — royalties, income tax, sales 
tax, gas tax. Co-op members want the NDP to acknowledge the 
benefit of the refinery, the benefit of drilling, the benefit of 
exploration, and the benefit of all the royalties as a result of that  

upgrader. 
 
And the minister, the former minister from Swift Current, says 
no, we won't acknowledge it. Well the co-op members tell us 
they'd like you to acknowledge it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You want to be satisfied. 
 
Mr. Devine: — No, no. The co-op members want to be 
satisfied. The co-op members want to be satisfied. The co-op 
members in the province of Saskatchewan want to know that 
the NDP would like to acknowledge what their contribution to 
the province is. 
 
That's why they're still upset. They feel just like the farmers — 
retroactive legislation, take hundreds of millions of dollars, 
force them into it. Well I'll tell you  the minister can shake his 
head. The member from Swift Current, the member from Indian 
Head can all shake their heads  co-op members will not 
forget what you did to them. And they're not going to forgive 
the fact you won't even acknowledge . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. It now being near 5 o'clock, 
the Committee of the Whole will rise and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 


