






















































February 23, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 23, 1995 

 

 
381 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
people from the Gull Lake area, I would like to present the 
following petition. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
programs towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'd be happy to table them on behalf of the people of the 
Gull Lake area. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition from people from south-west Saskatchewan. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And we have people from Fir Mountain, McCord, Glentworth, 
Lafleche, several in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the double-
laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 

 
Clerk: — Mr. Britton, as Vice-Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills, presents the seventh 
report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 
 Your committee wishes to report that Mrs. Teichrob has 

been elected as Chair of the committee. Your committee 
has duly examined the undermentioned petitions for 
private Bills and finds that the provisions of rules 59, 
60, and 61 have been fully complied with. 

 
 Of the Caronport schools in the province of 

Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend the 
Briercrest Bible College; 

 
 Of Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation in the province 

of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend the Act of 
incorporation; 

 
 Of the Manitoba-Saskatchewan Conference of the 

Seventh-day Adventist Church praying for an Act to 
incorporate; and 

 
 Of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in the province of 

Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend The Act to 
incorporate the Saskatchewan Co-operative Wheat 
Producers Ltd. 

 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Shellbrook-Torch River: 
 
 That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Members' Bills be now concurred in. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In regard to the Act changing the status of the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, I have been requested to ask the Speaker for a 
ruling under rule 37 on a question of conflict of interest, 
whether or not the provisions of that Act in fact apply, a 
conflict of interest for members who are members of the 
Saskatchewan legislature, to in fact vote on that particular Act 
for the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member from Regina 
Rosemont has made a point of order. I will look at his point of 
order and reserve judgement on it and bring back a statement to 
the House. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 66, the private Bills 01, 02, 03, and 
04 are hereby laid on the Table and are deemed to be read the 
first time. 



February 23, 1995 

 
382 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on day 19 ask the government the following 
question: 
 
 Regarding the department of Provincial Secretary: (1) 

how many employee positions are there in the 90th 
anniversary office; (2) what are those positions, their 
job descriptions, and current monthly salaries; and (3) 
when did those positions commence and when are they 
scheduled to end? 

 
My second set of questions, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 19 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Environment and 

Resource Management: (1) how much has been paid 
this fiscal year to Phoenix Advertising Group by your 
department; (2) what were the services that were 
purchased or commissioned; and (3) were all services 
paid for actually received? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a few 
sets of questions. 
 
I give notice that I shall on day 19 ask the government the 
following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Municipal Government: 

(1) how much has been paid this fiscal year to Phoenix 
Advertising Group by your department; (2) what were 
the services that were purchased or commissioned; (3) 
were all the services paid for actually received? 

 
The second set of questions, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 19 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Justice: (1) how much has 

been paid this fiscal year to Phoenix Advertising Group 
by your department; what were the services that were 
purchased or commissioned; were all the services paid 
for actually received? 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 19 ask the government the following questions: 
 
 Regarding the Agricultural Corporation of 

Saskatchewan ,ACS: (1) how much money is 
outstanding on the $25 per acre production loan 
program; (2) what steps are being taken to recover this 
money; (3) at what date will all monies be recovered; 
(4) to date how many loans have been paid in full; (5) 
how many of these loans had write-downs, for what 
reason, at what rate of interest; and (6) were any loans 
forgiven; if yes, how many were forgiven; for what 
reason were the loans forgiven; and what do the  

forgiven loans total? 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 19 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Co-op upgrader: what is the total amount 

of royalties collected by the government as a result of 
the Co-op upgrader in the '94-95 fiscal year; what is the 
total amount of fees received by the government in the 
'94-95 fiscal year as a result of upgrader operations; and 
what is the total amount of taxes and any other form of 
revenue collected by the government concerning the 
upgrader for the '94-95 fiscal year? 

 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 19 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Lloydminster Bi-Provincial upgrader: (1) 

what is the total amount of royalties collected by the 
government as result of the Bi-Provincial upgrader in 
1994-95 fiscal year; (2) what is the total amount of fees 
received by the government in the 1994-95 fiscal year as 
a result of the upgrader operations; and (3) what is the 
total amount of taxes and any other form of revenue 
collected by the government concerning the upgrader 
for the 1994-95 fiscal year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I hope he 
takes no offence by this because I haven't been able to ask him, 
but I see a member of my constituency up in the gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, in your gallery, sitting up behind the clocks — you 
may not be able to see him — Dennis Barnett, former mayor of 
St. Walburg, in which capacity he served for many years. Thank 
you very much for coming down, and it's nice to see you. If 
everyone would join me in welcoming Dennis here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure 
today to introduce a constituent of mine sitting in the Speaker's 
gallery, Mr. Harvey McLane. Harvey is well known, working 
throughout the province in the Department of Health and 
working very hard for rural hospitals. He's now also the new 
candidate for Arm River for the Liberal association. I ask all 
people to welcome my constituent to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
an honour and privilege for me to introduce several guests in 
your gallery today, to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly. These are very talented people for whom I have a 
great deal of respect, and have made contributions not only to 
their communities but the province and, in some instances, to 
Canada. 
 



February 23, 1995 

 
383 

If they would stand, please, when I state their names, just so 
you can know who they are. Pat Edenoste, who has worked 
extensively with non-profit organizations and coordinated 
communications and public relations. Ron Osika, who is the 
former executive manager of corporate affairs for the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. Harvey McLane, 
who was introduced by the member from Arm River, who is a 
farmer, but is immediate past chairman of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations but remains on the 
Canadian board. Bob Bjornerud, who is a farmer, as well as 
being reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of Saltcoats. Linda 
Trytten, who is very involved in education, very innovative in 
distance education and in community development in the 
Rosetown area. And Brodie Partington, who is a recently retired 
Air Canada Boeing 747 captain. 
 
Would you please warmly welcome those individuals here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
friends that I would like to welcome through you to the 
legislature here today. And if they would stand when I 
announce their name. 
 
Bert Wilson, who is an organization consultant and 
communications specialist. Steve Helfrick, who is a former 
provincial civil servant and union shop steward. Steve served 
more than three years in South Africa with CIDA (Canadian 
International Development Agency) and he's operated a small 
business and a fishing camp in northern Saskatchewan. Ken 
Krawetz of Invermay, who is past president of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. Ken's an insurance 
broker and a farmer from Invermay. 
 
Dennis Barnett of St. Walburg. As we heard earlier, Dennis 
served as mayor of St. Walburg for 12 years and was director of 
the Rural Health Coalition as well as spokesperson for the 
Equal Tax Committee. 
 
Leslie Anderson of Regina. Leslie is the director of 
communications for Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association. 
 
And John Yeo, from Moosomin. 
 
And we welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take a moment as well to 
recognize the businessman from the Moosomin area, John Yeo. 
And I would just like to suggest, if you've got any pump 
problems, call John. He's Mr. Pump Man in Moosomin. So 
welcome, John, to the Assembly. 
 
I'd like to as well take a moment to recognize Mr. Dale Hassett 
who's been working with a group and Coalition in Support of  

the Family. And I think I see a group of students that may be 
here. He's involved with a school, a private Christian school in 
P.A. (Prince Albert), if I've got it right. 
 
And I think we'd like to extend a warm welcome to this group 
who have joined us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly a very distinguished person sitting in the 
west gallery. This is a person who is charged with the 
responsibility of being the provincial secretary for the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. And he is here today to 
observe the actions and activities of the very experienced and 
competent legislators here. 
 
I ask you all to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 
two very important people in your gallery, one being my 
daughter, Heidi Scott, and her friend Shelly Radcliffe, both of 
Indian Head. There's no school today, so they've come to see 
the proceedings here. And I ask that all members join in 
welcoming them here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I'd like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly 14 students from the Prince Albert Christian School 
that was referred to by my colleague, the member from 
Moosomin. I'd also like you to welcome their teachers, Dale 
Hassett, Gary Mason, Karri Luxton, and Lisa Ehlert, who are 
accompanying the students. So I'd like you all to give them a 
warm welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of the Assembly Mr. Bob Bjornerud from Saltcoats. He's the 
reeve of the municipality. I'd like to welcome him here to the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — No, there's nobody else standing. I waited 
until the last, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to join with the member from Saltcoats in welcoming 
Bob Bjornerud to the legislature. Saltcoats of course is my 
home town. And just a little note: with Bob Bjornerud's great 
pitching and my great fielding, we managed to capture the over-
40 baseball championships in Saskatchewan this year. So  



February 23, 1995 

 
384 

although we cooperate on the field, ball field, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it may be different in the political field. Welcome, Bob. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Twinpak Expansion 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday one of our 
growing manufacturing companies located right here in Regina 
announced a major plant expansion and modernization. 
Twinpak is in the business, making plastic containers and lids 
for the dairy, deli, and food industries throughout North 
America. The Regina plant, Mr. Speaker, is the third largest of 
its kind in Canada. Twinpak is one of the largest plastics 
packaging companies in the country. 
 
On Tuesday Twinpak's parent company announced an 
investment of $3.65 million to expand the Regina plant and 
upgrade to the most modern equipment. This investment shows 
great confidence in Saskatchewan's economy. Twinpak knows it 
can grow and prosper here because we have a positive business 
climate, a central location with convenient shipping routes, a 
stable and skilled workforce, and a quality of life that cannot be 
matched anywhere. 
 
Twinpak's expansion is good news for our economy for a 
number of reasons. It's proof that manufacturing companies, 
particularly those in the plastic sector, can be successful here in 
Saskatchewan. The expansion will put it in a position to win 
more new customers. Increased exports of manufactured goods 
brings revenue to the province. 
 
The company will also offer employees an opportunity to 
upgrade their skills, and as productivity and sales increase, 
Twinpak is expected to create more full-time jobs. 
 
Congratulation to Twinpak and everyone involved in making 
this winning expansion possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Construction of the Langenburg Health Centre 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to inform 
this Assembly of some good news that comes from my 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, a $2 million tender for the 
construction of the Langenburg Health Centre has been 
awarded to a local contractor, Timco Construction of 
Churchbridge. 
 
The health centre will be a vital part of community services in 
Langenburg and area. It will link the Centennial Special Care 
Home with the seniors' lodge, Southview Place. Completion is 
expected for next January. 
 
As well as creating a very important health facility, the project 
will also provide spin-off benefits to the local economy through  

the purchase of materials, the hiring of sub-trades, and the 
continued employment of Timco's personnel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the project is a result of a cooperative fund-raising 
initiative. Funds were provided by the provincial government, 
the federal infrastructure program, and the Langenburg Union 
Hospital Board now incorporated into the East Central Health 
District. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the citizens of 
Langenburg and surrounding communities, those who took part 
in the planning process for the facility, the members of the East 
Central Health Board, and Timco Construction for their efforts, 
which will provide enhanced health services and benefit the 
community for years to come. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Development of Saskatchewan Gold Mine 
 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, we've all heard stories about the 
1800s and the gold rush that occurred in the Klondike and how 
gold fever attracted and excited people from all over the world. 
 
Well there's excitement once again about gold, and it's all 
happening at Contact Lake in northern Saskatchewan. What 
was a prospector's dream in 1979 has now become a reality. 
This gold mine is the results of cooperative efforts of the 
provincial government, Cameco, and Uranerz working together. 
Hundreds of construction jobs were created during the 
development and further employment has been created for a 
hundred mining jobs. 
 
The mill can produce about one gold bar a week. Each gold bar 
has an estimated value of about $300,000. The significance of 
this project and its potential to the province was evident when 
the Premier participated in pouring the first gold bar. Usually 
when people think about gold in the province of Saskatchewan 
they are thinking about wheat, but times have changed. 
 
I would like to congratulate everyone who has helped to 
develop another worthwhile project in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Niche Markets Seminar 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As many members have 
noted in their statements lately, there is a recognized need for 
the diversification of the Saskatchewan agricultural economy 
through the development of niche markets for livestock, crops, 
food processing, as well as home-based businesses, and 
tourism. 
 
Today in Moose Jaw, another seminar is taking place which 
will provide information and advice for those who are  



February 23, 1995 

 
385 

interested in expanding or altering their operations. This 
seminar, called Focus on Niche Markets, has developed into an 
annual event for the entrepreneurs, homemakers, farmers, and 
community economic development committees. 
 
The program identifies needs and interests of its participants 
and provides expertise from several resource experts. Today, 
there are to be presentations on prairie tours, on home business, 
on specialty and forage crops, on livestock, and on food 
processing. Resource people are from the University of 
Saskatchewan, from private business, and from our own 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event is held in Moose Jaw, but it addresses 
the express needs of people all over the province who are 
excited about the prospects for Saskatchewan, and optimistic 
about the opportunities our expanding economy offers them. 
Events like this, great and small, in cities and in smaller 
communities, for farm families and for town residents, they 
show that Saskatchewan is on the move. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

MLA Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Associate Minister of Economic Development. Mr. 
Minister, you are one of five members of the current cabinet 
lucky enough to be covered under the old MLA (Member of 
Legislative Assembly) pension plan. 
 
If you were to retire next year, you would stand to collect a 
pension of about $900,000 by age 80. Do you think this is fair, 
Mr. Minister? Do you think it's fair to the taxpayers to give you 
such a lucrative pension, while you and your government are 
forcing Saskatchewan families to make so many sacrifices? 
What do you think? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just don't really know how to respond to a question like that. I'm 
no different than anybody else in this legislature. I've been 
around for 20 years, and I can assure you that any pension that I 
get, that I've earned the same as you've earned. And I don't 
really think question period should be taken up with such 
questions as you've just put forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I obviously beg to 
differ with the member that this is not worth the time of the 
legislature to bring this up. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the other Economic 
Development minister. Mr. Minister, your government has 
attacked the taxpayers of this province, but you have done 
absolutely nothing to restrain yourself. Under the old MLA  

pension plan you and six of your NDP (New Democratic Party) 
colleagues are going to become very wealthy at taxpayers' 
expense. You, sir, you stand to make 1.4 millions of dollars by 
age 80. 
 
Mr. Minister, instead of restraining taxpayers, why don't you 
show some self-restraint? Will you rescind the old MLA 
pension plan and bring your pension into line with the new 
plan? Will you do that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer that 
question from the member for Rosthern because I'm surprised 
to hear the Conservative official opposition now falling into the 
same trap as the Liberal leader, and that is not so much dealing 
with what the facts are. And it's more important what they don't 
say than what in fact they do say. 
 
And I think the member from Rosthern well knows that the 
Government of Saskatchewan in 1978 changed the 
Saskatchewan MLA pension plan as we did change pension 
plans for the public service and teachers and others, which has 
become a money purchase plan to which MLAs contribute, and 
it is matched and is the most tax friendly pension plan in all of 
Saskatchewan, in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is far different than what is being proposed by the Liberal 
government in Ottawa which the Leader of the Liberal Party 
represents in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, where they are not 
prepared to do that and in fact more or less continue their old 
pension plan. 
 
In Saskatchewan, and it is well reported even by the Taxpayers 
Association of Saskatchewan, we have the most friendly 
pension plan for MLAs in all of Canada, and that was done in 
1978. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it appears 
that the Deputy Premier is acting as a deputy prime minister and 
basically saying, I really don't have to answer to anyone about 
my own pension plan. It's just window-dressing what we're 
seeing happening in Ottawa. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you're very well aware of the fact, yes the 
pension plan was changed. But there are seven members on 
your side of the House who have lucrative pension plans, such 
as the new Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, your pension plan 
amounts to about $1.7 million by age 80. You're the Minister of 
Justice. Is this justice? Do you think it's just that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, many of whom are struggling to make ends meet, are 
going to give you $1.7 million by age 80? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat again 
what I said in my answer to the question from the member from 
Rosthern. That in 1978 — and I think there were some 
Conservatives in the House at that time — the pension plan for  



February 23, 1995 

 
386 

MLAs was changed. There were some MLAs who were left in 
the old plan at that time. And I think that's not unusual, Mr. 
Speaker. There's MLAs who have served in this legislature for 
well in excess of 20-some years, which is a long time. 
 
But steps were taken in 1978 to make the Saskatchewan 
pension plan for MLAs, public service, people working out of 
Crown corporations, all of which was negotiated with the 
public sector unions, to make the pension plans in this province 
self-sustaining; so that they continue to pay for themselves and 
have no obligation on the taxpayer at the time when the 
individuals, be they MLAs or public servants, retire. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me that 
the Deputy Premier here is just as adamant about his position as 
the Deputy Prime Minister was, and so I'm going to ask you this 
question, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
Your salary . . . or your pension is going to be $1.7 million by 
the time you turn 80 — $1.7 million, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
That's what you are going to take in by the time you reach 80 
years old, if you were to retire today. Does that seem fair to you, 
Mr. Deputy Premier? Or are you going to stand here and defend 
the actions of the Deputy Prime Minister the same way you 
have in the previous questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is 
somewhat humorous because in all of my wildest expectations 
about my longevity I have never expected to live beyond 100 
years of age, and I think in the member's calculations opposite I 
would have to live well in excess of 100 years of age to be able 
to benefit in the way he indicates we would be able to benefit. 
 
I can't speak for the Deputy Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would never want to be able to do that. I think 
the Deputy Prime Minister of Canada can speak for herself and 
can speak on behalf of the Liberal Party, whether they are 
provincial or federal Liberals, anywhere in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I'm saying is that members of this Legislative Assembly 
contribute 9 per cent of their salary to their superannuation. 
And I think that's a fair contribution. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
those people who have served here for many years have 
contributed significantly. But the point that's important to be 
made here, that it was the New Democratic Party government of 
this province in 1978 that made the first moves in all of Canada 
to reform the superannuation plans of members of the 
legislature and now has set the course for others who have had 
to follow. And my only wish is that the Liberal government in 
Ottawa, and under the encouragement of the Leader of the 
Liberal Party in this legislature, would follow suit to what this 
government did in 1978. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier,  

you may think this is humorous, but I can tell you the people of 
Saskatchewan don't think it's very humorous at all. The old 
pension plan, the old pension plan, the one that you and other 
members of your cabinet . . . is what we are talking about, not 
the current one, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
This brings us, this brings us to the big winner, the big winner 
in this pension sweepstakes  the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The Premier who on TV last Sunday said that 
everybody had to make sacrifices, everybody had to make 
sacrifices. What he should have said was, everybody but a few 
members of my cabinet. That's what he should have said. 
 
You haven't, the Premier hasn't, you haven't, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, sacrificed one dime of your pension. And the Premier's 
pension if he reaches the age of 80 will be $1.8 million; $1.8 
million is what he stands to collect from the taxpayers of this 
province. Who pays for that, Mr. Deputy Premier? The people 
of Saskatchewan pay for that. 
 
My question is very simple. Do you think this is fair? Do you 
think this is fair? Do you think this: you and your colleagues 
deserve those kinds of pensions, funded by the taypayers of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the 
members of the opposition have followed the pattern of the 
Leader of the Liberal Party. They have so desperately looked for 
something to be critical of in the budget and found nothing that 
they have to latch onto something like this. 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, what MLAs of this legislature 
have in fact contributed. Let me remind you, Mr. Speaker, and 
the members of this House, that it was under this government in 
1991 that cabinet ministers agreed to take a 5 per cent cut in 
their salary. That was a contribution. Now that does not meet, 
Mr. Speaker, the needs of deficit reduction, of debt repayment, 
but it is part of sharing what other people in this province have 
had to do in order to bring about a balanced budget. 
 
Let me remind the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that MLAs 
of this Legislative Assembly, including the members opposite, 
have frozen their salary since 1990 and continue to freeze it, 
and I think that's the appropriate thing to do. But I also ask the 
members opposite to consider what they did to this province 
when they were in government where they spent money on their 
friends and the former premier would load the briefcase of 
anybody who came along to collect money and put this 
province into a debt of almost $15 billion, which the taxpayers 
of this province and our children and their children are going to 
have to pay for generations to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Premier, 
since you won't answer the question, Mr. Deputy Premier, I'll 
answer it for you. 



February 23, 1995 

 
387 

No, it isn't fair. It isn't fair to the taxpayers who are being forced 
by your government to pay $1.8 million to the Premier of this 
province in pension benefits. That is not fair to the taxpayers of 
this province. Everybody knows it's not fair and that's why the 
pension plan in 1979 was changed, except for seven members 
of your cabinet, Mr. Premier. But your pension has not been 
changed. Everyone else's is an entirely different one, and you 
know that, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
You, the Deputy Premier, the Justice minister, the Economic 
Development minister, the Associate Economic Development 
minister — and the list goes on — you and you alone are 
exempt from the sacrifices that all other people in this province 
are being asked to be made, Mr. Deputy Premier. 
 
Why can't you just do the right thing, Mr. Deputy Premier — 
admit your pension is way out of line with everyone else's in 
this Legislative Assembly and bring it into line with the rest of 
the members of this Assembly? Then for once you'll have done 
something right for the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well first of all, I'm going to 
address the question of comparison that the Leader of the 
Opposition raises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But first of all, let me say this. I happen to know that the 
Premier of this province makes a considerable sacrifice to do 
the work that he is doing. It is a job that takes dedication, 
commitment. 
 
Well the members opposite laugh, Mr. Speaker. But I want to 
tell them that it is a job that he has done since 1991, which 
takes dedication, commitment, and an awful lot of courage, in 
spite of the opposition by the Tories and by Liberals in this 
House, as we took this province from a financial crisis situation 
to a balance and surplus in 1994, a balance in '94-95, and a 
balance into the future which is going to be sustainable. 
 
Now that took some commitment and that took some courage 
and I think it took some sacrifice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let me make the comparison. Let me compare what this 
Premier has done to what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I gave the Leader of the 
Opposition sufficient time to ask his question; asked other 
members to give him the opportunity to ask his question. I wish 
he would now listen to the Deputy Premier as he gives his 
answer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seventeen seconds left. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would like to remind the member 
from Rosthern that I determine the length of the answers and 
questions and not the member from Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm  

relieved at that. 
 
I want to say to the members opposite: when they make 
comparisons, I would like them to compare what the Premier of 
this province does and what he gets paid in remuneration to 
what they paid one George Hill, committed over $1 million in 
severance to their friend. 
 
I'm prepared, Mr. Speaker, I'm prepared to compare what the 
Premier of this province contributes to this province to what 
Senator Berntson, a Conservative senator, does and what he 
gets, and while he double-dips, while he gets his provincial 
MLA pension and gets a senator's salary, just as a senator that 
the member of . . . that the Liberal leader has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GRIP Premiums 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Agriculture. Yesterday, Mr. Minister, your 
Minister of Finance engaged in a debate over who has done 
more to harm farm families: the NDP in Saskatchewan or the 
Liberals in Ottawa. During the exchange, she said, and I quote: 
 
 . . . (I think if) we've done anything to agriculture, you 

wait until next Monday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure it'll be a toss-up as to who has betrayed 
rural Saskatchewan more. It will truly be a clash of the Titans. 
My question to the Minister of Agriculture: Mr. Minister, I'm 
wondering if you would acknowledge that it was the Premier 
and his government that got the ball rolling when you 
unilaterally and retroactively broke legal contracts with farm 
families in this province. 
 
Could you confirm that the changes to GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) your government implemented were 
responsible for the Premier to pilfer $188 million away from 
farmers and the federal Liberals to take 317 more. Would you 
confirm that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, I'm glad that we 
finally have the opposition parties coming around to agriculture 
after two or three weeks in the House . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Right. Mr. Speaker, it's also rather strange that 
the Leader of the Opposition, when he's at the Saskatchewan 
Cattle Breeders' Association, stands up and says that 
government should get out of agriculture  it should have no 
support programs whatsoever  and at the same time comes 
back in the House and says that in the best year that 
Saskatchewan farmers have had in quite a long time, they 
should get an $860 million pay-out. It's rather ironic whether or 
not he thinks that would fit in with our trade agreements that he 
so often talks about. 



February 23, 1995 

 
388 

Going back, we certainly did not take the GRIP surplus away 
from the farmers, Mr. Speaker. We in this province have 
changed our focus on agriculture. We have maintained . . . we 
are spending our money smarter. We've maintained a safety net 
for farmers. We've helped farmers with diversification and 
value added. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our farmers in 1994 had the best income they've 
had since 1980-something. And a good portion of that income, 
in fact the major portion, can be attributed to the diversification 
that the farmers did in this province, and we helped them to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — When Monday comes around and the federal 
budget has been presented, and like your Premier, the Prime 
Minister decides to download on the provinces, I'm wondering 
what your response will be. I'm wondering how you'll react 
when really he's simply following your lead. 
 
Will it be a response like you gave in the Moose Jaw Times-
Herald, February 1, '95 when talking about your GRIP program, 
and you said: "It was about enough to pay the premiums on 
GRIP. Some had enough money left over to buy a box of beer, 
but not much else." That's what you were talking about, the 
people that you're charged with representing — enough to buy a 
box of beer, Mr. Minister. 
 
When the Liberals see the Premier of Saskatchewan — the 
province with the most arable land in the country — 
confiscating GRIP premiums from farm families, they think it's 
okay. I'm curious, Mr. Minister. Tell us how you're going to 
feign concern and outrage when you've already set the 
precedent? What kind of a deal did you cut with the Liberals in 
Ottawa that would let you off the hook, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, the deal we cut with 
the federal government is well-known. We negotiated a new 
safety net to replace GRIP — not as rich a one as we would 
like, but we negotiated a deal. We now have a deal with the 
federal government for a replacement for GRIP. 
 
Alberta is now getting out of GRIP and they haven't got a 
replacement, and they are going to have to negotiate with the 
new federal budget. 
 
We have already put in place a reasonable program. We 
negotiated the best deal we could get with the feds. 
 
And we are supporting our farmers in both the safety net and 
with ag innovation fund where we're going to have $91 million 
going into the development side to create jobs and to create 
markets for Saskatchewan farmers and to continue with the 
diversification that our farmers have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Job Creation 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears that 
this government has been prepared to retroactively change 
absolutely everything except the pensions of the members on 
the front bench. One of the other things they've decided to 
retroactively change has been the plans that they've made for 
job creation in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whatever plans the NDP claim to have had — the 
plan to create 30,000 jobs; the plan to have 700 new companies 
come forward; the plans to rebuild rural Saskatchewan — those 
plans have failed. In fact the only success they've had in their 
planning has been to follow through on raising taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Economic Development. Your 
Partnership for Renewal targets were set before your 
government received windfall profits from oil and gambling, 
sir. How do you explain the difference between your Minister 
of Finance's forecast in her budget of 12,700 jobs created by 
1998 and your own projection of 30,000 jobs by the year 2000? 
I mean is your Finance minister working from a different plan 
than you are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to respond 
to the question because it gives me an opportunity to explain 
how the business people in the province are making out in 
creating jobs in the province, and they're doing very, very well. 
 
The Partnership for Renewal document which was created by 
business people, working people, and cooperatives along with 
the government in 1992 and released to the public in November 
of 1992, predicted and estimated 30,000 jobs by the year 2000. 
So far in the first two years of that program there were 5,000 
jobs created by business in 1993 and 2,000 net jobs in 1994 for 
an average of 3,500 per year. And some simple arithmetic 
would tell the minister if you multiply 3,500 by eight years 
you'll get about 30,000 jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, I suggest you read your 
Minister of Finance's budget address on page 32. The minister 
knows that StatsCanada have rebased their employment 
numbers for every province in Canada. The NDP job creation 
record is bad under the old and the new numbers. They have yet 
to get back to the 7,000 jobs lost since they took power for a 
full year in 1992, Mr. Speaker  a pathetic record in a period 
of booming commodity prices, strong export markets, and a low 
dollar. 
 
My question to the minister: in December 1994 you evaluated 
your own progress, Mr. Minister, and you gave yourself, and I 
quote, "good grades". How can you give yourself good grades 
when even under the new StatsCan numbers your government 
has created 1,000 fewer jobs than when you took power in 
1991? 
 



February 23, 1995 

 
389 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Partnership for Renewal 
document which you're referring to — which I say again was a 
creation of the business people as well as cooperatives, working 
people, along with their government — I think is working very 
effectively. The former president of the chamber of commerce, 
Mel Watson, referred to it as the bible for the business people 
on economic development in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mel Watson is not a well-known supporter of the New 
Democratic Party but believes firmly the work that was done in 
building this partnership is working very well. 
 
And this is the sense of all of the chambers that I have met with, 
and I've met with many of them across the province in the past 
year. The gloom and doom that you continue to perpetuate here 
in the Assembly is not borne out in the business community 
anywhere in the province. And I say to you that while you were 
driving around in the limousine with the Senator this past 
summer, spreading your gloom and doom, it wasn't being 
bought then and it's not being bought now because it's being 
done for one reason only. That's for the betterment of politics 
for you and the candidates who are with you here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government's record is tied to its own labour legislation and 
high tax and utility rates which have undermined the attempts to 
create jobs under your Partnership for Renewal plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, just the Thursday prior to the budget coming 
down there was a new document put forward and announced at 
the University of Regina. And that document tells specifically 
about how it is nothing could be done in Saskatchewan except 
retirement. And there should be 30,000 jobs created by the year 
2000. One of the things, sir, that you do not understand is that 
your particular record does not stand up to scrutiny. 
 
My question to you, sir: it is obvious that your own self-grading 
is less than objective. Will you provide the evidence to this 
House that shows exactly what jobs your plan has created and 
what companies and investment has come to this province as a 
result of your policies? Will you table that in this House, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that there have been many, many jobs created, 
not by the Government of Saskatchewan, but by the small-
business community. And you can continue to attack them for 
their lack of job creation if you want, but it's not being bought 
by anyone in the province. 
 
I don't even think, to look at the expression on the face of the 
member sitting behind you, that he buys your line about the lack 
of initiative on the small business in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He knows that you made a commitment to this Assembly that 
you would bring a project a week to my office. You promised 
that. You promised that. It is now I think week 130. We should  

have had 130 projects. You promised to bring them to me week 
by week. We can no more believe you on this issue than you 
can on your promise to bring a project a week. You haven't 
brought any. And the people of the province know that if you 
were elected as premier you would bring nothing but disaster 
and failure to the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, not that anyone wouldn't really trust your numbers and 
your claims in the province, but the facts remain the same: 
1,000 fewer jobs today, this month, this year, than when you 
took power in 1991. That is fact. But could you be kind enough 
to tell us how many companies have left Saskatchewan since 
you took office? Will you table those numbers as well, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the out-migration 
from Saskatchewan is a public document and you can go to the 
library and get the numbers. Or I will get them for you. And 
what it will show is that out-migration has slowed significantly, 
slowed significantly since the days that the member from 
Estevan and his group were in government, dropped 
significantly. The population of Saskatchewan has now grown 
for eight straight quarters. Each quarter the population has 
grown. And that's the first time since the mid-'80s. So get your 
numbers straight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The population of Saskatchewan 
now stands at 1.016 million and that has been growing for eight 
straight quarters of the past calendars. And I say to you, Madam 
Member, you should get your numbers straight because just like 
StatsCanada numbers you were using on the first day of the 
session, you're absolutely wrong on the population. It has been 
growing, will continue to grow as long as we are lucky enough 
not to have a Liberal government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1988 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Securities Act, 1988, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — A Bill to establish the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation and to enact a 

Consequential Amendment 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a 
Bill to establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation be 
now introduced and read the first time. 



February 23, 1995 

 
390 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, you were being so 
efficient today that when you dealt with ministerial statements it 
was so quick I didn't get an opportunity to rise. I ask leave of 
the House, if I may, to make a ministerial statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskTel-Norstar Venture 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud 
today that a SaskTel subsidiary has secured a $46 million 
construction contract with Ameritech, the fourth largest 
telephone company in the world, to do a major construction job 
in the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this 
is the largest ever international contract that has ever been 
undertaken by SaskTel or by a subsidiary of SaskTel. Norstar 
Network Services, a joint venture of SaskTel and Norstar 
Communications Ltd., will build fibre optic coaxial cable 
networks in Chicago and Detroit over the next two years. 
 
These networks will bring 235,000 customers in those cities the 
next generation of information highway services such as video 
on demand and enhanced entertainment and business services. 
Some analysts project that this will be a $50 billion business in 
this decade. About 30 per cent of that total will be spent on 
construction. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, Norstar was searching for a business 
partner and chose SaskTel, the company with arguably the most 
fibre optic experience on the continent of North America. In 
1984 the company built what was then the world's longest fibre 
network right here in Saskatchewan. And it was SaskTel 
technicians who worked on the fibre optic controlling system 
inside the Channel Tunnel, the largest construction project of 
the 20th century. 
 
So the corporation is extremely well positioned to play a 
leading role in future fibre optic ventures like this one 
throughout the world. Contracts like this say something to me, 
Mr. Speaker. It says that we have good people. It says that we're 
competitive. And it says that we're world class. And it says that 
we do it right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Construction will begin almost immediately. And the best news 
of all is that there is strong likelihood of future contracts in 
other American cities. New businesses and contracts such as 
this one are absolutely essential to keep SaskTel an asset for the 
people of the province as the corporation faces increasing 
competition. It also provides a diversified source of revenues 
for SaskTel and income from outside of this country, from other  

parts of the world, which will benefit the people of 
Saskatchewan as these kinds of diversifications take place. 
 
As SaskTel employs about 3,700 people in 60 communities 
throughout the province and is a significant driver in the 
Saskatchewan economy, I think that is in the interest of 
everyone who lives in this province. 
 
So on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
I salute Norstar and SaskTel on this major international contract 
and look forward to many other such contracts in the months 
and years ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I suppose 
this is good news for SaskTel and the province of Saskatchewan 
because perhaps this is one of the few government initiatives 
that will create some jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. But 
I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
would deal with a multinational corporation, and an American 
one to boot. It seems that philosophically this government over 
the years has had a great deal of difficulty with multinational 
corporations and especially American ones. 
 
When you look over what is involved with this new enterprise 
that they're taking on, you see it involves video. And I wonder 
very much, Mr. Speaker, whether this is sort of along the same 
line as the government's SaskTel operation of the 1-900 
numbers where the government is allowing SaskTel . . . foreign 
operators to use SaskTel phone lines to siphon money out of 
Saskatchewan's people's pockets for sex lines. They're also 
using the same type of technology, Mr. Speaker, to sell 
pornography into the hotels through SaskTel's lines, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would hope very much that this new project is 
not going in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd 
like to begin by repeating some of the minister's comments. His 
comment that contracts like this one says that we have very 
good people. Contracts like this says that we are competitive, 
and that it says that we can compete world class. I could not 
agree more with the minister's comments, Mr. Speaker. There is 
no question of the talents of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Further to that however, one must indicate that, and 
acknowledge, that fibre optics, having been discovered in this 
province, has not been utilized to our greatest benefit. Very, 
very often in fact, fibre optics has been given over to other 
places and we have lost some of our industry in this province to 
elsewhere. 
 
There's another comment that the minister made and that is that 
this kind of a contract is one that is going to be essential for 
SaskTel to remain an asset for the people of the province given 
the kind of competition it's facing, and I hope that the 
government is indeed examining what is transpiring in 
telecommunications. 



February 23, 1995 

 
391 

It is a serious thing when business people in this province, this 
year, have been approached by American telecommunications 
to purchase a new kind of service that in fact in the second that 
they punch in their numbers here, that it can be picked up by the 
telephone company in the United States and put through on 
their lines at cheaper rates. That in fact will bring forward the 
kind of competition that we really seriously have to look at if 
we want the long-term best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan to prevail. 
 
So as much as we are excited as a Liberal caucus with the 
announcement of this contract with SaskTel and Norstar, we 
hope that in fact the Government of Saskatchewan is looking at 
the security of the people of this province, and in particular the 
real asset of Sask Telecommunications in the long term. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to return 
no. 1, I would move that it be converted to motion for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Motion for return (debatable). 
 
(1430) 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. As I was 
saying yesterday when I was so rudely interrupted by the 5 
o'clock end of the day here, I've been in this legislature since 
1986 and I've sat through a number of budgets — one a year, 
sort of thing. I've listened to question periods and I've listened 
to budget responses. 
 
What strikes me about this one, even much more so than any 
other provincial budget, is I listen to question period and I listen 
to the opposition Conservatives and I listen to the third party 
Liberals, and you know, Mr. Speaker, I can't tell the difference. 
If I closed my eyes I would not know who was asking the 
question. One's the same as the other. 
 
I listened to their budget debate very, very carefully. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, if you closed your eyes you wouldn't know whether it 
was a Conservative or a Liberal mouthing the words. 
 

And the thing that strikes me about this budget is that question 
period as we saw today, today being the last day of the budget 
speech debate, the last day of the budget speech debate, not one 
question to the Minister of Finance, not one question from 
either of the two opposition parties. 
 
Why are they so quiet about this budget document that was 
presented in this legislature last Thursday? Could it be because 
it's the first time there's been a balanced surplus budget in 
Saskatchewan since 1982 when the Conservatives took office? 
Could it be because in addition to the $119 million surplus in 
the fiscal year now ending we're projecting a $25 million 
surplus next year and projecting balanced surplus budgets for 
the following three years right up to 1999? Could it be that 
they're so silent because in this budget we have real and 
meaningful tax relief for people — up to $300 for dual income 
families? Three hundred dollars is real tax relief. I'm delighted 
that we're finally to the point where we're able to do that and 
continue to provide balanced budgets into the future. 
 
Could it be that the opposition parties are so silent because in 
this budget we addressed real needs with real initiatives? We've 
addressed in this budget JobStart and student jobs and 
initiatives to help to provide job opportunities. 
 
Could it be because in this budget we've provided some real 
health initiatives that they're so silent on it? Could it be that 
$20.3 million for health services in communities creating, Mr. 
Speaker, 460 jobs — 460 jobs in health. Could it be that that 
has silenced the opposition on this provincial budget? 
 
Could it be that the fact that the cost of running the provincial 
government is down $300 million from when we took office in 
1991 — down $300 million by shifting some of the priorities 
into the much needed services to people? Could it be that many 
of the priorities are right on? Is that why the opposition is so 
silent? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Could be the news was too good. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Could be that the news is simply too good for 
them and they know there's no weakness in this budget. There's 
nothing for the opposition parties to attack. I'm delighted to 
stand here as a government member and say that. That must 
really hurt for the opposition parties to be unable to attack this 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I remember a politician who said 
there's so much more we can be. Who would that have been? 
There's so much more we can be, he said. This was the member 
for Estevan, the former Conservative premier of Saskatchewan, 
said it in 1982, who said yesterday in Hansard, and I'm going to 
quote this: 
 
 Personally I think Saskatchewan should have higher 

targets, that we should be stretching our limits . . . 
 



February 23, 1995 

 
392 

I think Saskatchewan should have higher targets — sounds like 
a little nuance on, there's so much more we can be. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Trew: — The member for Saskatoon Greystone said that 
in Hansard, February 22, 1995. The member for Meadow Lake 
deserves full marks for paying attention to an otherwise 
remarkably boring speech delivered by that member yesterday. 
 
But the similarities between we have to have higher targets and 
there's so much more we can be — nice words, sounds 
expansionary. Well we heard it from a right-winger in 1982 and 
we're hearing it from another right-wing leader in 1995. 
 
But how can we take that seriously, Mr. Speaker? How can we 
take the Liberal leader seriously when on the budget the Liberal 
leader was going on about 1995 income tax projections are 
even lower than before. She was bemoaning the fact that 
provincial personal income tax is going to be lower this coming 
year than it was last year. 
 
Well earlier, not three minutes ago, I was talking about an up to 
$300 tax break for a dual income family. Now you can't give 
that kind of a tax break and not collect less income tax on the 
personal income tax side. But what the Liberal leader 
conveniently forgot is that corporate income tax is projected to 
rise $29 million and corporate capital tax is projected to rise 
$27 million. Mr. Speaker, that's up $56 million on the corporate 
side while the personal tax side goes down. 
 
Now I shouldn't be surprised that a Liberal leader would be 
mouthing the same things in Saskatchewan that Liberals and 
Tories in Ottawa have been doing since . . . certainly since I was 
born. And the year I was born, 1953, was the last year that 
corporations and individuals both paid roughly 50 per cent of 
the income tax in Canada. The last time I checked, that has been 
skewed to the point where individuals pay something like 84 
per cent of the personal income taxes, leaving about 16 per cent 
of income taxes for corporations. This budget does something 
in a minor way to try and make that adjustment back in some 
minor degree. 
 
How can we take the Leader of the Liberal Party seriously, Mr. 
Speaker, when — and again I'll quote from yesterday — she 
says: The NDP has provided irrefutable evidence they will 
spend every tax dollar they can get their hands on. 
 
Well that kind of flies in the face of fact, Mr. Speaker — the 
fact that the cost of running the provincial government is down 
$300 million this year from 1991; the fact that we have been 
able to realize those efficiencies. And those efficiencies, I might 
add, have been done with a varying degree of difficulty. Ask 
some of the several hundred civil servants that were asked to 
pay what for us can only be described as the ultimate price, and 
the ultimate price of course is them ceasing to continue their 
employment as civil servants; in other words, their services 
were terminated. Ask them if the price was particularly low or if 
we could have extracted more from them. 

Mr. Speaker, we asked a very significant amount out of a 
number of people. I'm pleased that the number was relatively 
small and that most of the downsizing has been done through 
attrition and normal retirements. But for everyone that actually 
lost their job and didn't want to lose their job, no words can be 
comforting enough. They paid the ultimate price. 
 
On the other hand, there was some things that were significantly 
easier to do — things like the Premier continues to drive a 1989 
Buick. The Premier of the province of Saskatchewan drives a 
1989 Buick with a growing number of kilometres on it. 
 
All of the cabinet with the exception of two, are driving 
vehicles that were owned by the province of Saskatchewan's 
Central Vehicle Agency prior to the election of the New 
Democratic government in October 1991. 
 
The two exceptions are the Minister of Environment and the 
former minister of Energy. Both have natural gas fuelled mini-
vans, natural gas being potentially one of the fuels of the future. 
 
So every cabinet minister driving vehicles that date 1990 or 
earlier is a step. It certainly flies in the face of what the former 
Conservative minister of Finance did when he bought a full-
sized van as his vehicle in the dying months, within six months 
of the provincial election of 1991. He bought this van with a 
trailer hitch so he could pull his boat to the lake and enjoy his 
last summer at taxpayers' expense. 
 
How can we take seriously, Mr. Speaker, a Liberal leader that 
talked about giving credit to the federal Liberal government. 
She talked about the — and I want to quote out of Hansard, 
yesterday, February 22 — she says, and I quote: 
 
 Oil revenues weren't the only thing that covered up the 

NDP's bad planning. They got more — not less — more 
money . . . than they . . . planned on. 

 
Talking about the federal government. And you know what? 
The Liberal leader was right. The Canada Assistance Plan, we 
got eleven and a half million dollars more than we'd planned 
on. And we also got $15 million more out of established 
program funding from the federal Liberal government. That's a 
total of twenty-six and a half million dollars more. 
 
What the Liberal leader forgot, very conveniently, was that 
equalization payments were down $31 million, and that other 
federal government revenue was down $6 million, for a total of 
37 million, leaving on balance the provincial treasury ten and a 
half million dollars short. Now she may sing the Hallelujah 
Chorus and the praises to the federal Liberal government for 
short-changing the province of Saskatchewan ten and a half 
million dollars. I don't think that warrants us starting the wave 
or anything like that for the federal Liberal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen repeatedly things taken out of 
context, facts partially presented. We've seen an individual that, 
well, today introduced some Liberal candidates; on other days  



February 23, 1995 

 
393 

we've seen her introduce people as part of the Liberal family. 
We've seen her introduce a fair number of former Tories. I've 
talked about a number of them before. I'm just going to leave 
that alone. I don't want to enter into that in this budget debate. 
But we see a whole lot of Conservatives who are now Liberals. 
We see a whole lot of Liberals who became Conservatives and 
now some of them are slipping back to the Liberal Party. 
 
The new politics is real interesting, Mr. Speaker. The new 
politics of let's get in touch with the grass roots of the province; 
let's try riding around in Senator Sparrow's limousine; and this 
is the way to get in touch with the grass roots of the people. It's 
really interesting to me to see that. 
 
The Leader of the Liberal Party is the same leader who 
promised 130 weeks ago that she would deliver to the Minister 
of Economic Development an idea a week for job creation — 
an idea a week, 130 weeks ago. When the Minister of 
Economic Development reminded the Leader of the Liberal 
Party of that just about 10 or 15 minutes ago, I heard . . . well 
what I heard is, I will; just call an election. Well that's kind of a 
little twist on a job project a week. Oh just wait until the 
election and then I'll dump 100 and how many? — 180 job 
ideas, 180 all at once? I don't think that the member opposite 
can do it. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to stand here and support this 
provincial budget. I want to commend the Minister of Finance, 
the cabinet, for the terrific job that they have done in rallying 
behind the leadership of the Premier in bringing Saskatchewan's 
finances to the state they are now, to the state where we can 
refocus. Instead of focusing in on a debt, on a deficit problem, 
we can now refocus and go after job creation with the same 
vigour and determination and with the same great results that 
we've had with the fiscal situation. 
 
I'm looking forward to us doing similar things respecting jobs. I 
will be proudly voting and supporting this provincial budget. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's indeed 
a pleasure to stand in this Assembly and take a few moments 
just to bring a few points forward in regards to the budget 
speech debate that we heard presented by the Minister of 
Finance just about a week ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've listened for the last few days to a number of 
government members stand in this Assembly and give the 
minister glowing accolades for the budget which she presented, 
which I'm beginning to wonder where all the accolades are 
coming from as the budget was sure devoid of a lot of 
information and any real growth or opportunity in this province. 
 
Now we can give the minister . . . they can certainly give the  

minister glowing reports and give her some accolades in the 
fact that the budget is balanced at the present time. 
 
But the interesting part is how was the budget balanced. Was 
the budget balanced on the basis of good government, good 
management, or as we have seen and as the Provincial Auditor 
has pointed out, and even at least the Alberta Finance minister 
was willing to recognize, that it was good fortune more than 
anything that allowed the minister to balance the books this 
year. 
 
And I trust that as we go into the next number of years, I 
believe the minister presented to us a four-year plan to maintain 
surplus budgets. But it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, what kind of 
a plan. 
 
It's easy to forecast tomorrow that you'll have a $24 million 
surplus in the next budget or $115 million surplus, but can the 
minister forecast what resource revenues will be? And this year 
up a whopping 200, over $200 million in resource revenues 
which the government didn't really plan for; it didn't realize it 
might come in. 
 
And those are the types of things that come at the spur of the 
moment; they're cyclical in nature. And we're going to be asking 
the minister what has the minister done to offset the fact that 
that resource revenue may not be there next year. 
 
What about agriculture? We've seen a significant increase this 
year. And I believe the Minister of Agriculture pointed out the 
fact that even on the news today, the media brought out the fact 
that agriculture had a major net return, the first glowing report 
in the agricultural community since 1988. 
 
But the fact is as well, Mr. Speaker, that while agriculture is 
looking great today, it may not be there tomorrow. We have to 
pray that we get some good, solid weather conditions, sound 
weather conditions; that there's a decent crop next year; that the 
prices remain where they are. 
 
And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as much as we would like to, 
if we could maintain the present expense level and the cost of 
the inputs in agriculture, it certainly . . . agriculture would be 
probably presenting a very positive picture next year. 
 
So these are some of the things that I think we must take into 
consideration. And I think it would have been only appropriate 
for the minister to acknowledge as her colleague did in Alberta, 
that there were some circumstances that took place this year that 
allowed the government to bring in a surplus budget two years 
ahead of schedule. The fact that that balance was achieved this 
year, the minister certainly can receive credit for that. 
 
However, people across this province have aided the minister in 
achieving this goal. And, Mr. Speaker, now all of a sudden we 
hear the Premier and cabinet ministers running around this 
province and saying thank you to the people of Saskatchewan, 
while last year and even up until the presentation of the budget,  



February 23, 1995 

 
394 

the Premier and the Finance minister and many of the 
colleagues across the way would continue to say: no, we didn't 
increase taxes; no, we didn't charge Saskatchewan people more. 
But people have been telling me that's not true. Because they've 
been asking me, they've been reminding me, about their power 
bills, about their telephone bills, about their energy bills. 
 
And on that basis, I can say it's at least give the Minister of 
Energy . . . it took a new Minister of Energy and Mines to at 
least look at the SaskEnergy rates and give back a reduction of 
6.5 which, yes, it's appreciated, but it still doesn't come . . . and 
doesn't meet the fact that the price of natural gas has gone down 
by more than 10 per cent. So they give back a little bit. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, as we will see in the future and as we see 
in the years, will see in the next few months, this government is 
continuing to rely on the family of Crown corporations to 
basically tax the people of the province through the back door 
in order to meet their obligations. 
 
Let me take a look at health care. This government stands up 
and the members stand up and tell us how good health care is. 
Yesterday we raised the point about a gentleman who called us 
because he's been on a waiting-list for some 17 months for eye 
surgery. And because of his problem, his eyes deteriorating, his 
vision deteriorating, the specialists even bumped him up to an 
emergency list. 
 
But they had to tell him last week: sorry, that emergency list has 
just been backed off a bit because the funding for eye services 
at City Hospital in Saskatoon have been cut off and we have to 
wait until the new budget year before we can continue 
providing the service. 
 
And that's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. But what it does is it 
points out the fact that these members aren't being totally honest 
with the people of Saskatchewan when they say we have such a 
good service and we haven't taxed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people across rural Saskatchewan 
— not only rural Saskatchewan but even in the city of Regina 
and Saskatoon — who are facing difficulties. And I've visited 
patients in hospitals in both of our major centres. And it's 
interesting to note some of the comments you get from people 
in discussing our health care system and where we are today 
and where we were yesterday when maybe in some cases some 
of these patients were in the hospital two or three years ago. 
 
What I'm finding, Mr. Speaker, is that there are many people 
very disturbed with the trend in health care, very disturbed with 
the way the change has taken place, and disturbed with the fact 
that this government said they needed to cut 52 hospitals across 
this province. And guess where the cuts were made — in rural 
Saskatchewan where people have to travel great distances. 
 
Fifty-two hospitals were cut. Positions for nurses and staff 
people were cut. And not only just in the 52 hospitals but right 
across this province there's been reductions in staff, care, and 
services, Mr. Speaker. And that was all because they were  

going to save some money. And yet, Mr. Speaker, how much 
money was saved? 
 
Look at the expenditures in health in this year's budget — $1.56 
billion. No different than it was back in 1991. It was $1.5 
billion then; it's $1.5 billion today. The same amount of 
expenditure with a lot less services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that many of the nurses who lost jobs, 
many of the orderlies and the staff people, the cleaning people 
and many of these facilities who had . . . that was an extra 
dollar that was coming into their homes, are grateful today to 
this government for what they've done with health care. 
 
How many of the people across Saskatchewan who were cut, 
who felt the impact of the cuts in health care, are pleased to see 
the family of Crown corporations in this province continuing to 
grow. 
 
 Mr. Speaker, this government prides itself on being a 
compassionate government. In a lot of cases I don't find there's 
a lot of . . . people feeling that there was a lot of compassion 
shown in the way the cuts were made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a number of instances I've run across situations 
where people have been forced to go to other communities for 
the care they need. And when I talk about being forced to go to 
other communities, we were discussing this just the other day. 
Just recently I asked the Minister of Health why the community 
of Avonlea,, who have the finances, the resources, and people 
within the community are willing to put up the resources to 
build a private care home, a 40-bed care home, why that 
community cannot receive a licence to build that care home. 
 
And yet there are people in need of care home services in that 
community and in the surrounding area. And the government 
says, the minister two weeks ago told us, wait until next week. 
That was last week. He said wait until next week and I've got a 
major announcement that I'll be making. And I'm sure you will 
be happy with that announcement. 
 
Well, what was the announcement? The announcement, Mr. 
Minister, was an increase of $20 million to health care — 5 
million this year, with 15.3 million in '95-96. And where's it all 
going? It's all going into expanded home care services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there's nothing wrong with home care 
services. In fact I think that home care meets a very definite 
need in allowing people to remain in their homes as long as it's 
physically possible for them to do so, and as long as it's feasible 
for proper and adequate care and cost-efficient care. 
 
But there comes a time, Mr. Speaker, when many people find it 
very difficult and it would seem to me, as I look at the numbers 
and as I look at the money that's going into home care and as it 
was pointed out to me last night, home care becomes more 
costly than offering care in a special care home. 
 



February 23, 1995 

 
395 

And so we have to ask the minister, where are you today? 
Where is the minister with this big announcement? He basically 
led the people of Avonlea to believe that in this major 
announcement that he would also come out with a response to 
their request as to where the . . . their request was for a licence 
to operate their care home. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we can see that there are many people across 
this province who are concerned, and our elderly are very 
concerned. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it's not just our caucus. It's not 
just people around the province who have been talking to our 
Conservative caucus about the concerns. We even find that their 
own members are having grave difficulty in understanding what 
has transpired in the health care field, how they have decimated 
health care. And it's obvious the member from Rosetown-Elrose 
doesn't really want to hear about the decimation in health care. 
 
And I refer to a letter to the editor by a Dr. Lewis Draper who 
made some suggestions regarding health care, who brought 
forward the fact that he felt there were some significant costs 
that have been inflicted upon the people of Saskatchewan 
because the government didn't have a real plan in place when 
they decided to amalgamate smaller hospital districts into large 
districts and when they determined that they were going to cut 
52 hospitals. And I can appreciate his concerns because a 
number of those hospitals were in his constituency. 
 
The member represents the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg riding. And 
the member suggested that on the basis of acute care beds and 
physical presence there would be beds available at Ponteix, and 
he's talking looking at a 50 mile radius, and he's not necessarily 
referring to the fact that we resurrect all 52 hospitals, and nor 
am I, Mr. Speaker. I realize and most people realize that there 
were appropriate cuts and reductions in hospitals around the 
province. But he's suggesting that if we even looked at a 50 
mile radius that there would be beds available at Ponteix, 50 
miles from Swift Current; Mankota, 50 miles from Ponteix and 
Gravelbourg; and Coronach, 50 miles from Assiniboia, in 
addition to the acute care beds in Gravelbourg and Assiniboia. 
 
And I think. Mr. Speaker, if the government would have taken 
the time to very systematically look at the problems in health 
care, they would have realized it wasn't the hospitals out there 
that were operating that was creating the problem. It is the way 
funding was being allocated. And a lot of these centres were 
down to maybe 3 or 4 or 5 acute care beds, and they were 
becoming costly. 
 
But I think if we would have looked at areas where you could 
have put a hospital . . . and it may not have been a large centre, 
but as long as the centre had . . . and I have to agree with Mr. 
Draper, that even 50 miles away you knew that there was a 
small . . . Or the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Sorry 
about that, Mr. Speaker. The member from Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg, if he would . . . As he's indicated, if you would 
have looked at it systematically and put a centre or a hospital or 
a number of acute care beds, whether it was a 10-bed hospital 
or a 12-bed acute care facility, it would meet the need out there. 

And I find, Mr. Speaker, just right in the newspaper today about 
an individual who was brought in from Melville to the Plains 
Health Centre with a broken leg, went to go home, told that 
they could hire an ambulance or get someone privately to take 
them home, and found out the ambulance trip was going to cost 
them $288, when the ambulance was sitting here and making 
the trip back to Melville anyway. 
 
And they were sent out because they needed the bed in Regina, 
and they were being sent to their home centre. Well she's 
fortunate; she can be sent back to Melville. There's a hospital 
there. But there are many other communities where, where do 
you send patients? 
 
(1500) 
 
And I've had individuals tell me that they've actually had nurses 
complaining about people who have been sent out of our large 
urban centres who should not have been sent out. And there's a 
clear example even in my own community of an individual who 
should have spent a few more days receiving care before she 
was sent home to her . . . actually sent not to the hospital but to 
her own home. And, Mr. Speaker, it nearly cost her her foot. 
And I think that certainly doesn't speak very well of health care 
in this province. 
 
As I indicated, I appreciate the fact and we will acknowledge 
that certainly there is nothing wrong with putting more money 
into home care. But I think one of the things that still has to be 
reviewed — and I trust the Minister of Health has taken the 
time to review this — is how home care services are handled, 
the type of home care services that are made available. Because 
it seems to me that even with home care a lot of times money is 
wasted in the type of services we render through the home care 
program. I believe it's very important that we look at the 
medical needs of individuals. 
 
And one of the things I bring up and that was raised with me 
even last night is the fact that we've got people running into 
homes of home care patients and cleaning on a monthly basis. 
Most people do a thorough cleaning maybe once a year, maybe 
twice a year. But is it necessary to do a full house cleaning on a 
monthly basis? I think those are some things we need to look at. 
 
Was it necessary to take away the ability of the neighbour's son 
or daughter to go out and shovel the walk or mow the grass, and 
that little bit of extra money they could make, by sending home 
care in to do that work, Mr. Speaker? So those are some of the 
things that people are saying. I don't think we need . . . home 
care needs should be providing those types of services. 
 
I guess the other area, Mr. Speaker, and that speaks very loudly 
about this government, is the fact that this budget never 
mentioned a thing about gambling. And the auditor has pointed 
out that there are significant revenues that will be generated 
through gambling that will be coming into the coffers of this 
government. The only thing that . . . the government did talk 
about the fact that they've increased funding to help individuals 
who've become addicted to gambling. And I guess it's only fair  



February 23, 1995 

 
396 

to say yes, that's appropriate, and yes, it's fine. And we 
acknowledge that that's a worthwhile endeavour. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave for the introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleagues for giving me this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you a long-time friend 
of mine, Mr. Jim Feley who is sitting in your west gallery. Jim 
is accompanied here today with his son Jeff, and, Mr. Speaker, I 
had the opportunity of introducing them to the members here a 
few days back, and they had the opportunity of taking in the 
proceedings of the House at that time. They so much enjoyed it 
at that time, Mr. Speaker, they came back for a repeat 
performance. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all of my 
colleagues in the House to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we're also pleased to see these 
distinguished guests having taken this time to come to the 
House and listen to the debate. And we trust that even the 
debate this afternoon will give them a little more information 
and food for thought that they can mull over as to the 
truthfulness of everything that the budget the government is 
throwing at them . . . on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before we had introduction of 
guests, I indicated that one thing that the government neglected 
to do was talk about their gambling program and the amount of 
revenue that they endeavour to bring in by gambling. And I 
guess the reason they neglected to do it, because it's been a . . . 
the portfolio of gambling has been one that has weighed heavily 
on many people's shoulders. 
 
And I note that over the period of three short years, we are now 
on gambling minister number 5 which is an indication to me 
that it is a portfolio that not a lot of members were really 
looking forward to and found it very difficult and were glad to 
be moved out of and allowed somebody else to move into. I  

think what it's saying is that that's one of the reasons we see a 
government that is floundering in knowing what to do with the 
gambling program that they have basically initiated and now a 
program that wants to just go full steam ahead, and they don't 
know really how to pull the reins in. 
 
And because of that program that is going full steam ahead and 
— I might add — helter-skelter, they have a problem with so 
many people facing problems with gambling addiction that now 
they're throwing extra money at it. And I guess in that respect 
we can say it's fine. We believe it's appropriate that that extra 
money is thrown at it. But at the same time, is that dealing with 
the real question? 
 
While the government on one hand raided the White Bear 
Indian Band and shut down their so-called illegal casino 
although it's . . . one would question whether it was illegal 
because the debate is still taking place in the courts. 
 
We see on the other hand, they sit down, they're sitting down 
with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), 
and working out agreement with the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations to prevent casinos from popping 
up across the province. However they can and will appear on a 
number of reserves across this province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, as we get into the debate further, we will 
find that there are many people across this province who have 
some serious reservations about gambling and about using 
gambling as a means of deriving revenue. And it's not just in 
centres like Saskatoon, where they voted overwhelmingly 
against it. It's not just in centres across rural Saskatchewan, 
even in my communities, but even many of our native leaders 
and native people have some very serious and deep concerns 
with regards to an expanded gambling program. 
 
I think . . . I've been approached by people who have raised the 
question, and they've raised the question because they've 
worked very hard to try and control alcohol addiction and drug 
addiction on their reserves. And they just see this as another 
avenue that they're going to have to work hard to try and 
maintain their integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are many things that must be debated 
as we get into further debate with regards to the gambling issue. 
It certainly is a contentious issue and, as we've already seen just 
in the news just prior to and following Christmas, we've seen a 
number of people that have already been convicted because of 
gambling addictions. And that's just in a very short period of 
time. These VLTs (video lottery terminal) haven't been out there 
very long and already people are finding themselves in a 
problem and stealing from their employers to support their 
habit. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is indicative of the problems 
that we face, and we will certainly have many more questions 
we would like to raise and will be raising not only with the 
Premier . . . not only with the minister but with the Premier and 
his government as well. 



February 23, 1995 

 
397 

Let me end my few comments this afternoon by just pointing 
out one fact, and that is the Provincial Auditor's observations of 
the budget. And while the Provincial Auditor gives the Minister 
of Finance a passing grade for bringing in a balanced budget on 
the general revenue side of government, the Provincial Auditor 
has also taken the time to let us know and let the people of 
Saskatchewan know that that portion of balancing the books is 
only 60 per cent of the actual spending and expenditures in the 
province of Saskatchewan; and that the government wasn't and 
has never really been truthful with the people of Saskatchewan 
by not presenting the whole picture. And let me quote: 
 
 Withholding CIC dividend gives inaccurate budget 

picture . . . 
 
 By withholding money in the Crown Investment Corp. 

(CIC) and the liquor board, the government is not giving 
an accurate picture of the 1994-95 budget, says 
provincial auditor Wayne Strelioff. 

 
And then he goes on to indicate what the government had 
budgeted for last year to come out of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), but they decided not to take it. 
And I guess it's appropriate that that decision was made because 
of the windfall profits that happened to come into their 
possession through agriculture and through the resource sector. 
And now it appears even the unions are helping to balance the 
books. 
 
 While Thursday's budget was "a strong financial plan of 

the part of government under the general revenue fund" 
it is . . . not complete (he said) . . . 

 
And that's one of the arguments that we must make and bring 
forward to this government. It's time we presented the broad 
picture, the whole picture of expenditures, rather than just 
spending time on a small, minute portion of expenditures in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there certainly is much more that could be raised, 
but in view of the time, in view of the fact that there are other 
members who would like to speak in this debate, I would be 
pleased to thank you for having given me the opportunity to 
speak this afternoon, and sit down and let other members have 
the opportunity now of addressing the budget speech debate. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — It gives me great pleasure to enter this 
debate in support of the budget presented a few days ago by my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance. 
 
Balancing a budget, the first in 13 years, is a monumental task, 
one which requires courage, commitment, and compassion. Our 
government's four-year balanced budget and debt management 
plan is realistic, honest, and practical. It's an approach that 
Saskatchewan people will endorse because that is the approach 
that they take in regard to their own affairs. 
 
Our plan provides tax relief in measured steps, steps that won't  

jeopardize the province's fiscal position. It makes debt 
repayment an integral part of our financial future, and it 
continues to provide funding for services and programs that 
benefit all Saskatchewan people and contribute to their quality 
of life. 
 
Throughout our 90-year history, the people of this beautiful 
province have always risen to meet great challenges. They are 
resilient, self-sufficient, compassionate, and wise. They believe 
in prudent fiscal management, both in their personal lives and 
in the operations of their government. They believe that all 
people deserve a decent quality of life, that fair taxation is a 
foundation of a society that values social and economic justice, 
and that governments are the instrument through which all this 
is achieved. They understand that governments provide 
programs and services to Saskatchewan people directly through 
the government bureaucracy or indirectly through third party 
transfers. 
 
Unlike the Leader of the Liberal Party they know that 
government is not some faceless, foreign, greedy monster and 
that expenditure cuts means cuts in services and cuts in transfer 
payments. They will not quickly accept the opposition's 
exaggerated political rhetoric on taxation and government. They 
realize that a fair and responsible taxation regime is a better 
method for paying for public services than a system of user 
fees. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is really what the Liberal 
leader supports when she attacks taxation. 
 
I want to quote an article from the Calgary Herald on Friday, 
an article that was written by Catherine Ford, and I quote: 
 
 A . . . system of user fees is the answer to . . . (the tax 

protester's) dream. That way, they don't have to 
subsidize anyone. It is a slimy way out of . . . social 
responsibility that doesn't suit your own particular frame 
of reference. 

 
For tax protesters like the leader of the Liberals, taxation 
becomes a convenient rallying cry for people who in their hearts 
believe in the user fee system, a system which is really a system 
that rewards the haves and marginalize the have-nots. It is a 
right-wing agenda that the members opposite have bought into 
because today they believe it is politically popular to discredit 
the purpose of government, the role of the public servants, and 
the benefits of a fair and responsible taxation system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the remarks made by the Leader of the 
Opposition are irresponsible, dishonest, and manipulative, and 
it proves that they will stop at nothing in order to achieve 
political power. The Liberal leader has no consistent policies on 
which to build a responsible government and furthermore she 
has allegiances to no one, not even her Liberal counterparts in 
Ottawa. That, in my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not 
leadership that shows integrity, honesty, and credibility. 
 
Now in regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the budget in my 
department, we continue to provide a wide range of services to  



February 23, 1995 

 
398 

local governments, public safety, social housing programs, and 
cultural and recreation agencies. My remarks in this Assembly 
will not cover all the elements of such support but I do want to 
focus on a number of programs and services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, revenue sharing is an important part of 
providing financial support to our more than 800 rural and 
urban municipalities. Our revenue-sharing transfers to rural 
municipalities last year allowed them to construct almost a 
thousand kilometres of rural roads and almost 60 kilometres 
where we resurfaced. 
 
This year, with the assistance of the $33.23 million in revenue-
sharing grants, there will be even more road work in those 
municipalities. So far, approximately 248 RMs have applied to 
construct and service almost 1,460 kilometres of road. 
 
The urban revenue-sharing grants, which amount to $46.534 
million, will continue to provide urban governments with 
reasonable level of support for their local services and 
programs. 
 
(1515) 
 
It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that during the last three 
years when the provincial government has been coping with its 
deficit-fighting plan, we have continued to provide reasonable 
support to local governments. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the total 
reduction over the last three years has amounted to $6.7 million 
or about 1 per cent of the total budget of 670 million that 
accounts for all municipal government budgets. 
 
The impact of this $6.7 million reduction has equalled 
approximately one to one and a half mills in pressure on the 
property tax. Our approach to support for municipal 
governments in this province is dramatically different than the 
approach used by our neighbours in Alberta — a province that 
is so often held up as a shining example. There they have 
eliminated their transfers to municipal governments, and as well 
they are transferring 100 per cent of the property assessment 
cost to local government. 
 
In Saskatchewan, revenue-sharing transfers have now been 
stabilized. But in response to requests from municipalities, we 
must turn our attention to review and reform. It has been about 
20 years since the revenue-sharing program was first 
introduced. Conditions have changed, objectives have changed, 
and needs have changed. 
 
We must re-examine the principles on which transfer payments 
are allocated to municipalities. The following principles should 
guide us in this discussion. There should be increased emphasis 
on equalizing the capacity of municipalities to provide services 
to residents. Equalization would focus on the cost of providing 
services rather than the cost of maintaining local administrative 
structures. Funding should continue to be unconditional so as 
not to distort local service priorities. Financial assistance should 
be targeted to support the provision of primary municipal 
services such as police and fire protection, streets and roads,  

and water and sewer services, and we should encourage 
intermunicipal cooperation and effective service delivery. 
 
And finally, any new formula should be fair and equitable, 
predictable, efficient to administer, effective at achieving 
objectives, and fit with other provincial programs and 
initiatives. It is our intention to engage in discussions with the 
urban governments on a new formula that could be 
implemented by 1996-97. 
 
Another important initiative that is taking on greater 
significance, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, is the provision 
of emergency services such as police, fire, ambulance, and 
emergency measures. To ensure that in the future there is a 
coordinated approach to delivery of appropriate services, the 
provincial government is facilitating a review of existing 
services that will involve representatives from SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, SaskTel, and service 
providers. The goal is to make improvements to the emergency 
service delivery system. This review is looking at 
communication systems, geographic information systems, 
management coordination, accessibility, responsibility, and 
affordability. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan our cooperative spirit has 
helped us overcome challenges before and it is helping us now. 
Saskatchewan municipalities are participating with their 
neighbours in ever-increasing numbers. Our research shows that 
there are literally thousands of intermunicipal agreements in 
this province. These agreements are a practical and cost-
effective approach to providing sustainable services. Our 
government's intercommunity cooperation program has helped 
to focus interest in this area by funding new and innovative 
approaches to shared service delivery. 
 
In 1995-96, the ICC (intercommunity cooperation) program will 
be extended, with a commitment of a further $350,000 to be 
used by municipalities working together to find innovative ways 
of sharing services and reducing costs; $50,000 of this program, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be dedicated to helping municipalities 
who want to pursue restructuring options. 
 
There has been a lot of discussion recently about the VLT 
program. It has been 18 months since the VLTs were introduced 
at the urging of the hospitality industry and a number of rural 
communities who argued that too many Saskatchewan people 
were spending their gaming dollars south of the border or in 
other provinces where electronic gaming had already been 
introduced. 
 
From the beginning our government has been determined that 
this expansion of the gaming industry must be controlled and 
carefully regulated. We have also been determined to carefully 
assess the social impacts of gaming and to deal with those 
impacts in a thoughtful and sensitive way. Recently I had the 
opportunity to announce another measure that will have a  



February 23, 1995 

 
399 

positive impact on all of our communities. 
 
Effective April 1, nine and a half million dollars, or 10 per cent 
of the government's net VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues, 
will be designated to local communities. SUMA, SARM, and 
SAHO will advise us on how best to distribute these funds for 
the maximum benefit of local people. How it should be 
allocated and what it should be used for will depend upon the 
recommendations received from these associations. 
 
I want to make it clear to the members of this Assembly, the 
commitment we made is to share 10 per cent of the net income 
each year in perpetuity. The remaining VLT revenues are now 
shared with communities through programs and services 
financed by the government's General Revenue Fund. However, 
by targeting the remaining 10 per cent of this revenue more 
directly, we're able to enhance the benefits communities may 
receive from the VLT programs while still maintaining our goal 
for a balanced budget. Our objective is to place this money into 
the hands of local people to serve community needs in more 
direct and tangible ways. 
 
As I said, we are waiting for the three associations to give us 
direction on the method for distributing the funds and the 
purpose for which they should be used. This is a permanent 
commitment which the Government of Saskatchewan has been 
able to make because we have been able to make . . . because 
we have been able to meet all of the targets in our balanced 
budget plan. 
 
The provincial government is sensitive to the needs of people 
with disabilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The province, in recent 
years, increased grants to communities to assist them in the 
provision of transit services to people who are disabled. An 
estimated $2.15 million was committed to the operations and 
capital costs of this service in this fiscal year. 
 
This represents a 15 per cent increase in the $1.87 million spent 
in 1992. Communities are eligible for up to 50 per cent of the 
operating costs and up to 75 per cent of the cost of specifically 
equipped vehicles. All told, there are 79 communities providing 
this very necessary services, and it is another example of our 
government's continuing support for disadvantaged and 
disabled people living all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan people value and preserve 
their heritage; respect, accept, and celebrate their cultural 
diversity; and promote their expression and excellence through 
the arts and cultural industries. There have been a number of 
developments recently that are significant to the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last month I released a discussion paper relating to 
arts, cultural industries, multiculturalism, and heritage. On a per 
capita basis, Saskatchewan is still amongst the leaders in 
providing funding support for the cultural, heritage, and 
recreation agencies. This year we will be increasing our funding 
support by $175,000 to the Western Development Museum so 
that the museums in Yorkton and North Battleford can continue  

to operate and capture the tourist dollars that are now becoming 
an essential part of our economic development strategy. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we'll be increasing our funding 
through grants to the libraries in northern Saskatchewan so that 
communities in the North will have the same opportunities for 
library services as those communities in the South. 
 
In addition to this support for the library system, we have an 
application before the infrastructure program to provide 
regional libraries with new computer technology that will allow 
them to participate on the information highway. We hope to 
make an announcement in this regard very shortly. 
 
The film industry in Saskatchewan in 1994 had a $33 million 
impact on the economy and created hundreds of jobs. There are 
26 film companies producing films today compared to only 19 
in 1989. 
 
A few days ago it was my pleasure to announce a further 
initiative that will accelerate the growth for this new and 
exciting industry that is emerging rather rapidly in our province. 
The three-year, $4 million agreement to which I refer will 
generate approximately $40 million in production activities 
over the next three years and create about 1,200 jobs and $130 
million in economic activity. 
 
The agreement with the Saskatchewan Film and Video 
Development Corporation will allow the Saskatchewan film 
and video industry to take advantage of the opportunities in the 
expanding entertainment and information industries and to 
provide seed money to attract the private sector investment. 
 
Another example of an added impetus to our economic growth 
is a recent rare fossil find. I refer here of course to the major 
scientific discovery of the skeletal remains of the tyrannosaurus 
rex at Eastend. The rare find has drawn worldwide attention. A 
temporary facility, an extension of the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum, has been equipped and staffed to provide a local 
preparation and research capacity related to the T-Rex as well 
as other fossil discoveries in the area. This year our government 
is providing $180,000 toward this project. 
 
There is however, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately still a need to 
reduce funding in some areas in order to achieve the goals our 
department set in the development of the balanced budget plan. 
In 1992-93 we increased funding to the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board by $500,000, providing a total of $4 million for that 
fiscal year and for the fiscal year 1993-94. 
 
Last year however, we reduced that funding by $200,000; and 
this year, regrettably, we've had to reduce funding by a further 
$95,000. Although this is a difficult cut for the Arts Board, the 
amount that we are providing for arts is still above the 10-year 
average and larger than the amount when we came into office in 
1991. We will work with the Arts Board to find a way of 
mitigating the impact of these cuts in order that grants to the 
artistic community, they not be impacted. 
 



February 23, 1995 

 
400 

This past weekend, Mr. Speaker, I had the great privilege of 
participating in the opening of the Canada Winter Games in 
Grande Prairie, Alberta. Young athletes from all across Canada 
are competing in 21 sports. Team Saskatchewan has a number 
of excellent athletes and have already won several medals. Our 
department provides staff and developmental support for our 
young athletes together with our partners, the Saskatchewan 
Games Council and Sask Sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even in this period of fiscal restraint, we continue 
to encourage and support young people to participate in multi-
type sporting events like the Canada Games and the Western 
Canada Summer Games. Once again in marked contrast to the 
Government of Alberta, that has served notice that they do not 
wish to participate in the 1998 Western Canada Summer 
Games, thereby denying their young people the opportunity to 
participate in this western Canada multi-sport event. For people 
who hold up Alberta once again as a model for us, they should 
look very closely at the consequences of their actions. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, our government remains committed 
to providing continued support to the arts, cultural, recreation, 
and sports communities, and to expanding their opportunities 
within their cultural and economic context of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our government also believes in affordable and accessible 
services provided by local governments, and it is our 
commitment to continue to work with them in order to achieve 
these common goals. 
 
In conclusion, I would like to wish all residents of 
Saskatchewan a happy 90th anniversary and look forward to 
participating with them in their celebrations. I will support, with 
a great deal of enthusiasm, the budget presented by our Minister 
of Finance and look forward to working with our government 
on those objectives and goals. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pride that I 
rise and support our budget today on behalf of the Nipawin 
constituency and the people in it. It is always a privilege to rise 
in this place, and it is especially enjoyable in this case of this 
historic event of this budget. 
 
I have a copy of the budget in my hand, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
good news for the people of the Nipawin constituency. It's good 
news for the province of Saskatchewan. Balanced budget, Mr. 
Speaker, brings stability. Balanced budget brings confidence. 
They bring investment. This balanced budget brings increased 
spending for health care. This balanced budget brings lower 
taxes. This is a new day for the province of Saskatchewan, and 
it's a pleasure to be part of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first balanced budget . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

Hon. Mr. Thompson: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I'd like to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a 
family from Beauval: Rick Laliberte, his wife Val, and their son 
Kyle. Rick is a member of the Northern Lights School Division 
and is down in Regina meeting with officials of the Department 
of Education. And I would just like all members to welcome 
Rick and his family here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
was about to say, this is the first balanced budget that 
Saskatchewan has had for over 13 years. And I might also say 
that it's the first balanced budget we've had since the New 
Democratic Party was the government last in the province. And 
the people in my constituency know that fact and appreciate it 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am excited to be part of this. This is one of the reasons that a 
lot of us put our hat into the ring when we ran in the first place, 
because of the mismanagement and the deficit financing of the 
former government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did we announce in this budget a 
balanced budget in this coming year, but we announced to the 
province and to all that we had a balanced budget in the year 
that we're in now. This is good news — two balanced budgets. 
 
And not only in this document did we mention that there were 
two balanced budgets, but we have set out plans in here to have 
three more consecutive balanced budgets in the province of 
Saskatchewan — five consecutive balanced budgets in the 
province. 
 
We have came from the brink of financial crisis in the province 
to being the first province in Canada to have a balanced budget. 
Once again Saskatchewan has shown Canada that no matter 
how hard and how difficult the task may be, the people of this 
province are up to the challenge, and we've proved it once 
more. We're leaders in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in three short years, just over three short years, we 
have came a long ways and we have done it the Saskatchewan 
way. We have worked together with communities, with our  



February 23, 1995 

 
401 

partners in education and health, local government, with 
business and with labour, and we have reached a milestone 
today with this budget. 
 
Our balanced budget plan that we had, had specific goals and 
targets in it. The plan was based on caring and cooperation and 
compassion and sharing and all shouldering a burden of the 
load. And the plan succeeded because of the hard work of the 
people of the province. Together we did it. We have gone from 
having a deficit of $841 million, one of the highest per capita 
deficits in the Dominion of Canada — perhaps the highest — to 
the first province to have a sustainable balanced budget. 
 
We have in this document five years of sustainable budgets, 
balanced budgets. We have travelled from a time of uncertainty 
and insecurity to a new day of confidence and security. Now is 
the time to build on that foundation. And the debt management 
plan that we have in here, to manage the debt of the province, in 
our balanced budget, includes a strategy to pay down the debt 
so that our children and our grandchildren will not be saddled 
with our bills. That we won't be living one style of life in 
Saskatchewan now and leaving other generations to pay for it, 
as seemingly was the plan of the former government. 
 
We have in this budget a plan to move towards full 
employment, an ideal of full employment. It's based on a solid 
foundation of economic growth and training matched to the 
need. 
 
We have in this budget a plan to improve the quality of life by 
improving our health and education program. A strategy that 
will allow the people of the province of Saskatchewan to now 
start to reap rewards for the past few years of sacrificing, as 
they were called on to do and they did so well. Because of the 
sacrifices made in the past three years, we have earned the 
freedom to dream dreams for ourselves and dream dreams for 
our children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will this new plan work? It's a good question. People wonder 
when a government starts out with a plan, will the plan work. I 
believe it will work. We have proved the credibility of our last 
four-year plan and this new plan will work. We can build on 
what we've already accomplished here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our restored financial health means that we are in a stronger 
position now to weather uncertainties that may come along. Our 
plan may have to be modified. There are many dark clouds on 
the horizon; there are many things we don't know and can't 
predict with a great deal of accuracy. Because of where we are 
today, because of the freedom we have achieved, we can say 
that our plan may have to be modified, but it will be done. It 
will be done. 
 
The people in my constituency of Nipawin know and 
understand that a balanced budget, and having a sound, credible 
financial plan, brings stability. The sound financial management 
is a precondition of economic growth. Business has always 
been reluctant to invest in a province that cannot  

manage its own money. 
 
Saskatchewan's recent fiscal record has restored the confidence 
in our economy. We have reached the deficit targets that we had 
for ourselves and we reached them two years ahead of time. We 
did it by cutting spending, reducing spending in our province 
and our programs. We did it by creating an economic 
development, by promoting economic development and the 
climate to promote economic development, and we did it by 
raising taxes as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we redesigned our oil and gas structure to 
encourage exploration and production, and it worked. We 
changed our approach to agriculture to encourage 
diversification and more value added, and the numbers show 
that it worked. 
 
We provided targeted tax reductions to business. A lot of 
people talk about taxes that have been increased, but we 
specifically and very strategically reduced the tax to small 
business. Small business provides 80 per cent of the 
employment in our province, and we knew that. And they 
responded and created the jobs, and it worked. Our approach is 
paying the dividends that we hoped for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year alone the retail sales in our province 
increased by 9.4 per cent. That is the best performance we've 
had since 1982. The best performance we've had since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't have time to comment on all the things that 
are in this, but now where we are today, we have a sound 
foundation to build on, that we can build on, and now we're 
going to make jobs our number one priority. We're going to 
attack that with the same vigour and the same amount of 
planning that we did the deficit reduction three years ago. 
 
We're going to make long-term, ideal full employment as our 
ideal. Everyone that needs a job and wants a job should have 
one. That's going to be our goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another component of our job strategy is further 
targeted tax reductions. Over the last four years we have 
reduced the per cent of our corporation income tax by 20 per 
cent — it used to be 10 and now it's 8. And it has worked. Mr. 
Speaker, the people back home in the Nipawin constituency, the 
business people back home, know that this happened. They 
appreciate it and they responded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the small-business tax that we have in 
Saskatchewan now is the second lowest of any province west of 
Quebec. In this budget we're reducing the taxes on aviation 
fuel; we're reducing the tax on fuel from 7 cents a litre to 3.5 
cents a litre. More tax reductions. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we are going to reduce selectively the 
corporation tax for manufacturing and processing firms here in 
the province. The amount of this reduction will depend on the 
amount of the business of this company's presence in the 
province. 



February 23, 1995 

 
402 

The more business activity that they have in the province, the 
more the tax will be reduced. For Saskatchewan-based 
companies, the corporation tax will be reduced from 17 per 
cent, where it is now, to as low as 10 per cent. Mr. Speaker, that 
will make that particular tax the lowest tax west of Quebec. 
 
People back at my constituency know this. They've been 
looking at the budget and they know it and they appreciate it, 
and they say thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also adding to the value of agricultural 
products in the north-east part of the province. We've got many 
opportunities up there because of the diversity of our 
agriculture. And we've got many ways and many different 
innovative ways that we can add to the value of that. And we 
are encouraging them with $18 million in the agri-food 
innovation fund in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are companies up in north-eastern 
Saskatchewan now that are looking at this and they appreciate 
it, and they know it, and they're glad we did it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the things that are in this 
budget; a few of the things that are good for the province of 
Saskatchewan. This is the best budget that Saskatchewan has 
had for probably over 13 years. Mr. Speaker, I'm just so excited 
about it and glad to be here today and to be part of it. 
 
I'm just going to make a few more words . . . or say a few more 
words and then I'm going to be seated. I know there's other 
people that want to comment on this budget as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the good news is . . . part of the good news 
that was announced in this budget — and it really was good 
news — that not only did we balance the budget for 1994-95, 
but we had $119 million profit to invest, profit to pay down the 
debt. We've started a new direction for Saskatchewan of paying 
down the debt in our province. 
 
We are turning our backs on the problems that have been in 
Saskatchewan. We are remembering them only as a lesson 
learned. And we're setting our sights firmly on tomorrow. We 
are leaving behind the past of deficits and debt and we are 
looking with enthusiasm for a brighter tomorrow. Together, 
together, we have earned our freedom. We have learned wisely 
to use moderation and balance and hard work and good 
planning. 
 
There is, Mr. Speaker, no doubt there's a new day dawning in 
Saskatchewan, as is the title of the budget speech. I'm glad to be 
part of it. I'm proud to support this budget. And I believe this 
budget is positive and it's sustainable and believable and it's 
good news for the people of the Nipawin constituency and it's 
good news for the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say that it's a pleasure for me to rise today 
and to state right off the beginning of my remarks, to nobody's 
surprise I'm sure in the legislature and in Saskatchewan, that I 
wish to give my full support to the 1995-96 budget as 
introduced by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. 
 
Before I do so, I want to pay a special word of tribute to the 
contribution made by my friend and long-time colleague sitting 
behind the rail, the former minister of Finance in the Blakeney 
government, the Hon. Mr. Walter Smishek, who is here with us 
today in the legislature and flatters me, I must say, in saying that 
he comes because he wants to hear my remarks. I'm not sure 
that I can quite match the standard that Walter would expect of 
me, but I'm certainly flattered by his presence in the legislature 
today. 
 
I have to say that during his tenure as minister of Finance, as 
was the case throughout the entire period from 1971 to 1982, 
the Blakeney government of the day operated on a balanced 
budget or a surplus budget, and it was the kind of good news 
and prosperity that the people of Saskatchewan became 
accustomed to prior to the election of the Conservative 
government from 1982 to 1991. So thanks to Walter for a job 
well done and thanks for being here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I've been 
following this debate with a great deal of interest, as I hope 
the people in Saskatchewan have been following it with a 
great deal of interest, because one sort of recurring thought 
keeps coming back into my thoughts, into my mind, as I 
listen to the official opposition Conservatives and the 
pretend official opposition Liberals make their remarks. 
And it reminds me of an old Rolling Stones' song. Those of 
you who follow the Rolling Stones will know of this song. 
There's one lyric in that song that says this: I see a red door 
and I want to paint it black. I see a red door and I want to 
paint it black. 
 
In fact the name of the song is, Painting it Black, Painting it 
Black. Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what we've heard during the 
duration of this budget debate by the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, Conservatives and the Liberals — I see a red 
door and I want to paint it black. I see some optimism and I 
want to paint it black. I want to paint the legislature black. I 
want to paint the legislative buildings black. I want to paint all 
of the optimism and the hope of Saskatchewan people black. 
 
I want to tell the Liberals and the Conservatives it ain't going to 
work. It isn't working because the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan are not going to be so easily fooled by the 
rhetoric of the Tories and the Liberals, knowing that things are 
not black. For the first time since the defeat of the 
Conservatives in 1991 there is a new day dawning and it's filled 
with hope and opportunity and promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 23, 1995 

 
403 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I want to paint it black, the 
Conservatives say. And the Liberals rush in and say no, I want 
to paint it blacker. And then when they get up and make their 
speech, the Conservatives then get up and say it's impossible for 
the Liberals to make it blacker; we're going to make it black, 
blacker, and even more blacker. Dark black, purple black, 
purple dark black — any kind of monochromatic black colour 
or combination thereof, the Liberals and the Conservatives will 
put it all together. 
 
No wonder they're riding so low in popular support, because 
they know, as the people of Saskatchewan know, that that kind 
of a line simply has no resonance. How can it have resonance 
when the new day is dawning; when the people are now 
beginning to see sunshine coming into Saskatchewan's lives? 
 
There is a new day in Saskatchewan. There is a new day of 
hope. They see the old way when, I might say to the 
Conservatives and the Liberals, things could properly be 
painted as being black. That old day of deficit after deficit after 
deficit leading to a mountain of debt, that period of black nine 
years, they see that behind us. They see a future of sustainable 
balanced budgets and surplus, a new day of hope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — They see, Mr. Speaker, finally the 
end. It's not completely over, but at least the beginning of the 
end of all of those failed megaprojects that the Conservatives 
embarked upon which caused this deficit and debt. 
 
And I will not recite all of the litany of it except the one that I 
keep on referring to, is GigaText, which in the book written by 
Stevie Cameron called On The Take she describes as gigamess. 
I invite the people of Saskatchewan to read that chapter if 
nothing else of the particular book. 
 
Those failed megaprojects by those fast-buck artists over there 
now sitting in the official opposition, those would-be barons 
and tycoons, these people who wheeled and dealed with the 
taxpayers' money, those black days, they see that at an end. And 
they now see a new day of hope that our Crown corporations 
are going to be run on a sound, businesslike, and proper social, 
economic policy for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. A new day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — A new day of real jobs. A new day of 
optimism at the farm gate. It's not totally that we're out of the 
woods there, but a new day of optimism in agriculture. A new 
day of optimism in investments for training. A new day of 
optimism for young people. A new day of hope and optimism in 
health care renewal — health care renewal which if we had 
gotten along in the good, bad, old, black days from 1982 to 
1991, would have seen the destruction of medicare, precisely 
what the Conservatives and the Liberals have never, ever 
supported right since 1962 and today still want to see 
accomplished. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I'll have a word to say about health 
care in a moment. Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have indeed stepped 
out of the darkness of Conservatives and Liberals and Liberals 
and Conservatives, and into a new day of opportunity and hope 
and trust. The first balanced budget of any government 
anywhere in Canada in over five years. The first balanced 
budget in this province since 1982, since my friend and 
colleague Walter Smishek sat with me in the treasury benches, 
since 1982. 
 
And we did it the Saskatchewan way, Mr. Speaker. We did it 
the peculiarly distinctive, compassionate, humane and sensible 
Saskatchewan way by people coming together to rise to the 
challenge and to defeat the challenge and to now decide to work 
together for a brighter tomorrow. That is what we have 
accomplished in this budget '95-96. What a great achievement 
— what a great achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it's a great 
achievement by itself, but what I'm speaking to is the 
methodology: people coming together, tightening their belts. 
Sure they had to sacrifice. Sure there were some tough 
decisions that we made. They had to bear the brunt of them. We 
all bore the brunt of them. We set the goals and the targets, and 
I hope the people of Saskatchewan will give us credit in due 
course for that. But they did it in their peculiarly distinctive 
Saskatchewan style, and they did it in this way too which makes 
Saskatchewan so unique. 
 
We built our budget by not sacrificing or destroying the core 
values of what it means to be a Saskatchewanian or what it 
means to be a good Canadian. We pulled together. And in 
pulling together, we said we're not going to tackle this deficit 
and debt in a non-Canadian way, the non-Canadian way being 
hacking and slashing and destroying government and the 
services that government provides for people. 
 
After all, what is government? Listening to the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, they would have us believe that government is 
some foreign entity out there. It isn't. Government, all of us, is 
no more, no less, than the people. We are here to serve the 
people. And the people of this province, the people of this 
country, want us in hard times, in the politics of the 1990s, the 
politics of public deficit and debt — that is the challenge — 
they want us to preserve the quality of life, the core values of 
good health care and good education and equality of 
opportunity. They do not want to adopt a policy of hack and 
slash under some sort of thinly-disguised pseudonym of lean 
government, lean government which really means no 
government. That's what it means. 
 
Make no mistake about it. What the Conservatives and the 
Liberals are talking about is not lean government  no 
government. And just like they're in contest about who can 
paint the black bean blacker, they are in contest about who can  



February 23, 1995 

 
404 

paint the lean bean the most lean and leaner and leaner and 
leaner until there is no government. 
 
Make no mistake about it. This budget and this legislature and 
this province and this country is at a crossroads because the 
debate is, can we preserve the fundamental, core values of 
community and compassion and decency and education and 
health care? Or do we give up and surrender and become 
Americanized and ruin the country in the process? That's what 
this debate is about; that is what this budget is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, it is to be sure that we 
cannot deny — none of us in government, none of us as 
legislators can deny — that we are facing all kinds of external 
pressures which are beyond our control in many circumstances: 
global economics, global interdependency, global technology, 
capital moving quickly and rapidly all around the world. We 
know these are factors that a provincial government may not 
have much control over, maybe even the national government 
may not have much control over. 
 
But I tell you this, Mr. Speaker. This is what makes this '95-96 
budget so great. I will tell you that so long as we occupy the 
front benches of this province, of this Government of 
Saskatchewan, so long as we occupy the responsibility and the 
trust of government, acknowledging these global pressures, we 
will work with them but we will never give in to them because 
we want to build an independent and strong Canada and an 
independent and strong Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — That's why this debate is so important 
to me and why I've been watching it with so much interest. We 
can argue about the facts and the figures. I think those are, by 
the way, beyond argument because they're quite clear and 
independent experts have authorized the figures and validated 
them, that we have articulated and set out in the House. 
 
But apart from the figures, what this really is, is this core, 
fundamental debate that I've talked about, about the kind of 
vision and the kind of future that we really have in store for 
ourselves and for our children; whether we want to protect 
those values of good health care and education or whether or 
not we give up; or whether we will, in short, paint everything 
black and blacker, lean and leaner, leaner and meaner, and in 
the process destroy the distinctive, fundamental feature of what 
it means to be a Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to be a Canadian, as you know, as every one of us 
knows, is something much more than simply carrying the title 
of being Canadian, belonging to a great and peaceable country. 
That, of course, is something we should be proud of. But we 
distinguish ourselves from our cousins and our friends to the 
south of us in the United States because there they have adopted 
a policy over 200 years ago of relying on individualism. That's 
their ethic. The great American  

Revolution was a fight about individualism. 
 
And when they won in the revolution and when they set up the 
United States Bill of Rights, the Bill of Rights is a document 
which protects the individual over all. And the document in the 
United States views government as being something other than 
a composition of men and women of all colours, races, creeds, 
languages, who've come together to build something more than 
individual rights, to build societal rights, community rights. 
 
Justice does not only equate with individual rights, Mr. 
Speaker. Justice equates with individual rights, but it also 
equates with other, communitarian rights. Justice equates about 
whether or not we are a caring and compassionate society. 
 
And so in the United States even to this day, the President of 
the United States, who's visiting our great country today, has 
tried to reform such a fundamental, basic, communitarian 
justice objective as health care, and he seems to have failed. 
And what they're doing in the United States now, they're 
resorting to the courts. They're resorting to the individual 
interpretations of the United States's Bill of Rights in an attempt 
to get a basic, fundamental freedom as we have in this province 
and we enjoy, such as health care and medicare. 
 
We didn't build our country that way, Mr. Speaker. We didn't 
build our province that way. We built our country and our 
province in the belief that individual liberties and rights are 
very important, but that side by side there are also community 
rights which are also important. 
 
And instead of believing in the war of the individuals and the 
dog-eat-dog approach of the Liberals and the Conservatives, we 
decided in our province and in our country that we would get 
together to accomplish by working together that which we 
could not achieve by working alone. 
 
And look at the great accomplishments. Our medicare system, 
our social safety net — those are the things which distinguish 
Canadians from Americans. Those are the things which have 
made Canadians and Canada number one in the world. And 
now the Liberals and the Conservatives say, less government; 
no government. They say destroy that. I say never will the 
people of Saskatchewan give you the front benches with that 
philosophy and that approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — That is the Rolling Stones' theme, I 
want to paint everything black. And it's not washing politically, 
Mr. Speaker, because it is foreign to our ethics, to our culture. It 
is foreign to what Canadians know what we are. 
 
And everywhere in this province, people are responding. Jobs 
— no matter what the Liberals try to do, Statistics Canada, the 
federal Liberal government agency, jobs up over 7,000 since 
1992. I could go on. January 1995, even the surge continuing  



February 23, 1995 

 
405 

into the 1995 year. 
 
I want to tell you about jobs, Mr. Speaker, by giving you one 
concrete example. Yesterday it was my pleasure to be in 
Contact Lake, about an hour's drive north of La Ronge. First 
time I'd ever been there. And here I see, following the 
Saskatchewan ethic that I've talked about, a model of 
cooperation and job creation. 
 
Here we have private industry. Here we have aboriginal groups. 
Here we have environmental groups. Here we have government 
organizations and agencies working through such programs as 
the multi-training program, working through the northern 
development fund. My colleague, the Hon. Associate Minister 
of Economic Development was there, as was the Associate 
Minister of Education there, and we saw all of these people of 
all colours and all backgrounds coming together, to do what? 
To officially open the largest gold-mine in Saskatchewan in a 
provincial park. Cooperation. 
 
And you know, anywhere outside a hundred yards of the site 
location, anywhere on the lake and on the trail, you could never 
tell that there was a gold operation there or a milling operation. 
It has been designed and built in that way to be sustainable, to 
protect the environment, and to be economically sustainable. 
And when that particular production ceases, it has been 
designed so that the area can be rehabilitated right back to its 
natural habitat. And there is an example of cooperation and 
jobs. 
 
And you know, I thought to myself, Mr. Speaker, yesterday — 
and I've been thinking about this overnight and today — I 
always talked about the gold of Saskatchewan being wheat. 
And it is the gold of Saskatchewan; it's still the engine of our 
economic development. 
 
Who would have ever thought that we'd see the day that 
because of the bounty that we've been provided for by the good 
Lord, that we can say that gold is wheat, but gold is gold? 
 
And gold in northern Saskatchewan provides opportunities for 
aboriginal people, gets them off social assistance because they 
can contribute and they work so hard, and there's a 
redistribution of wealth and opportunity. 
 
And where else but in Saskatchewan through the policies of the 
Minister of Economic Development, the Partnership for 
Renewal, and the taxation policies of the Minister of Finance, 
can we see this cooperation translate into a tangible gold 
operation? 
 
Gold means gold. Gold means wheat. It means jobs and it 
means more jobs in the future. JobStart, Future Skills, 
opportunities galore. 
 
Retail sales therefore are up. Potash values are up. 
Manufactured products and shipments are up. Oil and natural 
gas revenue is up. Agriculture is even up. They're not out of the 
woods — agriculture. Everything is up in the province of  

Saskatchewan. 
 
Oh, there they are — the doom and gloom people are at it again, 
trying to paint it black. I didn't think they had any paint left yet 
to paint black. There they are. 
 
All of this is up and this is because the painting of the black of 
the Liberals and the Conservatives simply is not going to apply. 
Mr. Speaker, we're not out of the woods, thanks to the big-
spend, big-buck artists of the Conservatives and the Liberals. 
We're not out of the woods yet. We've got a huge debt. We're 
not out of the woods. But here's an example at Contact Lake, 
Mr. Speaker, where people in a Saskatchewan way have pulled 
together to cooperate, to protect core values. 
 
And the member from Shaunavon, the member from 
Shaunavon representing the Liberal Party would dismantle all 
of that because he wants less government; would dismantle that 
because he wants no government; would follow the lead of his 
federal Liberal counterparts who will have bought into the 
Conservative agenda for less government, meaning no 
government. I say shame on him and the Liberals and the 
Conservatives. Shame on them for turning your back on the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it is a 
fundamental debate about what kind of society we want to build 
and what Canada and Saskatchewan is. A fundamental debate. 
And I'm glad the conservative Liberals, Liberals, Conservatives 
have joined us in this, because we're building for the 21st 
century in another way as well. I want to give two examples. 
 
The 21st century, just five years away, that's all. It is said that 
knowledge-based industries are going to be the jobs of 
tomorrow. The traditional plans, the traditional industries, we've 
got to work on them and to maintain them; there's no doubt 
about that. But we've got to start planning for this. And we have 
two things that we're talking about. This budget supports it, by 
the way, with the taxation plans by the Minister of Finance. 
She'll address that, I'm sure, in her wrap-up remarks. 
 
One is ag biotechnology. Thirty per cent of all of Canada's ag 
biotech is located right here in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan — 30 
per cent of all of Canada's ag biotech. You know that 200 
million more dollars in annual sales by the year 2000 is the 
prediction that these people in this area say will be the outcome 
of ag biotechnology. 
 
Here's a home-grown industry which ties in with agriculture and 
what farmers can do and how this means more value added and 
more worth for their products right here. Ag biotech. That is a 
21st century. These people are going to vote against this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who did that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Who did it? The member from Morse  



February 23, 1995 

 
406 

says, who did it? The member from Morse can't even pronounce 
it, let alone defend the policy of ag biotechnology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And the member from Shaunavon of 
course, this member, when he sat on this side, professed the 
words of support to this policy until he found some phoney 
reason to jump over to the Liberal Party and take with him 
$190,000 of taxpayers' bucks. Shame on that kind of an 
approach. That's what they do, Liberals and Conservatives 
together. 
 
He says, who defended it? The member from Morse, 
biotechnology. It's a joke. What the member from Morse and 
the member from Thunder Creek did when they were in the 
front benches, they had GigaText. That was their idea of ag 
biotechnology. 
 
Give us a few more examples. Supercart. There's another good 
example of what you did on ag biotechnology. How about 
Joytec? There's another good example of ag biotechnology. 
How about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — High R Doors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — High R Doors. There's another good 
example of ag biotechnology. 
 
How incredible of the official opposition parties, those 
Conservatives and Liberals together. How dare they say in 1995 
they're for it. I know, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know that what they say is unbelievable. But 
that's what we're doing, we're moving ahead in ag 
biotechnology. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, the information technology. 
This I want to say a word about as well. We have a number of 
companies at the information technology, an industry of the 
21st century. Here the member from Thunder Creek is also 
going to take credit for it. 
 
We have as a consequence of the information world of 
tomorrow, a leading edge industry developing. And what's 
important here is that the barriers which have been serious 
barriers of geography are being lessened and being reduced by 
virtue of the information highway, Mr. Speaker. . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . They have been reduced, and this has been 
always a difficulty. But I wish that the hon. member from 
Thunder Creek, if he would take part in this debate, would 
actually stand up on his feet and make a contribution, rather 
than chirping from his seat in this regard. 
 
The information society, Mr. Speaker, this is another example 
of what we're going to do and how we're building tomorrow for 
the 21st century. The key here is universal access. The key is 
being sure that our young people are trained to do these two 
jobs in these two areas of biotechnology and information for 
tomorrow's economy, while all the while protecting and  

guaranteeing that our traditional economic activity develops and 
continues to develop in the right way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying here is this. The philosophy 
behind this budget is a philosophy of Saskatchewan people 
working together to pull us out of crisis, which they've done. 
The philosophy is of Saskatchewan people working together to 
having pulled us out of crisis, building for tomorrow, which 
they're doing. 
 
The philosophy of this budget is to be of optimism and of truth. 
It is to put behind the black paint of the Conservatives and 
Liberals and to now rally to start providing jobs, which is the 
truth statistically as shown. We are building, and the philosophy 
behind this budget is to preserve and to maintain the 
fundamental core values of Saskatchewan and Canadian people. 
That is the difference between us and those two old-line parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about core values. I want to come back to 
that theme for a moment. I mean to me nothing exemplifies 
core values than the quality of life programs that I've identified 
— health care and education. I want to return to this theme. 
 
This is the key debate — this is the key debate. Will we as 
Canadians have the wisdom and the courage to protect that 
which makes us distinctively and uniquely Canadian? I've 
alluded to that a moment or two ago. Do we have the courage 
and do we have the wisdom and the foresight to build our 
programs and our budgets and our legislation to do that? Or are 
we going to succumb to the so-called external pressures of 
Americanization and globalization and technology? That's the 
key issue. 
 
Are we going to give up? Are we going to become Americans 
or pale imitations of Americans? And I think no bigger litmus 
test there to answer this question than on social programs, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to tell you without any equivocation that on this 
side, this New Democratic Party government on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, says yes, we have the wisdom and the 
courage and the foresight and the philosophy to make sure that 
Canadian values remain the same and are going to be relevant 
into the 21st century, unlike the black-paint artists that are 
sitting opposite us. 
 
Let me give you an example. We're doing it right now . . . two 
examples. Health care. Conservatives and Liberals oppose it; 
they absolutely oppose it. They oppose it because they opposed 
medicare in 1962. The KOD (Keep our Doctors committee) — 
the Liberals and the Conservatives led the Keep Our Doctors 
committee. In 1962, where were you? You were out there with 
the KOD. Where were you? You were out there with the KOD. 
You were out there knocking on the doors. 
 
The Liberal premier, Ross Thatcher, was kicking on the door 
opposing medicare. Nothing has changed. Nothing has 
changed. A few different faces of some people that are around 
there, but the same old bosses that control them, the large, big 
corporations and the same old anachronistic 19th century 
philosophy is still there. The Americanization is still there. 



February 23, 1995 

 
407 

And no wonder they're opposed to our health renewal. What's 
behind our health renewal, Mr. Speaker? Very simply this. 
What's behind our health renewal is this — the philosophy that 
health care is more than bricks and mortar and hospitals, more 
than pills and more than fancy, expensive technology. Oh yes, 
we need them when we need them, but good health care for the 
length of our lives depends as much — I would say even more, 
on such things as income and jobs and education and good 
environmental practices. 
 
The Canadian institute on child poverty says that a child born 
by accident of birth into a home of poverty is more likely to die 
in infancy more times than those born in middle and upper 
middle income, be sick during the years of growing up, and die 
at an earlier age than the rest of us. Is that the kind of health 
care system we want to perpetuate? That's what the Liberals 
want; that's what the Conservatives want. 
 
In fact not only do they want to perpetuate it, they want to even 
dismantle what we have by going into two-tier health care. 
That's what the Conservatives and the Liberals are talking 
about. 
 
So what we're saying in our health care is, let's shift the 
philosophy, Mr. Speaker -- shift it, not destroy it. We need 
hospitals; we need the pills; we need the technology; we need 
our doctors; but let's shift it now to prevention, to wellness. 
Let's make sure that there is education. Let's seek to eliminate 
poverty. Let's seek to provide education. Let's make sure that 
discrimination is eliminated. Let's protect the environment. Let's 
say there is a role to this. 
 
Let's say that we're going to give our assistance to senior 
citizens. Let's keep them out of institutions longer as possible so 
that they can lead more productive, healthier, happier lives, not 
in institutions but in their communities, contributing to the 
communities. That's the philosophy of our health care program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — But from day one those Liberals, 
Conservatives, those dinosaurs of the 21st century, have 
opposed it from day one. Initially the Leader of the Liberal 
Party got up in the 1991 election — oh, I fully well remember 
this during the leaders' debate in 1991; there, the member from 
Saltcoats has got the transcript — she got up and she said, close 
down the rural hospitals. That's what she said. Then she turned 
around and inside the legislature she now is opposed to this. 
Then at one point she got up and she said, well you've got to 
elect the hospital boards; now she says you do not have to elect 
the hospital boards. All over the map, a typical Liberal. 
 
Then the Conservative approach is the same position. I think 
the hon. member from Shaunavon made the wrong move . . . no 
he didn't make the wrong move. I was going to say he should 
have gone to the Conservatives. No, no, no, no. No, no, no. He 
didn't make the wrong move in leaving us; we're happy and he's 
happy. He made the wrong move because you shouldn't have 
gone to the Liberals, you should have gone to the Conservatives  

who want to destroy medicare. They want to destroy it, because 
they have consistently opposed all of it. 
 
Oh, that Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election of which we've 
talked so much about. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Five hospitals. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — That's right, five hospitals, the W5. 
Who did it? They did it. The Conservatives did it. They set up 
those hospitals and all of those hospital beds, and all the articles 
that have been printed about it and all the W5, this was their 
idea of health care. And now all of a sudden they get up and 
they say, why don't you let in the cataract clinics for two-tiered 
hospital care? 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, you can hack and slash like other 
provinces have done. You can argue two-tier. You can flip-flop, 
flop-flip all over the place. You can be a Liberal/Conservative. 
You can do all of that. But I tell you one thing: if you do it, you 
cannot save health care. The worst thing you can do is be 
neglectful of it. The worst thing that you can do is not have the 
plain, old-fashioned — I'll use this word — guts to save it for 
the 21st century. 
 
And if you do not have that wisdom and the courage to be 
compassionate about health care, the defining line between us 
and them, you will see the destruction of health care. That's 
exactly what they want to do in Alberta. That's exactly what the 
Liberals and the Conservatives want to do in Saskatchewan. 
And by golly, so long as we're around, that will never happen in 
Saskatchewan — never happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I'll give you one other example, Mr. 
Speaker, in the non-health care area. Take a look at the 
children's action plan. Take a look at the domestic violence Act 
that my friend and colleague, the former minister of Justice, 
brought in. Take a look at the plan for prevention, and support 
of families, resource centres, stay-in-school programs, health 
initiatives, parenting skills, healing conferences — one could go 
on and on — all defined and set out in this budget, are the core, 
key values. 
 
Government which adjusts to the politics of the '90s  public 
debt is the politics of the 1990s  but draws the plan in a way 
that we can afford to pay the core programs as best as we can 
afford to pay for them. Not a party that simply says well, the 
politics of public debt means less government, which means no 
government. Throw it right out — throw it right out. 
 
Not the politics of Newt Gingrich in Canada; one being Newt 
and the other being Gingrich. One being like Tweedledee and 
one being like Tweedledum. It doesn't matter which of the two 
spokespersons are of which of the two parties, Newt or 
Gingrich, Gingrich or Newt. I tell you that mean-spirited,  



February 23, 1995 

 
408 

destructive, man-hunt politics of the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, that destruction of Saskatchewan and core 
values, will never be accepted by the people of this province. 
That's why you're going to be defeated and massively defeated 
when the next election is called — when the next election is 
called. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Let me say about the Liberals for a 
moment, let me talk a word about the Liberals for a moment. 
Let me just say a word about the Liberals, about the storm 
clouds that I see about the fundamental heart and soul and 
mind, the debate we're talking about, Canada here. You know 
on Monday the federal Liberals are going to have a budget and 
I'll be looking forward to seeing what the hon . . . the member 
from Shaunavon has to say about that and agriculture. Oh he 
had lots of worries about our GRIP programs and we'll see what 
he has to say Monday night on that. 
 
This is a government elected to do away with the GST (goods 
and services tax). We'll see what they have to say about that on 
Monday. We'll see whether the new politics of the Liberals and 
the Liberal leader and the member from Shaunavon is based on 
principle or money from the Liberal federal operation. 
 
As Tommy Douglas used to say, when they say it's principle 
and not money, it's money 100 per cent of the way. That's what 
the Liberals will be. That's if they're elected. You know what 
you're going to see, Mr. Speaker? You're going to see to see 
more taxes and more cuts to social programs. 
 
And this is what I want to talk about. One area specifically 
bothers me, which is a fundamental philosophy, the difference 
between them and us. Take the proposal on post-secondary 
education. They want to eliminate it to the extent of $100 
million for Saskatchewan, to our purse right here. You know 
what that means? That if you go to university, you're going to 
have to have manyfold, sometimes ten times fold, tuition fees to 
get into university. Just as my colleague, the Deputy Premier 
says, for the rich. 
 
This is an insidious policy, because what it says is, it's pay as 
you go — pay as you go. It says to the young men and women, 
the young students, the future leaders of our society, the future 
business people, those who will be generating the wealth, it 
says this to them: you got to pay as you go, as you go to 
university. 
 
And you know, member from Thunder Creek, if that student is 
forced to do that and if we allow that plan to succeed, it just 
might happen that when that student reaches the workforce and 
starts paying taxes, he or she might say to the senior, well you 
know what it is: I had to pay as I went; you, Mr. or Mrs. Senior, 
you pay as you go; and you on social assistance, you pay as you 
go. That is what the Liberal philosophy is here behind this — 
intergenerational transfers of responsibility. 
 
Communitarian community values, the theme of my speech,  

that is what Canada is all about. What they want to say to the 
young people is, accept an ethic which is foreign to Canada. 
 
I'll give you another example they're talking about — I hope 
they don't do it. The Liberals are talking about, saying, you 
know we're going to just simply dump all of the social programs 
onto the laps of the provincial governments — not going to give 
you enough money to keep up the standard. You just got it, 
that's what they're going to say. 
 
And then they're going to say to the richer provinces: if you can 
afford the higher standards of social programs, good luck; but 
for the poorer provinces who cannot afford the standards of 
social assistance, too bad, tough luck. 
 
There is how you build a Canada. You build a Canada on 
intergenerational competition, you build a Canada on regional 
competition, you build a Canada on individual competition, and 
you destroy a Canada which has been built on competition but 
compassion and cooperation. 
 
And I tell you, that is where the storm clouds are there right 
now facing this particular Canadian people and population on 
Monday night. That is what the Liberals are talking about and 
that is what is being mooted. That is Canadian. Those are black 
clouds. Now there is a proper time to bring out the black paint. 
That is something that everybody should be worried about. That 
will destroy Canada. I've said that to CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio in an interview. The 
interviewer said to me: do you mean, Mr. Premier, you really 
mean destroy? And I said, yes, it will. I mean it won't destroy 
the country overnight, but it will gradually, over the long while, 
redefine the country. 
 
He says, what about GRIP? The member from Morse says, what 
about GRIP? I'll tell you what about GRIP. We said about GRIP 
that it was the shortest-lived so-called long-term program for 
farm security ever. And it was. We said to the member from 
Morse and we said to everybody in the province of 
Saskatchewan about GRIP that it wasn't market sensitive. It's 
funny me saying this; you should be talking about market 
sensitivity. 
 
We said that if you did away with GRIP, what you would do is 
you'd have more innovation by farmers. And you know what? 
The federal Liberal government and our government agreed on 
doing away with GRIP and we signed a new, whole-farm 
income plan. And you know what? I didn't hear one voice of 
dissent from the member from Shaunavon who left us 
supposedly on GRIP. Not one. Not one. 
 
There is the stand of the principles. There are the stand of the 
principles of these two old-line people. I have to laugh about 
the principles. They tell us: you know, you elect us and we have 
a principled stand on gaming — Liberals on gaming, a principle 
standing. Well you know, I have to say a word about this. 
 
I have to say a word about integrity in politics and gaming. You  



February 23, 1995 

 
409 

know they say there should be integrity in politics. Who would 
disagree with that? There has to be integrity in politics. We all 
try to be. Liberals try to be, Conservatives try to be, we try to 
be; we all try to have integrity. But integrity, you know, is many 
faceted. It is individual integrity and it's also integrity in 
positions. 
 
I talked about the position on gaming. Now here is one where 
I'm going to compliment the official opposition. They have a 
policy which is integrity. It's not a right policy in my mind, but 
at least a correct one. They say no to gaming, no to casinos, let's 
have a referendum on it; that's what you say. And you've got 
that; that's integrity. I don't agree with it. 
 
Here's what the Liberals do: 1992, July 3, the Leader of the 
Liberal Party said, first nation casinos — listen to the words, 
quote — first nation casinos would threaten provincial revenues 
as well as race-tracks, bingos, exhibition casinos, and video 
poker. End quote. 
 
Two months later Roy Bird of the FSIN publicly criticized the 
Leader of the Liberal Party. So in June of 1993 she gets up in 
the legislature and she says, quote, on VLTs: the province has 
probably foregone 50 to $60 million in revenue because you 
haven't set up VLTs. Flop and flip. 
 
Then when the VLT position got all the hoteliers and many of 
the local communities riled up, she wrote a letter in March of 
1994 to the hoteliers and she says basically, we support the 
VLTs. Then two months later she flops again and says to the 
communities, well hold it; what we can do is we can give more 
to the hoteliers, more to the communities, and balance the 
budget by reducing the revenues of the province without raising 
taxes and without slashing back in programs. Well you know, if 
anybody believes that, I've got a couple of bridges that you 
could buy from me in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Then she said, there's got to be a moratorium on casino 
development. Quote: we don't need a referendum on this issue, 
she said last November. Well I think the truth finally came out 
when a former Liberal staffer is quoted as saying just a few 
weeks ago, quote: on the Liberal gaming issue we're not 
committed firmly to any position. I say that is the case . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Talk of integrity. Talk of integrity. 
And then you see, there's something in the hundreds . . . The 
new politics of integrity, hundreds of millions of dollars 
promised in new spending programs by the Liberal leader, but 
no tax increases of course. And no VLT . . . well the VLTs, we 
don't know where she stands on VLTs. More spending, fewer 
taxes, a balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, voodoo economics, 
voodoo economics, voodoo economics. 
 
You know the Roman poet, Ovid, I'm going to quote him, 
summed up . . . She summed up her philosophy very simply. 
She said this, quote: everyone's a millionaire where promises  

are concerned. 
 
You, Mr. Member from Shaunavon, must be a multi-
millionaire. Must be a talk of integrity; $15 billion debt and 
then talk about integrity. The complaints about patronage. One 
of the federal Liberals . . . don't follow what the Liberals say, 
it's what they do. 
 
Senator Pietro Rizzuto says, after they won power federally, 
quote, about Liberals: I'll try to find them jobs, whether in 
private enterprise or in the civil service, end quote. Then the 
Leader of the Liberal Party — I love this one — in 
Saskatchewan, the Regional Optimist, April 17, 1994, headline: 
 
 Haverstock: NDP put power before people. 
 
 (Here's the quotation) . . . However, she said that doesn't 

mean she wouldn't make partisan appointments if she 
were premier. 

 
 "That's doesn't mean that Liberals won't get jobs," she 

said. "They're competent . . ." 
 
Integrity and new-style politics, Mr. Speaker. It is a joke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time has run out. I want to close by saying 
why this is a fundamental debate. To me this is a fundamental 
debate, a fundamental debate as you can see, about the values 
of Saskatchewan and Canada. Values and approaches which the 
Saskatchewan people rejected in 1991 under the label of PCs 
(Progressive Conservative) and they'll reject it under the label 
of PCs in 1991 or under the label of Liberals in 1995 or 1996. 
They're common; they're the same. 
 
Both parties, on labour, say no to minimum wage, no to 
workers' compensation, no to labour standards, no to trade 
union Acts. 
 
In fact the Leader of the Liberal Party talked about occupational 
health and safety. Mr. Speaker, I have this quote: what are these 
yahoos (referring to us) doing dealing with legislation that is 
completely irrelevant. Unquote. 
 
Now she can call me a yahoo. Occupational health and safety 
— irrelevant? Well I guess if you're a Ph.D (Doctor of 
Philosophy) doctor psychologist in a fancy paid job at some 
university, then it's irrelevant. I guess it's irrelevant. I guess it is 
irrelevant. If you're riding around in some limousine donated by 
a senator, then it is irrelevant. Let them eat cake; that's the 
philosophy. 
 
Well I tell you, here's where they're the same. Liberals and 
Conservatives, Conservatives and Liberals — elect them, and 
they'll undo all of the labour legislation. They'll undo all of the 
social programs of the province of Saskatchewan and foist on 
Canada something which will no longer be Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's not going to work. It's not going to work. Mr. 
Speaker, it is not going to work. Talk about your pension and  



February 23, 1995 

 
410 

talk about your pension and talk about what you want to do 
about pensions, which is to Americanize politics the same way. 
You don't want working men and women or farmers in there. 
You just want your big, multinational people in there. And you 
talk about your pensions any time, Mr. Speaker. You talk about 
all the boys in power from 1982 to 1991 and what they did with 
the public purse and where their money's at. We'll have lots of 
time to talk about public funds as the months unfold, about the 
Conservatives and the Liberals — lots of time to talk about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the members of the House, this is a budget 
of progress. This is a budget of hope. This is the dawning of a 
new day. This is the saving of Saskatchewan and Canada. This 
is a budget for the future. And please, I say to Saskatchewan, 
reject the black-paint artists, the doom and gloomers. Join with 
us in building a brand-new future for Saskatchewan and 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, it's a great pleasure to 
close debate on this budget, the first balanced budget in this 
province in more than a decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I should add, however, this is going 
to be a difficult act to follow. 
 
I want to first thank the constituents of Saskatoon Westmount. 
It is a privilege to represent them in this legislature, and I'm 
most grateful for their continued advice and support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the people of Saskatchewan. 
As I've travelled around the province, people have come out to 
meetings. They phoned into open-line programs. They've 
written letters to the editor. And they've stopped me on the 
street to give me advice. Many have actually taken the time to 
call or write to me with their reaction to this budget. In their 
letters they talk about how relieved they are that our financial 
crisis is behind us, how pleased they are that this government 
lived up to its commitments, and how proud they are that 
Saskatchewan was the first province in all of Canada to balance 
its books. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Last but not least, I want to thank 
my caucus colleagues. Our budgets have been team efforts. We 
work together to chart our course. We made a pact when we 
became government that we would live up to the promise that 
we made to our children and our grandchildren. We all had a 
stake in this commitment, and we all worked hard to ensure that 
our word was kept. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this caucus has never wavered in its commitment 
to the fiscal agenda. This is the finest caucus in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — It's easy in our present fiscal 
situation sometimes to forget how far we've come in three short 
years. It's easy to forget that we were on the brink of a financial 
crisis in this province. It's easy to forget when I became 
Minister of Finance in 1993 this province couldn't even borrow 
money in Canada. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you this: this caucus will never forget 
those days. The long nights, the hard choices, the need to turn 
our face to the wind and say, this is what we have to do if we 
care about the future of this province. We laid out a plan to turn 
this province around fiscally and economically. 
 
Today we see the results of that plan: sustainable balanced 
budgets, an economy whose growth is among the highest in all 
of Canada, and a province which is a special place to live. A 
province where we have not only secured our financial future, 
but we've also maintained a high quality of life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Now that the goals of our first plan 
have been achieved, it's time in this budget to lay before the 
people of this province our second plan. 
 
What does our new financial plan mean to the average person in 
Saskatchewan? It means that jobs can now be our number one 
priority, so that we can do everything in our power to ensure 
that our children have the opportunities to launch their careers 
in this province. It means parents can feel secure in the 
knowledge that they will have a quality education system there 
for their children. It means people, especially seniors, will know 
that a better health care system will be there for them when they 
need it. It means that we can begin to reduce the mortgage on 
Saskatchewan by paying down the debt. And it means that we 
can do all of these things and still begin to reduce taxes for the 
average family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan builds on the solid foundations laid in the 
first plan. Stimulating economic growth to enhance revenues 
was part of our strategy to balance the books. That's why we 
restructured our oil and gas royalty rates. That's why we 
changed our agricultural programs to promote diversification 
and value added production. That's why we provided targeted 
tax cuts to business. 
 
And our strategy is paying dividends. No matter how much the 
opposition dislikes the statistics, they can't escape them. Over a 
billion dollars has been invested in our oil and gas industry. Our 
retail sales in 1994 were the highest since 1982. And 12,000 
more people were working this January than last. 
 
In this budget we're building on that very solid foundation by 
using every lever at the disposal of our government to promote  



February 23, 1995 

 
411 

economic growth and create jobs. By building on our 
agricultural strength; by promoting biotechnology research and 
value added processing; by continuing to provide targeted tax 
reductions to business; by working with others in the 
community. By investing in social and economic infrastructure 
and by investing in new programs to help our youth land that 
all-important first job in Saskatchewan. And by ensuring that 
our people have the training they need to fill the jobs that are 
being created by this economic recovery. 
 
So the first prong of our new plan is jobs. The second prong is 
enhancing our quality of life by enriching the quality of health 
and education. Improvements to student loans and a new 
distance education initiative will help to ensure that students 
from all backgrounds and regions have equal access to quality 
education. 
 
In health care we're moving to the second stage of our reform of 
medicare by increasing our support for home- and community-
based services. What we're creating in this province is a people-
centred health system, which places less emphasis on 
administration and institutions and more on services for people, 
which gives people more control over their health by 
emphasizing prevention, which provides health care as close as 
possible to people's homes, and is controlled by local people. 
Our goal is to sustain balanced budgets, but also to sustain our 
high quality of life. 
 
The third prong of our plan is to begin to reduce taxes for 
Saskatchewan families. When we brought out our balanced 
budget plan, we made a commitment to the people of this 
province that as our financial situation improved we would 
begin to reduce taxes. We are living up to that commitment. 
Every taxpayer contributed to eliminating the deficit; every 
taxpayer will share in the benefits. That's why we're providing 
an annual reduction in the deficit surtax of up to $150 per year 
per individual, or $300 for a two-income family. This tax cut is 
affordable and sustainable. 
 
As I went around this province, people told me again and again 
they do not want to return to the 1980s where dramatic tax cuts 
led to higher deficits and higher taxes; where governments 
drastically cut taxes today, only to raise them tomorrow. 
 
Our tax cuts are different. They're affordable and they're here to 
stay. People deserve that sort of stability, security, and honesty 
from their government. 
 
The fourth prong of our plan is to begin to pay down the 
province's debt. We've already begun that process. In 1994-95, 
not only did we balance the budget, we achieved $119 million 
surplus. This surplus, along with reductions in Crown 
corporation debts and restructuring of megaprojects, allowed us 
to reduce the province's debt by over $500 million this year. 
 
This achievement needs to be put into perspective. A surplus of 
$119 million is equivalent to Ontario having a surplus of $1.2 
billion or Canada having a surplus of $3.6 billion. By 1999 we 
will have reduced the debt of the province by $1.2 billion. This  

level of debt repayment is equivalent to Ontario reducing its 
debt by $5.5 billion or Canada reducing its debt by $16.6 
billion. 
 
Our debt management plan also allocates future surpluses  
one-third to pay down the debt, one-third to reduce taxes, one 
third to enhance our quality of life. To ensure that we sustain 
our financial health, we've already opened the books of the 
province, so the people of the province can know the true state 
of their finances. In this session, we will build on that solid 
foundation by passing balanced budget legislation. 
 
This, then, Mr. Speaker, is our new plan for the province's 
future, our plan to take Saskatchewan into the 21st century. Mr. 
Speaker, we've had to be open, honest, and accountable to 
Saskatchewan people. The same should be expected of our 
opposition. They too have to be held to account for their 
positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about credibility. This session is 
about credibility. It is about who has the credibility to lead this 
province into the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — You know where we stand. Where 
does our opposition stand? We have laid before the people of 
Saskatchewan two plans for their future: the balanced budget 
plan whose goals have been achieved; and our new four-year 
plan for the future. The opposition has carped and whined and 
niggled and nattered about our plans. But have either of them 
come close to proposing an alternative? Have either of them 
had the integrity to say, we don't agree with the government's 
plan, so here's ours. No, they haven't. 
 
The Tories would make Saskatchewan into Ralph Klein's 
Alberta. Although I must say that I haven't heard a lot about 
Ralph Klein's Alberta lately from the opposition benches. 
Maybe it's because the Premier who went around lecturing 
people about balancing the books and not raising taxes met his 
day of reckoning — his own budget. He did not balance the 
books and he did pick taxpayers' pockets by increasing health 
care premiums and taking million dollars in new fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will never accept Ralph 
Klein's agenda. They will never accept the inequity of making 
parents pay to send their children to kindergarten. They will 
never accept a two-tiered health care system where your access 
depends on your ability to pay. They will never believe that the 
decent way to treat poor people is to give them a one-way bus 
ticket out of the province. This government is committed to 
living within its means but we're also committed to maintaining 
our high quality of life. 
 
But at least I have to say this about the Tories. There is a strain 
of consistency in their approach — cut taxes, cut programs. The 
same unfortunately cannot be said of the Liberals. Their 
approach is flavour-of-the-month finances, blowing in 
whichever direction the wind is going that day. Mr. Speaker,  



February 23, 1995 

 
412 

this type of approach is not credible. 
 
Last session of the legislature the Liberals were the big 
spenders. They accused the government of being deficit-driven, 
uncaring. And they criticized us for not spending more money. 
They wanted more money for infrastructure; they wanted more 
money for agriculture; they wanted more money for crop 
insurance; they wanted more money for provincial court judges. 
And the list goes on. 
 
(1645) 
 
In the last session of the legislature the Liberals added $300 
million to the deficit. So last session the Liberal flavour was big 
spending. This session we have a new flavour of Liberal — the 
born-again conservative Liberal, the cost-cutting Liberals. The 
Liberal leader is now going to cut government spending. So far 
her major contribution to this debate has been at the very 
philosophical level of talking about the number of people 
working in one office in Saskatchewan relative to the number of 
people working in another office in Alberta, a very high level 
debate. 
 
Never mind the fact that the duties of departments in offices 
vary dramatically from province to province. Never mind some 
real comparisons, real comparisons like the fact that while 
Saskatchewan spends less than $900,000 a year on 
intergovernmental affairs, Alberta spends more than $5 million 
a year on intergovernmental affairs. None of this matters. The 
Liberal leader's main contribution to the debate about high 
finances has been to talk about the number of people in this 
office relative to the number of people in that office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before getting into the real numbers on 
government spending, let's establish some context about the 
Liberals and their use of statistics. They're either totally 
confused about numbers or they've been manipulating them. To 
be charitable, I'll say it's confusion. One day the Liberals say 
there are no new jobs in Saskatchewan and they use Statistics 
Canada to back them up. Then Statistics Canada comes and 
says there's thousands of new jobs in Saskatchewan. What do 
the Liberals do then? Well they switch to Revenue Canada. 
When Revenue Canada doesn't work, then they switch to 
income tax; never mind that it's the federal government that 
determines income tax projections. 
 
Who knows where they're going next. The Liberals are either 
manipulative or confused. Either they're manipulating numbers 
to suit their purposes or they simply don't understand finances 
and numbers. The misuse of numbers about government 
spending is especially disturbing to me when they're talking 
about cutting the costs of government because they're simply 
not levelling with the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has already acted to dramatically 
cut the cost of government. The numbers are there in black and 
white, and the Liberals know those numbers. They know that 
we cut spending by $275 million. And the number would even 
be higher if we took into account all the offloading that we've  

had to absorb in the last three years. Financial experts praise 
this government for curtailing spending. For instance, recently 
the chairman of the Toronto Dominion Bank said there's two 
provinces that have done an excellent job at curtailing 
spending: Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, all of the statistics show that Saskatchewan is already 
lean. For instance, in Alberta, even after the last round of cuts, 
the per capita cost of providing services and programs in 
Alberta is still higher than in Saskatchewan. So we all know 
we've already got a tight ship. We run an efficient public 
service. The facts bear this out. These are the facts. 
 
So if the Liberal leader is talking about further reductions in the 
cost of government, what she means is drastic cuts in services 
for people, cuts in health, cuts in education. And she's got to 
level with the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
people do not want flavour-of-the-month finances, a leader who 
adds $300 million to the deficit one session and talks about 
cutting government the next. These are challenging and 
changing times. Governments have to be able to navigate in 
very choppy waters. People don't want a ship that is not 
charting a consistent course, a ship that blows in the wind, a 
ship that is buffeted by the waves. People want a ship that is 
charting a clear course; people want a ship with a rudder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan people want most from their 
politicians is honesty and sincerity. In the last week many . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. According to rule 
14(3) it is at this time that the Speaker must put the question to 
the main motion. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:50 p.m. until 4:54 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen Thompson 
Wiens MacKinnon Tchorzewski 
Lingenfelter Shillington Johnson 
Atkinson Kowalsky Calvert 
Cunningham Carson Mitchell 
Penner Upshall Hagel 
Bradley Lorje Pringle 
Lautermilch Crofford Renaud 
Murray Hamilton Trew 
Serby Whitmore Sonntag 
Flavel Roy Cline 
Stanger Kluz Knezacek 
Harper Keeping Jess 
Carlson Langford  

— 41 
 



February 23, 1995 

 
413 

Nays 
 
Boyd Devine Swenson 
Neudorf Martens Goohsen 
D'Autremont Toth Britton 
Haverstock McPherson  

— 11 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, we won't get into 
any detailed business today but we'll tomorrow be working on 
Bills as well as calling estimates for Economic Development. 
And with that I would move the committee rise and report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 
 
 


