






















































May 16, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 16, 1995 

 

 
2259 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have today several 
hundred signatures of people that want to petition the 
government. And I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
They come from the area of Golden Prairie, Eastend, looks like 
Gull Lake area, Ravenscrag; we have Consul and just about 
every town, I guess, in the south-west and so I won't read all of 
them. But I'm happy to table these on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from Estevan, Alida, Storthoaks, Bienfait, 
Maryfield, Glen Ewen, Carievale, Redvers, Antler, Wauchope 
and Bellegarde areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I too wish to present petitions to the 
Assembly, and I'd like to read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a  

 provincial basis. 
 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the petitions I present are basically signed mostly from that 
Yorkton, Springside, Theodore area, as well as Kinistino and 
Yellow Grass. I so present them. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 
petitions to present and I will just read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on the abusers, recognizing that gun 
control and crime control are not synonymous, and 
allowing provinces to deal with gun control legislation 
on a provincial basis. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these come . . . a lot of these come out of 
Saskatoon, Invermay, MacDowall, and places like that. I would 
be pleased to present them today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitions 
continue to pour in and it is my pleasure to table some of those 
today as well. And the prayer of my petition is similar to my 
colleagues': 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners this afternoon come from the 
Foam Lake, Watson, Mozart area, as well as Carnduff and 
Gainsborough. And it gives me pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to lay 
these on the Table this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I as well 
have petitions with regard to the issue of firearms in 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan that are very 
concerned about this issue. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the Lampman area, 
Estevan, as well as from my constituency; a number of 
petitioners from Eston and area. And I'd be pleased to present 
them on their behalf today. 



May 16, 1995 

 
2260 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

adequate funding toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee on Regulations 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Toth, from the Special Committee on 
Regulations, presents the fourth report of the said committee, 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
present the report of the Special Committee on Regulations and 
move, seconded by the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden: 
 
 That the fourth report of the Special Committee on 

Regulations be now concurred in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think once the Assembly takes a minute to 
review the report and the number of regulations that have been 
reviewed by this committee, you may be surprised at the 
amount of time that has been spent, the reviews that have taken 
place of the regulations and the by-laws. 
 
And I can only suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that was only made 
possible because of the able assistance received by the Clerk of 
the Assembly and certainly by the Legislative Law Clerk. And 
we as a committee would like to thank these individuals for 
their willing and able assistance and the time they've taken in 
bringing the reviews to the attention of the committee. 
 
I'd like to also thank all committee members for their 
indulgence in allowing us to have had ample time and reviewed 
very judiciously the report that has been brought forward and 
the different regulations. And as well acknowledge the fact that 
a number of departments and certainly ministers in the past 
have taken time to acknowledge the work of the committee and 
bringing forward the needed changes in legislation and 
regulations to bring them up to date and address the concerns 
that committee members have brought forward. 
 
So it's my pleasure to indeed move: 
 
 The fourth report of the Special Committee on 

Regulations be now concurred in. 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to  

second the motion brought forward by my colleague, the 
member from Moosomin, who was certainly a most diligent 
Chair. I'd also like to thank Gwenn Ronyk and Bob Cosman for 
their work on the committee and the committee members as 
well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, a combination of the poor 
lighting in the galleries and his casual dress, which in this case 
is almost anything but black suits and black robes, had me 
guessing; but I've had it confirmed that there are two visitors in 
your gallery that I should like to introduce to you and through 
you to the members. 
 
He is currently a history student at the University of 
Saskatchewan, but prior to that was the Clerk of that other 
place, the Senate in Ottawa. And I think by this time it's 
becoming clear to those who did serve here before that I'm 
referring to a former Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, who is 
seated in your gallery, and his wife. I would like the members to 
please join me in welcoming Gordon and Elaine Barnhart. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join with my 
colleague in welcoming Mr. Barnhart and his wife Elaine on 
behalf of the opposition caucus. Certainly it was my pleasure to 
have worked with Gordon for awhile in the Assembly and I 
think we really appreciated his efforts in this House and 
certainly wish them the best in the future. Again, thank you for 
coming and letting us know you're still around. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join with my colleagues in this House in 
welcoming Mr. Barnhart and his wife. I had the great pleasure 
of having a most thoughtful, intelligent, and insightful 
conversation with Mr. Barnhart and hope that we can do that 
again in the near future. 
 
I too would like all of the colleagues of this House to join 
together in welcoming the two of them one more time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two 
introductions. One is to join with my colleagues in welcoming 
Gordon and Elaine Barnhart, who were wonderful hosts to a 
Saskatchewan delegation one time when we were in Ottawa, 
but also go back a long way to times when our children were 
being driven together to Montessori School when they were 
preschool children. So I've had a long association with the 
family and I indeed welcome them here this afternoon. 



May 16, 1995 

 
2261 

I would also like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, 26 grade 4 students who are seated 
in the west gallery this afternoon. They're from St. Marguerite 
Bourgeoys School in the constituency. 
 
I recently had an opportunity to visit with teachers and parents 
who had an issue of concern, and now I'm looking forward to 
meeting with the students after they've had a chance to have a 
tour and a photo with me later on the steps. Accompanied this 
afternoon by Betty-Ann Faber and Janice Hicock as the teachers 
that are with them this afternoon. 
 
I'd ask all members to join with me in giving them a warm 
welcome today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, I once again would like to 
compliment you on your impartiality. At the risk of 
embarrassing a couple of constituents of mine, for the fifth time 
around, I would like to welcome to this House, Mr. and Mrs. 
Barnhart. And although I haven't had the opportunity recently to 
talk to Mr. Barnhart, I did a couple of weeks ago talk to Mrs. 
Barnhart in the Lakeview pharmacy and I must say it was a very 
thoughtful, intelligent, and insightful conversation that we had. 
So I would ask all members to, for the fifth time, welcome the 
Barnharts to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce 25 grade 8 students seated in the east gallery, from 
the Carnduff School. Accompanying the students is their 
teachers, Art Keating and Brian Nicholls, along with their 
chaperons, Mr. and Mrs. Logue. I'd like to welcome them here 
today. It's a long drive from Carnduff. 
 
And not only has this group come in today, Mr. Speaker, but we 
had a group earlier this morning from Arcola. And I would like 
to ask the Assembly to welcome the students and teachers from 
the Carnduff School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 
seven individuals seated in your gallery. They are individuals 
who are presently taking cancer treatment at the hospital here in 
Regina. I know that all members will want to join with me in 
wishing you and your families the very best at this most 
difficult time. And I'm hopeful that you will enjoy question 
period. 
 
As well, my friend and colleague from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden 
will be meeting with you after question period, and I'm sure 
you'll have an interesting discussion. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a great pleasure 
for me this afternoon to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, some guests on behalf of my 
colleague, the minister from Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
There are 40 grade 8 students seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They are from Rosetown Central High School in 
Rosetown. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Formack and Mr. Wiebe. 
 
I understand that they've had a tour and that they're going to be 
with us for question period, which I hope they will enjoy. And 
I'm looking forward to meeting with them later on for 
questions. 
 
So please join me in giving them a warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to join the hon. member from 
Souris-Cannington, if I might, to welcome the students, 
teachers, and parents from Carnduff. I can't see them, but 
Carnduff is my home town and my parents still live there, and 
this is a long tradition of the grade 8 class coming in to the 
legislature. I had that privilege not too many years ago. 
 
At any rate, I hope that you enjoy today. Good to see you, and 
have a safe trip back. And all the best in your studies for the 
rest of the year. Thanks for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

StatsCanada Reports Provincial Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Roy: — Mr. Speaker, we have all known that the 
Saskatchewan economy is growing, and now Statistics Canada's 
latest figures confirm what we have been saying all along. The 
Saskatchewan economy grew by 4.5 per cent in 1994, several 
points ahead of the national average. It is the province's best 
performance in four years. 
 
There was growth in the energy, mining, and agricultural 
sectors. The oil patch is seeing an increase in activity, 
production of potash rose dramatically in 1994, and total crop 
receipts increased 38.2 per cent in 1994. 
 
To demonstrate that this trend is continuing, the total value of 
manufacturing shipments increased by almost 23 per cent in 
January, 1995 over January, 1994. Total exports increased 70 
per cent in the same period and exports of agricultural products 
were up by 77.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one doesn't have to look very far to see that this 
increase in economic activity is helping to create jobs all across 
Saskatchewan. There was an increase of 9,000 jobs from 
March, 1994 to March, 1995. The future expansion of  



May 16, 1995 

 
2262 

Thompson Meats in Melfort will mean the doubling of this 
company's 70-person workforce. Cargill will build a canola 
crushing plant near Saskatoon creating hundreds of jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two projects are good examples of the kind 
of growth that is taking place right across the province in rural 
and urban Saskatchewan. Congratulations to the businesses and 
employees who are helping the provincial economy grow. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Development and Cooperatives Conference 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Mr. Speaker, the provincial government, 
together with Saskatchewan cooperative organizations, is 
hosting a conference which will be held in Saskatoon, June 12 
to 14, with the theme of Building Our Future: Economic 
Development and Cooperatives into the 21st Century. 
Conference chairman is Garf Stevenson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that this event has so far 
attracted about 400 delegates, including speakers from 20 
different countries around the world. Speakers include 
prominent Canadian and Saskatchewan cooperators, such as 
Yang Deshow, secretary-general of the All China Federation of 
Supply and Marketing Cooperatives, probably one of the largest 
cooperatives in the world with 160 million member households. 
 
Edgar Parnell, director, Plunkett Foundation of cooperative 
studies, Oxford, England; Nettie Wiebe, president, National 
Farmers Union, Saskatoon; Manyika Gombera, treasurer, 
Organization of Collective Cooperatives of Zimbabwe; Roberto 
Rodrigues, vice-president of Americas region, International 
Cooperative Alliance, Sao Paulo, Brazil; and our Premier. 
 
Other countries represented at the conference will include the 
United States, Switzerland, Nicaragua, Columbia, Thailand, 
Greece, Japan, Italy, and India. Mr. Speaker, cooperatives can 
play a key role in fostering world prosperity because they can 
thrive in both developed and developing countries. 
 
I am excited by the prospect of such a unique gathering here, in 
one of the strongholds of cooperation, discussing the future 
implications of everything from publicly traded cooperatives to 
globalization and technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Science and Engineering Fair 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 
almost one month ago that I informed the Assembly that a grade 
12 student in my riding would be a team Canada representative 
at the 1995 International Science and Engineering Fair in 
Hamilton, Ontario. 
 
Jason Leuschen of Bruno Central High School has returned  

home for that competition, Mr. Speaker, and I am pleased to say 
that he won an award for a project with industrial applications 
sponsored by the Society of Manufacturing Engineers. Jason 
wins a scholarship, a plaque, and prize money for his showing 
at this competition. 
 
I'm also pleased to mention that the team Canada was awarded 
with one-third of the first place finishes. This is a remarkable 
achievement because there were over 30 countries participating 
in this competition, and this was Canada's first year. Jason and 
team Canada members have helped Canada make its mark in 
the international community by demonstrating excellence in 
science. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only has Jason done well in science and 
engineering fields but his writing skills have received top 
honours as well. 
 
He will be representing Saskatchewan as a youth ambassador in 
Europe this summer after winning an essay contest. Each 
province will send one representative to England, France, and 
Switzerland, to promote cultural awareness. This trip, 
sponsored by E.F. Educational Tours, will take place in July. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Jason Leuschen for 
his excellent showing at the International Science Fair, and I 
know he will be representing Saskatchewan well as a youth 
ambassador in Europe. And it is a fine example, Mr. Speaker, 
of the talent that Saskatchewan produces. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Band and Choral Festival, Park Art, and 
Murals 

 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, three more good reasons to 
visit Moose Jaw this weekend. 
 
First, of course, it wouldn't be spring if the Moose Jaw Kinsmen 
International Band and Choral Festival did not occur, which 
almost happened. But the people of Moose Jaw refused to let it 
go, and this weekend the 46th festival proudly takes place. 
 
Twenty-three concert bands, fifteen choirs, eight jazz combos, 
and five jazz bands will entertain us at open-air concerts on 
Main Street, Saturday afternoon, and at Peacock Auditorium 
Thursday and Friday evening. These groups are travelling from 
Montana, Alberta, and from across our province. Every toe in 
Moose Jaw will be tapping, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on Saturday, folks can head up to the Hillcrest Sports 
Centre on Main Street for our Park Art '95, our annual art and 
crafts festival, featuring a wide variety of high quality, 
handmade, original crafts and works of art, along with more 
music and entertainment. 
 
Now finally, Mr. Speaker, for all those who enjoy a pleasant 
stroll through an historic and attractive urban setting, there's  



May 16, 1995 

 
2263 

always a chance to check out our 26 giant outdoor murals 
depicting events from our history, murals created by artists from 
Moose Jaw and as far away as Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
 
Only in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, can tourists combine these 
three first-rate attractions in one weekend, and that's without 
even discovering a tunnel or bumping into Al Capone. Mr. 
Speaker, this long weekend, if you're where it's at, you're in 
Moose Jaw. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Echo Valley Conference Centre 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today 
to rise and report on the progress of the beautiful Echo Valley 
Conference Centre. The Echo Valley Conference Centre is now 
in its third year of operation and doing very well indeed. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, a few years ago the future of Fort 
San was in serious doubt. But the local community, aboriginal 
bands, and the Government of Saskatchewan, worked together 
in a partnership to reopen Fort San. By doing so, they created 
jobs and training opportunities. Today this site is thriving, 
preserving a portion of Saskatchewan's history while providing 
millions of dollars in economic benefits to the surrounding 
community. 
 
The centre broke even a full year ahead of its scheduled budget. 
The former Fort San serves in the off-season as a conference 
centre for groups who want basic, clean accommodation. 
During the summer months, it houses the western Canada sea 
cadet training program. 
 
This summer, approximately 300 western Canadian sea cadets 
will receive intensive training at the Qu'Appelle Valley site, as 
Prince Edward saw last summer, and as I attested to a couple of 
years ago myself when I toured the facility. The summer of 
1995 will prove no exception as the sea cadets return once more 
to our beautiful valley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to welcome the cadets back to the 
community. With their help, we have maintained an important 
part of Saskatchewan's heritage. We have provided jobs and 
economic benefits to local businesses in the surrounding area. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the future looks bright for the Echo Valley 
centre. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to welcome to the  

Assembly today, 27 students, grade 6 students, in the west 
gallery from the Watson Elementary School in Watson. They 
are accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by their teacher Bernice 
Gerspacher. Islay Ehlert is chaperoning, along with Shelley 
Frederick and Jayne Nordick and Dwight Mierke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like, through you to all the members, to 
ask members to welcome this group here, wish them a pleasant 
stay in Regina, and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

GRIP Premiums 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today may be 
known here in the legislature as private members' day, but in 
our caucus we like to think of this time as member of the 
public's day. We are pleased again to bring the voices and 
concerns of ordinary taxpayers into question period. 
 
Since we started the "Mr. Premier, I want to know" program 
this session, we have received literally thousands of responses, 
and we hope to give the government the opportunity to respond 
to all of them. 
 
This question, the first in the series today, Mr. Speaker, comes 
from Albert Hassen from Bruno. Mr. Premier, I want to know 
why the final payment for the 1993-94 GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) is being delayed until 1996. Will the 
farmers be charged interest if there is money owing the 
government? Are the farmers going to be paid interest if there is 
money owing to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm 
pleased to answer that question for Albert. The GRIP program, 
as it was designed — and members opposite well know; they 
designed it — is based on payments being made when final 
prices are in. And therefore a crop that's grown in '93 isn't sold 
until the '93-94 crop year and the final calculations can't be 
done until '95 when the Wheat Board payments and the national 
grains bureau's numbers are all in. 
 
What we did as a government . . . had we continued with the 
GRIP program as it was designed, we would have sent out bills 
for premiums for '93 overpayment . . . we would have sent out 
bills for the '94 premium and collected them and waited until 
January '96 and then paid that money back to the producers. 
That didn't make much sense to us. 
 
What we decided to do was to not collect those premiums and 
not charge interest on them. And when the program is finally 
wound down, any balance still owing to farmers will be paid to 
them at that time. And we think that made much more sense 
than collecting the money in and then paying it back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2264 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question comes from Emeric Greenwald of Scott, 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, I want to know why we were told 
that Saskatchewan could not afford GRIP as we knew it, and 
now we are told that there is a large surplus in its account. This 
reality makes me wonder why our GRIP premiums went up 
over the last two or three years and coverages went down, while 
Alberta and Manitoba, our neighbours, enjoyed high production 
guarantees. We got undermined by the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, again I'm pleased to 
answer that question on the GRIP program. The money, the 
premiums, in Saskatchewan did not go up. In fact after the 
changes were made, the net effect will be that producers will 
pay no premium for '93 and '94 when the thing is all settled up. 
Producers in Alberta indeed paid 8 and $9 an acre premium in 
the last two years and got nothing back from the program if they 
had an average crop. 
 
We can demonstrate quite clearly that our producers got a lot 
more out of the market-place. That's why there was a surplus in 
the GRIP program, because the grain prices went up. That's 
demonstrated by StatsCanada numbers where in . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Will the members in 
opposition please come to order. The minister is trying to 
answer the question. I wish the members would listen to him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, our producers in 
1994 had a net farm income of $924 million, which was more 
than double than what any income that they got during the Tory 
regime, and even given the government payments that were 
there at that time. Our producers diversified, our producers 
made good production decisions and got more money out of the 
market-place than did producers in Alberta and Manitoba. 
 
And that, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is where producers would like 
to get their money from, is from the market-place and not from 
government programs if they can help it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Reform 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question comes 
from Ethel Nemeth from Lestock. Mr. Premier, I want to know 
why you have money for the Big Valley Jamboree, gambling 
addiction centres, etc., and yet our hospital and health care 
system is not important any more. You have high-paid NDP 
supporters running the show, shutting down hospitals, getting 
rich going to meetings, while the sick are waiting for hospital 
rooms which are used for storage. Your cut-backs are 
destroying small communities and causing lay-offs. Start 
thinking of the people who put you where you are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
individual who has written that health care is the number one 
spending priority of this government. We are spending in this  

budget year about $1.5 billion to provide quality health care for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The members opposite well know that some of the difficulties 
that the delivery of health care has experienced in this province, 
as well as the delivery of other services, is as a direct result of a 
$15 billion debt heaped on the people of this province by that 
political party, Mr. Speaker; now to be compounded, now to be 
compounded by an offloading of federal government onto the 
provinces from the federal Liberal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this context, in this very difficult context, this 
government has taken the appropriate measures, courageous 
measures, Mr. Speaker, to restructure the delivery of health care 
so that we are able in Saskatchewan to preserve the 
fundamental principles of medicare so that we will not see in 
Saskatchewan the Americanization of our system as being 
recommended by members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gambling Addictions Treatment 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps 
the next minister can be a little bit more accurate in the answer. 
 
And this question comes from Emilie Neufeldt from Saskatoon. 
And she asks, Mr. Premier, I want to know how the government 
and the health boards can justify cutting funds for hospitals and 
universities and then spend a million and a half to build 
treatment centres for addicts-to-be of gambling casinos, which 
will prove a curse to our province in the long run. Do you really 
have the welfare of the people in mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I recall the discussion in 
this legislature not many days ago when members opposite were 
lobbying for more resources to be put in addiction treatment 
programs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the situation in Saskatchewan is that we saw 
an expansion of gaming and gambling activities in this province 
beginning in 1969. It took a phenomenal leap in the 1980s with 
the bingo halls. Now the members opposite laugh at that. They 
were in government when we saw the phenomenal growth of 
the bingo halls. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, with gambling activity, we know 
with the consumption of liquor, we know there are issues in our 
society which will create addictions. We're proud, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have in place, across Canada the most effective and 
well financed gambling addiction program that you will find in 
the country, Mr. Speaker. Because in fact we are sensitive to the 
needs. We are aware of the concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Arts Funding 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,  



May 16, 1995 

 
2265 

our caucus has always tried to make the "Mr. Premier, I want to 
know" program reflect the views of the people. And we've 
always been careful to keep our views out of the question. And 
sometimes that means that we ask questions that we don't agree 
with. 
 
This question comes from Roslyn Friesen from Saskatoon. Mr. 
Premier, I want to know if you have any intentions of increasing 
funding to the fine arts. Being a classically trained professional 
musician, what the heck do I have to do in order to obtain some 
of it? 
 
Please respond to Roslyn Friesen. 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
for that question. Saskatchewan continues to support the arts 
and cultural community. They are a very important part of our 
economy and they're a very important part to the well-being of 
the province. 
 
We are supporting arts and culture. We continue to. Two years 
ago we increased funding to the Arts Board, and the per capita 
allowance that we have to arts and culture in Saskatchewan is 
very much on a par or more than most provinces in Canada. 
 
I think what we have to do is look at the federal government 
and see how they are committed to funding arts and culture in 
Canada. And we see there tremendous decreases in their 
transfer payments to arts and cultural industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Tax Exemptions 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Madam Minister, the truth is starting to come out about the 
so-called negotiations between you and the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations). You aren't talking about . . . or 
pardon me, you are talking about removing the PST (provincial 
sales tax) on off-reserve purchases. You're negotiating even 
further tax breaks for status Indians, like exempting them from 
collecting gasoline and tobacco tax on reserve. And now some 
Indian bands say that these negotiations aren't going fast 
enough, so they're threatening a tax revolt. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you looking at even further tax 
exemptions for status Indians? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I welcome that question. The group in question was 
. . . I had a meeting with the group in question, March 10. Chief 
Favel was there, Chief Bear was there, and a number of other 
people were there; to further the information, it was in 
Saskatoon from 4 to 6. 
 
And the position of the government was at that meeting the 
same as the position in this legislature. I have said we will not  

talk about Indian taxation issues in isolation. They are a 
package and they have to be discussed as a package. And the 
way that we would like to proceed is to have broadly based 
discussions at a high level in order to resolve this issue. 
 
And that's the position that we take in private, and that's the 
position that we take in public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister is 
saying and what the Economic Development minister has said 
to the people of Saskatchewan is they don't want to talk about 
these important issues during an election campaign. 
 
Madam Minister, will you explain then what exactly are the 
nature of the negotiations that you are talking about now? You 
have been trying to leave the impression that these talks were 
about ending the PST exemption for status Indians when that 
doesn't seem to be the case at all. 
 
In fact Chief Favel says that this issue is not on the table. And 
the report in today's newspaper seems to suggest that any 
negotiations that are taking place involve even further tax 
exemptions on items like cigarettes and gasoline. 
 
Madam Minister, why have you tried to mislead Saskatchewan 
people? Why have you tried to give the impression that you are 
talking about a PST exemption when clearly this isn't the case? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. We have been absolutely consistent and clear with the 
Saskatchewan people. We have said that we had extensive 
negotiation under the previous administration. 
 
We have a new administration at the FSIN. We have had 
preliminary discussions with them. The meeting I cite is one of 
those instances. 
 
And we have taken a consistent position. We have to talk about 
the whole package of tax initiatives. We have to have a 
well-thought-out, well-planned approach to taxation. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, when they raised this issue in the 
House the very first day, I said, you haven't thought it through. 
Within days they were backtracking. They were saying, oops, 
we didn't mean that everybody was going to pay the E&H 
(education and health), just off reserve. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, we're going to think and talk our 
way through this and come out with a reasonable, fair policy. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, your 
government says one day the negotiations are on; the FSIN says 
they're not on. The people of Saskatchewan would like you to 
clarify it for them. Saskatchewan people don't want a two-tiered 
taxation system, one set of tax laws for status Indians and 
another one for everyone else. Saskatchewan people want a fair 
taxation system, one that treats everyone equally, fairly, Madam  



May 16, 1995 

 
2266 

Minister. That's what our party stands for. But you seem to be 
going exactly the opposite direction. 
 
Madam Minister, you are already extending further tax 
exemptions to some Indian bands. The James Smith and 
Poundmaker bands are allowed to sell cigarettes tax free. 
Madam Minister, what other exemptions are you negotiating? 
Why are you negotiating further tax exemptions for status 
Indians when Saskatchewan people are demanding tax fairness? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. Just because he stands there and says something to be 
true, doesn't make it true. We are not negotiating anything. 
What we have in place are discussions about the broad range of 
taxation initiatives. 
 
But what I would challenge the member opposite to think about 
is the level of taxation here might be different than other 
provinces; that is in some cases Indians pay less here and some 
cases they pay more, but not in sum total in terms of value 
different than in other jurisdictions, including Tory 
jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to take a thoughtful, reasoned, 
comprehensive approach to this, and we're going to be proud of 
the fact that we're going to think our way through it and come 
up with a fair and reasonable policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation into Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
March the Justice minister announced that an independent 
prosecutor from Alberta would be reviewing the Saskatchewan 
decision not to charge Phoenix Advertising for transactions 
resulting in the Koskie conviction. Almost two months have 
passed and the government has not provided this House with a 
report. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Justice: what is the status of 
this investigation and will the report be provided to the public 
before an election is called? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for that question. It's timely because just this morning I 
inquired as to where the matter stood. I am advised by the 
department that the counsel to which this matter has been 
referred, who is an Alberta lawyer, had some two or three 
weeks ago requested a transcript of the trial. That transcript had 
to be prepared, had to be typed. It's apparently almost done and 
it's in the process of being typed and then sent to him. 
 
I learned of this this morning. It's not possible for me to 
estimate when the lawyer will be reporting to us, but as soon as 
we receive his report it will be made public. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
Alberta independent prosecutor must be concerned about the 
investigation, especially since he has contacted the Justice 
department for more information, as the minister stated. 
 
My question again to the Minister of Justice: why was the 
independent prosecutor not given all the available information 
at the start of the investigation? Why has your department 
dragged its feet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The answer to that question, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there was no transcript at the time. There was 
no transcript that had been requisitioned. After the request came 
back from Mr. Martin, we had to requisition the transcript, and 
work has proceeded as quickly as possible with respect to its 
preparation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the Phoenix Advertising 
Group is the agency of record for the NDP and will play a 
major role in the upcoming election campaign. Voters want to 
know the outcome of this investigation before they go to the 
polls. 
 
Mr. Minister, to halt the concerns of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan that in fact your government is trying to delay the 
investigation until after the provincial election, will you 
guarantee that this report will be made public as soon as it's 
delivered to the government, even if it comes during the 
election writ? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, I'm not in a 
position to give any guarantees to the House because my name 
is not Mr. Martin and I'm not dealing with this matter. We're 
trying to get the transcript to him as quickly as we can. We did 
not know that he would need that when the matter was referred 
to him. He did not know because he didn't request it 
immediately. But apparently in his consideration he felt the 
need to look at the transcript, so he requested it. 
 
As I said to the member, the transcript is being prepared as 
quickly as possible. It will be sent to Mr. Martin. And when his 
report is received, it will be made public immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Justice is fond of chiding those who come 
forward with proposals to help law-abiding citizens fight the 
Liberal gun laws. And the minister has said that entrenching 
property rights and invoking the notwithstanding clause won't 
help. 



May 16, 1995 

 
2267 

Well, Mr. Speaker, like the armchair quarterback, it's easy to 
criticize from the sidelines. However it appears that the minister 
might be coming around. My question is directed to him. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have recently considered joining Alberta in a 
court challenge over the Liberal gun registry. What would be 
the basis of this court challenge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The basis of the challenge . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The basis of the challenge, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition will allow me to put 
my answer, is that it may well be that the federal government 
have exceeded their jurisdiction. 
 
Their jurisdiction, after all, is founded upon their power to 
enact the criminal law. And it may be that they are moving 
beyond the regulation of the criminal law into the area where 
property and civil rights are involved, and that of course is a 
provincial responsibility. 
 
That's the basis for our thinking with respect to the challenge. 
We haven't yet got legal opinions on it, nor will we until we see 
what it is, if anything, that parliament finally passes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the basis of our Bills 31 and 48 deal with property 
rights and the notwithstanding clause they're attached to. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd like to remind you what you said in the paper 
on Friday — quotes from the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix 
specifically, where you said: 
 
 The court challenge would focus on the fact that the 

federal government's only power in this area is to 
legislate criminal law . . . 

 
 But the regulation of the gun control law — specifically, 

the proposed gun registry — "is getting so detailed and 
so far removed from criminality they begin to intrude 
into property and civil rights" . . . 

 
Let me repeat that, what you said: the proposed gun registry is 
beginning to intrude into property rights. 
 
Well welcome aboard the bandwagon, Mr. Minister. Now that 
you have embraced our position, how about embracing our 
legislation as the first step in your court challenge? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I have tried over and over 
in this House and in private conversation to tell that member 
and some of his colleagues the legal reality, and that is that 
there is utterly nothing in their Bill that will buttress the 
position of the province of Saskatchewan one whit, so far as our 
constitutional position in this matter is concerned — not one 
whit. 

Now that is the assessment of everybody that knows anything 
about constitutional law. It's as simple as that. And I wish the 
member would stop asking me that question and think of a new 
one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, we have a legal opinion dealing with section 92. 13. 
of the constitution. You've kept talking about we can't do it, but 
you have yet to come up with a legal opinion that states that you 
can't do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, if indeed the federal government is encroaching 
into property rights and our pieces of legislation, in your 
opinions, don't fit the Bill, will you bring something forward 
then that does give Saskatchewan made-in-Saskatchewan 
protection against the federal Liberal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — The member just misses the point, Mr. 
Speaker. The question is whether the federal government has or 
has not the power to make this Bill. If they haven't, it will be 
because it isn’t legislation respecting the criminal law. If it is 
not legislation respecting criminal law, that's the end of it. Their 
legislation is no good, and it will fall. 
 
There is nothing that we in Saskatchewan can do or indeed 
should do in order to buttress our constitutional position 
because it is as strong right now as it will ever be. The question 
is the content of Bill C-68 and whether that is indeed a valid 
exercise of the federal government's power with respect to 
criminal law or whether it has encroached upon provincial 
jurisdiction. 
 
That is as clear and simple as I can make it. If the member will 
just get all the Hansards together — all 96 of them — and read 
those over, he will find in there over and over again a very 
simple explanation to what is a question that just shouldn't be 
asked any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Expansion 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the gambling minister. Madam Minister, we see 
one more example of the NDP's helter-skelter gambling policy. 
Last week you announced that La Loche will be able to remove 
its five VLTs (video lottery terminal). At the same time you 
would refuse to honour a similar request from La Ronge. 
What's the difference, Madam Minister? Why do you have one 
policy for La Loche and another for La Ronge? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member for his 
question although I regret the shortness of your memory on 
these answers. This policy was set in August of last year. 
There's nothing new or helter-skelter about it. And it was set  



May 16, 1995 

 
2268 

within the context of the original purpose for the VLT program, 
the original purpose being requests made by the hospitality 
industry to be competitive with other jurisdictions and other 
industry players. 
 
Now in regards to the North, a number of factors were applied 
to looking at which communities would have the exemption, as 
has been done in liquor law. And it was decided at that time 
that north of the NAD (northern administration district) would 
be able to exempt themselves, with the exception of Creighton 
and La Ronge, which fell within the hospitality industry and 
other issues that were the reasons for that program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I'm not sure the people of 
or the mayor of La Ronge is going to be pleased with your 
answer. They're asking for the same opportunity that the 
community of La Loche has asked for. In fact they had their 
vote, and they have asked you, and you've indicated that you 
will remove the VLTs. 
 
Why will you not allow La Ronge the same opportunity? Or we 
do have a selective force, as we see in a letter to the editor in 
the Star-Phoenix. They don't want to force gun control on an 
unwilling population but are prepared to force VLTs on an 
unwilling population. When people are asking for an 
opportunity to vote, Madam Minister, why will you not give 
them that opportunity, and why will you not make a 
commitment to honour that plebiscite or that vote? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I will refer for the members . . . 
reminding the member of this press release in August 5, 1994. 
It was indicated that northern communities are recognized to 
have different economic situations than those found in northern 
tourist and border communities. And therein lies your answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act to amend The 
Health Districts Act (No. 2) 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move first reading of a Bill, An Act to amend The Health 
Districts Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be read a second time. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act to amend The 
Health Districts Act (No. 2) 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise  

to move second reading of The Health Districts Amendment 
Act. It is truly unfortunate that the changes which have been 
imposed upon our health care system have been made without 
any comprehensive plan, without measurability of their 
effectiveness, and with no concise system for accounting for the 
savings which may or may not be resulting from the changes. 
 
Across the province, we are hearing from people who have no 
level of comfort about the way health care is being managed. 
Whether or not it was the government's intention to convince 
people that health reform was necessary to save money, that is 
in large part what the expectation was amongst communities at 
the outset of this exercise. 
 
People have come to accept two things, Mr. Speaker. First, that 
health care was costing more, and it was necessary to search for 
some efficiencies within the system. And second and most 
importantly, people had an expectation that reform would mean 
health care of equal or better quality than they have come to 
access in the past. 
 
If that was not the impression the government intended to leave, 
then I think it had an obligation to set the record straight at the 
outset. After three years, more than three years in fact of 
helter-skelter changes, hospital closures with no back-up plans 
in place, political appointments to district boards, devolution of 
staff from the Department of Health, there is a tangled trail of 
confusing transactions that have even the Provincial Auditor 
scratching his head over the accounting methods being 
employed under NDP health reform. 
 
I remind the Assembly that it was the Liberals who first brought 
to light the serious situations in many of the health districts who 
are now reported to be running deficits. Continually we are 
asked, as I know the government has been, what kind of plan 
did the NDP have if they could not even accurately project the 
budgets of the health care districts in the very first year of their 
reform agenda? And if they could not even plan for the first 
year, how in the world can we trust that there will be any 
long-term benefit to doing this financially and in terms of 
quality and accessibility of care? 
 
However inconsistent the minister's explanations have been — 
one day he knows about the deficits, the next day he isn't so 
sure, the next day it's another story — however inconsistent the 
explanations have been, there is one consistent thread to all of 
this. Consistently, Mr. Speaker, the minister has refused to take 
responsibility for the lack of accountability in this system. The 
decisions continue to be made at the top, but the blame for 
budget overruns and inconsistencies always lands squarely at 
the feet of the districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as long as the district boards are the appointees of 
this NDP government, then it is the government and its minister 
who must be prepared to accept the burdens of both 
responsibility and accountability for the fiscal realities of health 
care in Saskatchewan. 
 
This is not a time for blaming others, particularly blaming local  



May 16, 1995 

 
2269 

communities who have been caught up in this chaotic change. 
This is a time for the minister to admit that Simard's wellness 
model has gone amok; to comply with the request of the 
Provincial Auditor for greater accountability. The legislation 
before the Assembly today reflects fundamental changes needed 
to improve the accountability of the financial status of the 
various district health boards. 
 
This Bill proposes two key changes to the existing legislation. 
Currently the Minister of Health has to be notified if a district 
health board is projecting a deficit, and the minister must then 
approve any budgeted deficits. This allows the minister to be 
privy to information that the public and the Assembly do not 
have. The current legislation has no requirement for the 
Minister of Health to advise this Assembly of any projected 
district health board operating deficits. 
 
This Liberal Bill would require the minister to advise this 
Assembly of any proposed deficits approved or endorsed by his 
department. Now recent events have revealed that there were 
$30 million in deficits incurred by district health boards across 
the province in 1993-94. 
 
This information was almost two years old before it was 
released, and the minister had this information since June of 
1994. Currently this Assembly has no idea how many boards 
ran deficits in 1994-95 or which boards are projecting deficits 
in 1995-96. All of this information, Mr. Speaker, is in the hands 
of one individual — the Minister of Health — yet it is not 
available for other MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) or the general public. 
 
The second amendment to The Health Districts Act would also 
increase openness and accountability of the district health 
boards one step further. This Assembly allocated $677 million 
in 1993-94 to district boards, yet it relies on the Department of 
Health to relay second-hand information to the members of this 
Assembly. 
 
The Provincial Auditor shares this concern, and I quote from 
his spring report, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 The Assembly will continue to be responsible for 

raising taxes and allocating money for spending on 
health care. However, the Assembly will not be 
receiving reports from the organizations, i.e., the 
District Health Boards, delivering the services and 
spending the money. 

 
It is important to the taxpayers to understand what the financial 
status of our health care system is from one year to the next, 
Mr. Speaker. But it is equally important that the districts 
themselves have a sense of measurement and accountability 
from one district to the next. 
 
There are a number of hospitals who are being told that they are 
in a deficit position despite the fact that they have had no 
financial problems in the past. When local administrators or 
members of the community ask for explanations, the  

information they receive is incomplete and confusing. 
 
How can people be expected to place their trust in a system 
which cannot even answer the basic questions of the people 
who support it and rely on it for health care? The auditor 
recommends, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 That the Department of Health should provide the 

Legislative Assembly with a summary of the financial 
plans and actual results of the . . . (district health 
boards). 

 
The Liberals agree that there must be one place at which the 
health care buck has to stop. If the government is going to 
impose its so-called plan for health care on communities, then it 
is the government, and not the communities, which should be 
held accountable if the plan fails in any aspect. Until the plan is 
proven, until the system has matured to the point where there is 
built-in accountability, then the government cannot simply drop 
the reins and let the horse run off. 
 
The Health Districts Amendment Act being proposed would 
provide the needed changes to existing legislation to implement 
the Provincial Auditor's recommendations. It would require the 
minister to table before the legislature each report, financial 
statement, and schedule of investment received from the district 
health boards 90 days after the end of the fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a question of accountability, and the 
taxpayers of this province deserve open and accountable 
government. This Act is an important and necessary step toward 
a more responsible system of government. Before any further 
changes are made to the system of health care in Saskatchewan, 
we must have an accounting system in place which will assure 
all taxpayers that someone will take ultimate responsibility for 
the financial stability of our health care system in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 
amendments of The Health Districts Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
opportunity to rise today. I want to indicate to the members of 
the Assembly and to you, sir, that we want to have a chance to 
look at the Bill, study it, and therefore I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 73 — An Act respecting Elementary, Secondary 
and Post-secondary Education in Saskatchewan/Loi 

concernant l'enseignement élémentaire, secondaire et 
postsecondaire en Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting Elementary, Secondary and Post-secondary 
Education in Saskatchewan be now introduced and read the first  



May 16, 1995 

 
2270 

time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting Non-profit 
Corporations/Loi relative à la loi concernant les sociétés 

sans but lucratif 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting Non-profit Corporations be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Provincial Court Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I would move that we would refer the Assembly to 
private Bill No. 2, second reading. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review 

Committee/"LURC") 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure to move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Legislative 
Utilities Review Committee). 
 
This is the second time that this Bill has been dealt with in this 
Assembly. The official opposition introduced a similar Bill 
during last year's session. Unfortunately the government used 
its majority to stifle debate on the Bill and as a result it died on 
the order paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a nutshell, this Bill allows for the establishment 
of a committee made up of MLAs to serve as a watchdog over 
utility rate increases. The committee would be cost-effective 
and would give private members of the Legislative Assembly 
additional responsibility. 
 
The main purpose of the committee is to prevent the  

government from arbitrarily increasing utility rates. The 
Saskatchewan public want, and desperately need a body to 
regulate utility rate increases. 
 
And if you just look back, Mr. Speaker, at the number of 
increases that this province has had to endure under an NDP 
administration, it becomes very apparent to the people of 
Saskatchewan why there is such a need for something of this 
nature. Just look at the amount of money that the Crown 
corporations have taken from the people of Saskatchewan in 
direct taxation type of methods. 
 
SaskPower in 1991 had a profit level of $118 million; in 1992 it 
had a profit level of $107 million; and in 1993, $81 million. 
Just that corporation alone, Mr. Speaker, gives reason why the 
need for a utility review committee of this nature. 
 
Sask Energy — it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker — SaskEnergy 
in '91 had a profit level of $27.4 million; '92 had a profit level 
of $51.5 million; '93 had a profit of $68.7 million. 
 
SaskTel had a profit level in '91, of $51 million; '92, of $79.9 
million; and 1993 had a profit level of $85.5 million. SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) in 1991 had a profit 
level of $15.5 million; '92, of $15.2 million; and 1993 had a 
profit level of $22.4 million. 
 
All of these, Mr. Speaker, at the same time as we've seen rate 
increase after rate increase. The only one, SaskEnergy, had a 
modest decrease and that was after a 40 per cent drop in 
well-head prices for natural gas, Mr. Speaker. And this 
government still continues to hoist these kinds of rates on the 
people of this province. 
 
And that's why there's such a need for a committee of this 
nature to bring about a utility review committee made up of 
opposition and government MLAs, putting them to work, Mr. 
Speaker, instead of the back-bench MLAs in the government 
caucus sitting there doing nothing all day long, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's time to put those people to work, rather than when the 
Government House Leader calls them to vote, they stand in 
their place . . . about the only thing they do, Mr. Speaker, is say 
yes or no to a government motion or a government Bill. Beyond 
that their responsibilities are absolutely nil in this House. 
 
And it's time that we put those members back to work. It's time 
that the people of this province had their members vote the 
wishes of their constituents on these very important issues. 
That's what they are sent down here by their constituency for. 
That's the reason that the people of Saskatchewan have shown 
some degree of confidence in the members opposite to bring 
them to this Assembly and vote on measures that are important 
to them. And that's why we are suggesting an all-party 
committee made up of government back-bench MLAs, 
opposition MLAs, and third party MLAs to decide on these, 
with the opportunity to roll back price increases, roll back 
utility rate increases, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2271 

That's why we say that the utility rate review committee would 
be cost-effective, because those MLAs are already being paid to 
sit around this House and do nothing on a day-by-day basis. 
 
And you can go through them, Mr. Speaker. Some of these 
MLAs, you haven't heard one peep out of them hardly this 
session. I don't think the people of Saskatchewan are looking to 
pay these MLAs the salaries that they get and the compensation 
in a number of areas, and the pensions and everything else, just 
to sit in their place all day long and do absolutely nothing for 
the people of Saskatchewan. They're not paying them to do that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They're asking them to come down here and do something 
constructive for the people of this province, rather than stand 
and make a member's statement and somehow or another that's 
their contribution to Saskatchewan. 
 
That isn't any kind of a contribution. Real and effective 
contribution would be to take part in the decision-making 
process in this government, not to sit back and just do as the 
House Leader and the party whip suggests they do. That isn't 
effective. We think that there should be a mechanism, Mr. 
Speaker, that these people are made a part of a utility review 
committee. And this committee, I think, could be very effective, 
very effective, because the public and their constituents would 
have some control over what they are doing in this legislature. 
 
The people want this, I believe. As we travel the province, Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed a huge issue — utility rates. You talk to the 
business community or the farming community out there, Mr. 
Speaker, and they see their rates just going up, up, up. 
 
It used to be in business — and I'm involved in business and 
involved in agriculture as well — utility costs used to be a fairly 
small part of the overall cost of doing business. Now it's 
become an extremely important component of the cost overhead 
that a business person or a farm operation has in Saskatchewan 
today — an extremely large part of the cost of doing business. 
 
And on top of that it's almost become like another mortgage 
payment for households across this province. At one point, it 
used to be, as I say, just an incidental expense for the average 
home-owner in this province. Now it's become like another 
mortgage payment on the backs of the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
And that's why people are fed up with this government's policy 
of constant tax and utility rate hikes. It's time for the Crown 
corporations to be opened up to public scrutiny, Mr. Speaker — 
40 per cent of the budget, the overall budget of this province, is 
in utility, or pardon me, in Crown corporations. And the public 
don't even have one iota of say in the running of those 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, nor does the legislature have 
opportunity to review in this legislature the expenditures of 
those Crown corporations. 
 
As MLAs we do not have an opportunity to question the 
government on reasons behind rate increases before they're  

imposed. And that's what we are calling for, Mr. Speaker, so 
that the people of this province and the MLAs have opportunity 
to have a say before the price increases, before the tax 
increases, the utility rate increases. 
 
Until recently the NDP government felt its Executive Council 
was better equipped to determine Saskatchewan's tax load than 
a group of MLAs representing their constituents. However the 
looming provincial election seems to have changed the 
government's mind, and now they are proposing to implement a 
45-day notice on any rate increase. 
 
So what they're going to say to the people of Saskatchewan is, 
we're going to increase your rates but it's only going to be 45 
days from now. What kind of a sham is that, Mr. Speaker? 
There's nothing in this that will help the people of 
Saskatchewan. All they're saying is we're going to increase your 
taxation, but we're going to give you a short period to get your 
house in order so that you'll be able to pay for the cost increases 
that we're about to hoist on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I don't think that is effective at all. All it is is just giving them 
some notice. It's like when the minister stands in his place and 
says, effective tomorrow we're going to have an increase in 
SaskPower rates. Instead, now the minister will stand up and 
say, effective 45 days from now we're going to have an increase 
in utility rates. 
 
What possible input do the people of Saskatchewan have? What 
possible input do the MLAs of this province have in that 
decision making? Absolutely none. And that's why, Mr. 
Speaker, we believe that a Bill of this nature is important. We 
believe it will put the back-bench MLAs to work in this 
province. 
 
And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the government to take 
this a step further. Support our legislation and establish a 
committee to consider the value of rate increases, rather than 
leave this duty to those who sit at the cabinet table, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's why there is such an important need for a 
Bill of this nature. That's why we're proposing it, and that's why 
we think all members of this legislature should vote in favour. 
 
I move second reading of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to have a close 
look at the Bill, scrutinize it and consult with the members of 
our caucus. Therefore I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move that 
the Assembly move to private members' Bill No. 11, for second 
reading. 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2272 

Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act respecting the Protection of 
Saskatchewan Taxpayers 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to rise today to make a few remarks about Bill No. 11, 
the very first — the very first balanced budget legislation ever 
introduced into the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have been demanding a legislative 
guarantee that governments will not run deficits, and this Bill is 
exactly that, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 11 would make it illegal for 
the provincial government to run a deficit or raise taxes without 
first obtaining the approval of Saskatchewan people in a 
province-wide referendum. 
 
Such a measure has proven to be very successful in jurisdictions 
all across North America, Mr. Speaker. We believe that there 
has to be more than just the part of it saying that the budget of 
this province should be balanced. That's important, and as a 
fiscal Conservative I support balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, 
but on the other hand, you have to have strong controls on a 
government like this one opposite, who just wants to, in order 
to balance their budget, jack up taxes in every area. 
 
That's how they've accomplished it in Saskatchewan. Other 
jurisdictions have done it differently, Mr. Speaker. In Manitoba 
they have a balanced budget. There has not been a major tax 
increase in Manitoba in seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Alberta there's a balanced budget and, Mr. Speaker, they 
have done it differently than the government of Saskatchewan 
has done it. They are about to balance their budget in Alberta, 
Mr. Speaker, and they have done it by reducing the level of 
government spending in Alberta. They haven't done it by tax 
increases as you people opposite have done. 
 
It fails for me to understand, Mr. Speaker, why the government 
simply just does not want to look at reducing government 
expenditures rather than increasing the level of taxation on the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 11 just doesn't 
urge a government to balance a budget over four years like the 
NDP's shell of a balanced budget legislation does; it forces a 
government to balance the budget while being accountable in 
doing so. 
 
Further, what's the sense of having balanced budget legislation 
when there is no meat to it, no penalties for those making the 
decisions, no voice from the people, yet this is exactly what the 
members opposite have introduced in their balanced budget 
legislation. 
 
It's nothing more than a sham, Mr. Speaker, to try and convince 
the people of this province that they're interested in balanced 
budget legislation. They bring in a shell game type of thing, Mr. 
Speaker, that says we will balance the budget. 
 
We want legislative guarantees and I think the people of this  

province want legislative guarantees on balanced budgets, but 
as well on tax increases, and they want penalties on the 
politicians themselves. They want a penalty on the politicians if 
they do not come forward and do not balance the budget as they 
have said. 
 
In our legislation there is penalties. There's penalties on the 
Premier, the cabinet, back-bench MLAs, because they take part 
in the decision making in some respects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They want a balanced budget, but they also want a fine. Our 
legislation calls for a fine on the cabinet and the Premier and all 
members of the government if they do not bring in a balanced 
budget. They'd lose 25 per cent of their salary, and I think that 
that'd be a pretty strong incentive for them to adhere to a 
balanced budget. 
 
The NDP had to essentially, Mr. Speaker, they had to slap 
together some kind of legislation themselves in order to respond 
to Bill No. 11, and slap together is exactly what they did. The 
only reason the government brought forward a so-called 
balanced budget Bill, Mr. Speaker, is because they wanted to 
appear that they were addressing the wishes of the people of 
this province. 
 
Yet people are smarter than the members of government think 
they are. After taking a look at the government's pretend 
balanced budget Bill, the taxpayers association stated, and I 
quote: this legislation is obviously a very weak political 
solution to a serious fiscal issue. And it doesn't measure up to 
the true principles of taxpayer protection. The proposed 
legislation gives no genuine guarantee that politicians will be 
forced to live within taxpayers' means. 
 
Bill No. 11, Mr. Speaker, does just exactly the opposite. It 
forces a government to live within the taxpayers means; it 
provides more accountability, more input from people, and 
force a balanced budget on an annual basis. 
 
Further, Bill No. 11 requires the provincial budget account for 
all government revenues and expenditures, including those of 
Crown corporations. And we think that that's an extremely 
important measure because 40 per cent of the spending of 
government is outside of the General Revenue Fund of 
government, Mr. Speaker — 40 per cent of it is in Crown 
corporations spending, and therefore should be part of the 
overall make-up of the budget of this province and to the 
scrutiny of all taxpayers. It requires the Minister of Finance to 
table summary financial statements quarterly to ensure that the 
budget targets are being met throughout the year. 
 
In addition, it requires that any budget surpluses be applied to 
reduce the accumulated debt and any surpluses achieved after 
the debt is eliminated must be used to reduce taxes. And if a 
budget . . . or pardon me, and if a government failed to balance 
the budget, the Premier, cabinet, and every member of 
government caucus would have their salary reduced by 25 per 
cent. 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2273 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that's a real balanced budget piece of 
legislation. The NDP's balanced budget legislation doesn't 
require that a budget be balanced every year, and if a 
government fails to meet its target, there are no penalties for the 
politicians who have made those decisions. 
 
We think that that is a pretty weak piece of legislation, a pretty 
spineless piece of legislation that the government is wanting to 
promote to the people of Saskatchewan saying that they really 
believe in this type of measure. If the NDP government were 
serious about passing real balanced budget legislation in the 
province of Saskatchewan, they would ditch their sorry effort at 
this piece of legislation and support Bill No. 11, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this piece of legislation, 
Bill No. 11. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I don't want to here 
get into a debate disagreeing with the member opposite, but 
obviously our government is solidly committed to debt 
legislation and balanced budget legislation. We are the 
government that has led the province to its first balanced budget 
in over a decade. And therefore I want to review the Bill the 
member is offering up today and I would beg leave therefore to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would 
move that the Assembly move to private Bill No. 15 for second 
reading. 
 
Bill No. 15 — An Act to provide for the Enforcement of the 
Code of Ethical Conduct for Members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly (Anti-corruption) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased indeed to have this opportunity to speak in second 
reading on the Liberal proposal to enforce the code of ethical 
conduct, adopted by this very Assembly on June 14, 1993, 
through this anti-corruption legislation. 
 
Almost four years ago, when I took my place in this Assembly, 
I had high hopes that the government would move swiftly and 
decisively to enact a code of conduct that would put an end to 
the public perception that members of this Assembly were 
acting outside of the rules and regulations that govern the 
behaviour of ordinary citizens in similar situations. 
 
I was anxious to see the government take action immediately, 
because as we all know, there's deep cynicism across the 
province and a pervasive suspicion that a great deal of 
disreputable behaviour and action has been happening under the 
cloak of secrecy. And, Mr. Speaker, those suspicions on the part 
of the public have proven legitimate and well-founded in 
several circumstances. 
 
We all recognize that criminal charges are indeed matters for 
the court and for the justice system. There certainly are laws in  

place for all of society that can be applied to the misconduct of 
even elected members. But the conduct and actions of many 
who should be models for the people have been borderline — 
far outside the scope of ethical behaviour, even verging on the 
criminal. It is in the interests of clearing up borderline 
situations, of making the grey areas more black and more white, 
that I rise to speak today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps some of the rules governing expenditures 
by members in this Assembly have not been made clear. But I 
must say for the record that I believe that they have been left in 
an ambiguous state for far, far too long. After all, in the past 
20-odd years there have been hundreds of people, hundreds of 
MLAs and staff, who have spent money in this ambiguous 
system. And it appears obvious to anyone that these rules, 
because of their ambiguity, can be broken, not that most 
difficulty, by the very people who created them. And no 
attempts have really been made over the last 20 years to change 
that ambiguity. The defence which has become de rigueur in 
the courts today is that the rules were not clear. We thought this 
was acceptable. End quote. 
 
Ignorance of the law would be no defence for the public, and I 
know that the public finds it extremely distasteful and 
disdainful to hear it from their members of the Legislative 
Assembly. After all, how can MLAs who made the rules now 
claim ignorance of the rules as their defence for breaking them? 
 
The evidence in the current things before the courts is 
substantial. Past and present members of this Assembly have 
easily found ways to benefit from expenditures of allowances. 
Caucus grants have been misspent with no accounting. The 
process of changing those accounting processes have been 
painfully slow and woefully inadequate. Moreover when 
members have been charged as the result of criminal 
prosecutions, tried in the courts and found guilty, this very 
Assembly has taken no direct action to sanction those members. 
The public is left in a state of bewilderment at how elected 
representatives charged, tried, and convicted of defrauding the 
public of funds entrusted to their use in public service, how 
these individuals can simply show up for work the next day, 
collect a pay cheque from the very taxpayers they have 
defrauded. In no other workplace can that happen. 
 
The public certainly is not satisfied with the leadership that has 
been shown by this government in putting this workplace on par 
with the rules that apply to ordinary citizens in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Liberal Bill will do just that, Mr. Speaker, and I urge all 
members of this Assembly to lend their support to this 
important piece of legislation in the interests of demonstrating 
to the public that we are very serious, that all of us are serious, 
about cleaning up the mess that has been created here over 
some time. 
 
The effect of the Liberal Bill will be to provide a mechanism 
through which the nine principles governing the conduct of 
members can be enforced. This mechanism would be the  



May 16, 1995 

 
2274 

formation of an ethics committee completely independent of the 
Legislative Assembly that would be empowered to investigate 
alleged breaches of the code and punish the offending member 
in a number of ways. 
 
This legislation would also require the ethics committee to 
automatically review the case of a member who has been 
convicted of a criminal offence in a court of law for further 
sanctioning by this Assembly, whether that sanctioning be 
vacating the member's seat, perhaps suspending the member 
from a sitting, or seizing a portion of the member's pension. 
 
I want to quote from the proceedings of the House on June 14, 
1993 when the Associate Minister of Finance spoke to the 
government motion recommending adoption of the code of 
ethical conduct. He said, and I quote: 
 
 Recognizing that all the members' actions will be under 

public scrutiny, elected officials must act different than 
private citizens. Members of the Assembly must first 
and foremost ensure that public interest takes 
precedence. Our first step in this direction is for 
politicians to demonstrate their collective commitment 
to high ethical standards. 

 
I believe that this Act is the second important step in 
demonstrating our commitment to integrity, to honesty, and to 
accountability, that the people of this province demand from us 
and deserve from us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing let me say that we, as elected members 
of this Assembly, have not only the obligation, we have the 
duty, to ensure that the behaviour of public officials is of the 
highest moral, ethical, and professional conduct. In supporting 
this legislation, all members will reaffirm their commitment to 
attaining and maintaining those standards in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to provide for 
the Enforcement of the Code of Ethical Conduct for Members 
of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I won't take up time of 
the Assembly at this point in debating the pros and cons of the 
Bill that has been proposed here by the Leader of the Liberal 
Party, only to say that we will be reviewing it with some 
interest. 
 
This issue, I know, is being dealt with by the Board of Internal 
Economy at the present time. I believe she's a member of that 
committee, and therefore I think it would also be appropriate 
not only to bring the ideas here to the Assembly, but put them 
forward in the committee which you chair, Mr. Speaker. And 
I'm sure that we will bring some resolve to this important 
matter. 
 
Therefore I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave and by 
agreement of members of the Assembly, I would move that this 
House now move to government business, Committee of the 
Whole, on the Department of Finance. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Chair: — The last date that this department of estimates 
were before the committee was on March 27, so I will ask the 
Minister of Finance to reintroduce her officials to members of 
the committee. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. On my immediate left I have Bill Jones, the deputy 
minister of Finance; next to Bill there is Gerry Kraus, the 
Provincial Comptroller; on my right is Len Rog, the assistant 
deputy minister of the revenue division; seated right behind me 
is Craig Dotson, associate deputy minister, budget analysis 
division; and next to Craig is Bill Van Sickle, executive 
director, administration division. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I don't 
think we're in a position to agree to item 1 just yet. I think there 
are a number of questions that need to be raised with the 
minister. 
 
And I'm pleased to see the Minister of Finance with us today. I 
think it's important that we have a chance to sit down with the 
actual minister versus the associate minister. I think we've 
addressed some of the questions before through the associate 
minister. So I thank the minister for being here, taking the time 
out of her schedule; and for her officials for having taken the 
time to come and deliberate financial issues today. 
 
Madam Minister, over the past little while and about two weeks 
ago, the Provincial Auditor brought to our attention an issue 
that we've continually raised in this Assembly, and raised with 
you and raised with your department. The fact that on one hand 
we seem to have selective remembrances as to what we want to 
talk about in Finance, and on the other hand maybe talk about 
the total outlook of the finances of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I refer to the fact that the Provincial Auditor has 
continually reminded us over the past number of years that it 
would be more appropriate to address financial spending and 
activity in this province based on 100 per cent accountability 
for the whole area of government spending versus just the 60 
per cent that normally is raised by your office, by yourself,  



May 16, 1995 

 
2275 

certainly by the Premier and by members of the front benches of 
your government, and the fact that any type of an increase that 
taxpayers would be facing is, while you would say it isn't an 
increase . . .  
 
And that's one of the reasons my colleague, the Leader of the 
Opposition, raised and we've introduced a Bill calling for a 
legislative utilities review commission that would be conducted 
and administered by MLAs in this Assembly. 
 
The fact is people across this province continue to view utility 
rate increases as just a direct tax versus . . . or an indirect tax 
versus a direct tax. And while those utility rates go up, you 
don't, as a Finance minister, have to stand in this Assembly and 
acknowledge the income that comes in or the revenue that 
Crown corporations generate, and indeed the revenue that is 
passed on to your department and to the General Revenue Fund 
from Crown corporations, which assists you in balancing the 
books at the end of the day. 
 
So I think, Madam Minister, it's important for us to get into an 
overall discussion as to the finances of this province; how 
Crown corporations . . . the part and the role they play, even the 
effect of unfunded pension liabilities and the role they will 
have, both today and into the future, in relation to the General 
Revenue Fund, which as you've indicated, will see a balance 
this year, or actually a surplus, if I'm not mistaken — is going to 
show a surplus. 
 
And yet part of that surplus can be reflected back in the loss of 
revenue that producers have in the province of Saskatchewan 
regarding the changes to the GRIP program. And even next year 
that's going to be reflected in the revenue that may come back to 
the government's hands in overpayments that have been made. 
 
So while the Minister of Agriculture today talked about . . . in 
response to a question that came from a constituent or from a 
resident of the province of Saskatchewan regarding the GRIP 
program, we see the government, the Minister of Agriculture, 
has told us that no, the reason the wind-down of GRIP comes in 
1996 is because it takes us that long to review all the estimates 
and to review the whole program and indeed wind it down 
properly. 
 
The other effect it has, it certainly generates another source of 
revenue just because of the overpayments that may be coming 
in. 
 
I'm wondering, Madam Minister, how does the burden of utility 
rate increases split between individuals and business? Like 
taxes, does it go right down the middle? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, of course the member opposite knows when Crown 
Investments Corporation is here he can ask that particular 
question. What we're talking about now is the budget for the 
Department of Finance for the year 1995. 
 

I would like to address the broader question raised by the 
member opposite. And the member makes comments about the 
Provincial Auditor, some allusions to the Gass Commission. 
And I would like to quote some of the comments made by such 
individuals. For example, Don Gass, the person who chaired the 
Gass Commission, said, the important thing is that the 
government, the NDP, has done what it set out to do. 
 
Also Brian Taylor, president of the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants in Saskatchewan, said they, the members of the 
government, have made decisions and stuck by them. 
 
What the auditor says in his most recent report is that we 
provide amongst the best financial statements in all of Canada. 
They're comprehensive in terms of reporting not only the 
activities of the government but also the activities of the Crown 
corporations. 
 
What he's talking about is how, when he says he would like to 
see something changed, he talks about the way we budget. And 
I would say the way the Government of Saskatchewan budgets 
is the way virtually every other government, provincial 
government, in Canada budgets. 
 
And I would say as well that if the members opposite pass our 
balanced budget legislation, what you will see there is a more 
comprehensive approach. The debt reduction plan encompassed 
in the balanced budget legislation covers not just the 
government operations but the Crown corporations, to prevent 
the practices of the 1980s whereby huge dividends were taken 
from the Crowns, stripping the Crowns and forcing them to 
borrow more and to rack up more debt. 
 
I guess I would conclude by saying that we believe this is an 
appropriate way to budget. The Crown corporations, many of 
them, like SaskTel, operate in a competitive environment. To 
force them to disclose fully details of their operations, when 
their competition is not forced to do so, would put them at a 
significant advantage. 
 
And in closing I would say that obviously utility increases are 
not taxes. When Bell Canada in Ontario raises phone rates, the 
people of Ontario don't say, I've had a tax increase. When 
Alberta Power, which is a private power company, raises power 
rates, the people of Alberta don't say, I've had a tax increase. 
 
The government has recently announced a new process to allow 
more public scrutiny and input into rate increases. And I'm sure 
when CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
is here, you may want to discuss that process. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well I thank you, Madam Minister. It's 
unfortunate that CIC doesn't get the opportunity of coming 
before this Legislative Assembly. And I don't think, Madam 
Minister, you can hide behind that fact that CIC doesn't have 
access and that this opposition does not have access to Crown 
Investments Corporation on the floor of the Legislative 
Assembly to address these issues. 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2276 

And we come back to that other matter, Madam Minister. While 
you would suggest that we address these issues through CIC, 
CIC plays a very important role in revenue generation in the 
province of Saskatchewan. You talk about Bell Canada. Bell 
Canada, I understand, goes before a public utilities review 
committee in Ontario. But on top of it, it is not a Crown 
corporation. So they don't pay a dividend. They pay taxes to the 
province of Ontario. Ontario derives revenue via taxation, but 
they do not derive revenue, as you do, through dividends that 
would come from the Crowns. 
 
And again I refer to some of the information that was brought 
out this afternoon in the debate regarding the Crown 
corporations and the reasoning for a legislative utilities review 
committee  the fact that members would indeed have access 
to and the ability to debate on the floor of this Assembly any 
rate increases which down the road generate into tax revenue or 
revenue for the province of Saskatchewan through dividends. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I think we can all acknowledge that yes, 
this year you didn't have to pull on dividends, but if required, 
it's just a matter of the Executive Council going to CIC and 
requesting that we want a dividend pay-out of maybe 40 or 50 
per cent into the General Revenue Fund. And that then can be 
utilized to bring forward a balanced budget, or if you want to 
show a negative budget . . . 
 
And while you indicate that you'd like to see the members . . . 
or the opposition members allow this budget to pass, no doubt, 
Madam Minister, at the end of the day this budget will be 
allowed to pass, because I don't think we want to leave this 
budget open-ended. 
 
Because following the next provincial election, who's to say 
that we can come in after you've gone to the polls and after a 
government has a majority, come in and say, oh but there was 
an overlook here and oh but the farming economy has gone to 
pot and oh but the oil resource revenue isn't there and 
unfortunately that balance that was there prior to the election 
has disappeared on us. 
 
(1515) 
 
Madam Minister, I think it's important that this budget be 
passed so that you aren't allowed to cook the books as we've 
seen over the past few years, how you can manipulate. And 
that's one of the reasons we continue to talk about the fact that 
utility rates and Crown corporations has to be addressed in the 
overall picture. 
 
As the auditor indicated to us, when you look at expenditures, 
when you look at the debt in the province of Saskatchewan, it's 
not just the general revenue or the Crowns or the unfunded 
pension plan; that is the large picture. But it's like you've got a 
farming operation with three different bins, and if you transfer 
from one to the other, it doesn't change the debt in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I'm sure that you would have information  

in front of you that indicates how the burden of utility rate 
increases is split between individuals and businesses, and I'm 
asking why you are afraid to give us that information. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I would remind the member of is that we're 
talking about the 1995 budget. It's the Department of Finance 
here. 
 
We have lots of information for you on taxation measures that 
are being introduced in this fiscal year; some of the projections 
upon which those taxation measures are introduced. We do not 
have detailed information on the other departments. And when 
these departments are here, I know that those people will be 
most interested in providing you with that information. 
 
But there is another quote that I think is worth bringing to the 
attention of the members opposite, and it's about the way the 
government budgets. And you're saying the government should 
balance across government, including the Crown corporations. 
 
I would note the comments of Donald Gass, who says that 
although he understands the position being taken by the auditor, 
he doesn't agree with it. He says: 
 
 “I'm not sure that's the most effective way to budget for 

the organization. I'm not sure it really works. Summary 
statements are the only way to get the whole picture in 
financial reporting,” said Gass, “but there are several 
methods one can use when budgeting.” 

 
And that's from The Bottom Line, and I will table that into the 
records. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I find it interesting. I find 
it interesting, Madam Minister, that it wasn't long ago we were 
debating a Bill before this Assembly — Bill No. 58, I believe 
— and your comments at that time were that those questions are 
too specific. Bring them up when we're here in estimates. Well 
here we are — estimates, Committee of Finance. We're here. 
 
Now you don't want to raise them here. So where do we go? 
Another stall tactic, just putting off trying to answer a question, 
trying to answer the questions of individuals across this 
province who have seen utility rate increase, utility after utility 
rate increase, when every one of the corporations are making 
large dollars. And why would they be making large dollars for 
as far as net revenue and having surpluses? Why wouldn't you 
just leave those alone? Why not give the taxpayer a break? 
 
And when it comes to Mr. Gass, his comments, back in 1991, 
when you were trying to suggest that the books weren't open, 
that the books were closed, people didn't have access  his 
comments on an open line at that time were this, that the books 
were indeed open. The books were available to anyone who 
wanted to take the time to go and review the books. 
 
While you would suggest that they weren't, while you were 
suggesting we had to get rid of waste and mismanagement, your  



May 16, 1995 

 
2277 

own commission at the end of the day acknowledged that 
certainly the books were open. And indeed on many occasions, 
you had to go and find whether Mr. Stevenson agreed with Mr. 
Gass so that you'd have something to contradict what Mr. Gass 
said because your commission actually indicated that there was 
that openness. 
 
So, Madam Minister, what type of revenue do utility rate 
increases generate for the General Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
knows that what I'm saying is that there is an appropriate place 
to ask the detailed questions about utility rates, and that's when 
the Crown Investments Corporation is here. 
 
With respect to the dividend, the dividend is in the budget, and 
it's . . . I can get the deputy minister to tell you the line that it's 
on, the dividend. It's on page 92, transfers from Crown entities, 
$50 million. 
 
With respect to Mr. Gass, he said that Saskatchewan, when we 
took office in 1991, had amongst the weakest financial 
statements in all of Canada. And a large part of his report was 
ways in which the government could change the way we keep 
the books and report to the people of the province in order to 
make the government more accountable. 
 
Just as one example, it was possible before 1991 to create a 
Crown corporation, to have the Crown corporation lose huge 
amounts of money — as occurred — and to not even have the 
public, through the legislature, aware that that Crown 
corporation existed. 
 
So certainly in terms of making the government open and 
accountable, we have come light years in the last three and a 
half years. And if the member wishes, I can list some of the 
changes that we made. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, you're obviously not 
aware of how this House operates. The CIC does not come 
before this Legislative Assembly, before this body in this 
particular room. CIC does meet with Crown Corporations. The 
unfortunate part with committees is the review is usually a year 
or two behind, has nothing to do with up-to-date information. 
So maybe we need to correct that. 
 
Seeing as you're not going to give us any questions regarding 
the utility rate increases and how they affect your budget, I want 
to ask a question, and that is a question here that . . . our caucus 
has indeed sent over a list of global questions, and we've sent 
them over quite awhile ago. And to date, I'm informed that the 
global responses have not been sent to us even though I had 
asked the Government House Leader if those globals would be 
sent to us so that we could pursue them or go through them 
long before the last . . . what may or may not be the last session 
where we have a chance to deal with the Department of 
Finance. 
 
So I'm wondering, Madam Minister, do you have the globals  

available? And would you make them available to us now, 
please? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, we have them, and we will 
send them across. Just for the record I want to clarify. The 
Chair of the Crown Corporations Committee has reminded me 
that they are up to date. They're talking about 1993. Plus they're 
also talking about prospective issues with respect to Crowns. 
And she mentions to me that if there was a more cooperative 
attitude, they could probably move along even more quickly. So 
that information is available. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, if '93 is up to date when 
we're halfway through 1995, then I wonder what we really call 
up to date, and I wonder what it really means to the public out 
there. 
 
And the interesting point, Madam Chair, is while the Crown 
Corporations Committee has certainly allowed for an expansion 
of the mandate, the minister still has the opportunity to 
determine whether or not they want to go out of the year under 
review, whether they want to address issues as they are 
immediately taking place. And it's selective amnesia again, 
takes place even in Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, it would seem to me . . . and we're 
going to take a bit of time to peruse your globals, and I thank 
you for submitting them. It's unfortunate that they weren't ready 
the last time we met, so we would have had an opportunity to 
sit down and look at them in more detail. 
 
But I think, Madam Minister, before I sit down and allow other 
colleagues to enter the debate, we must be mindful of the fact 
that utility rate increases, utilities in this province and the 
Crown sector, do generate some 40 per cent of the economic 
activity and the financing of this province. And it's important 
that we review that as an overall or global view of financing in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And it's unfortunate that you're 
not willing to share some of that information because a lot of 
times committee meetings are not as accessible to the public as 
we do have in estimates with the Department of Finance today. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I will allow other members to get into the 
debate at this time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and her staff once again to be in the Assembly dealing 
with issues surrounding Finance. I'm going to deviate a bit from 
the questions that my colleague from Moosomin was asking, to 
give your officials time to start coming up with some of those 
answers. And we can come back to the role that Crown 
dividends play in your tax regime in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I would like to go back to also another debate in here when 
you assured me that the proper place to ask those questions was 
in your estimates. And we were in here on interim supply a 
couple of weeks ago and I was asking you some questions 
about Treasury Board and Treasury Board compliance and the  



May 16, 1995 

 
2278 

report that you used to okay the casino deal in downtown 
Regina. 
 
And you said at that time, this is interim supply; I'm not going 
to talk about that any more. End of discussion and that was it. 
And we now have the appropriate forum because Treasury 
Board is a function which you preside over. 
 
So you told me at the time, Madam Minister, that it was not the 
report commissioned by the Gaming Commission that you 
relied upon  it was something else  for Treasury Board 
approval of this scheme of the Economic Development 
minister's. Could you now tell me what report Treasury Board 
used to okay this very large expenditure of dollars with the 
downtown casino? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I would say is that there is nothing in this budget 
respecting casinos. There is no revenue expected in 1995 in this 
budget as prepared with respect to casinos, therefore there is no 
offsetting information or offsetting analysis as to what the 
analysis is based on. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That's really unfortunate, Mr. Chairman. I 
expected a different answer of the Finance minister, especially 
after the discussion of some weeks ago. 
 
I mean it is exactly in the public interest, Madam Minister, to 
know what's going on in downtown Regina, because you're 
taking that money directly out of the Liquor and Gaming 
Commission, and that is money that could flow into the 
Consolidated Fund, and instead you're giving the minister a 
free-wheeling hand in downtown Regina and spending over $20 
million. 
 
It's totally appropriate, especially when you told me that there 
was a logical progression of events, a normal progression of 
events through Treasury Board — that the analysis was done, 
and because of the analysis this is how you decided to do it. 
 
Of course it affects the taxpayer. If that money wasn't spent in 
downtown Regina there'd be more revenue for you, more 
revenue for the Consolidated Fund, maybe more hospitals stay 
open, maybe less sales tax. It has very large implications. And I 
don't know why you would want to hide from the people of this 
province. If it's as simple as an analysis done through Treasury 
Board, then why not tell us about it if it was on the up and up. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. What I would say is that the project is being financed 
by the developer. There is no long-term budget in place because 
there is no revenue from this budget associated with casinos. 
Assuming there is a long-term revenue stream, there will be a 
long-term budget and all of the decisions that you're talking 
about will be forthcoming to the public. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Are you now telling the Assembly, Madam 
Minister, in direct contradiction of what you said earlier, that 
there was no proposal through Treasury Board as you claim  

everything happens with your government? That Treasury 
Board did not consider this proposal, when a few weeks ago 
you said that it did? Is that what you're telling the Assembly 
now? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I said to the 
member opposite, I will say again. What we're discussing here 
today is the 1995 budget. There is no revenue from casinos in 
this proposed budget, and it's got to do with the timing of the 
project. And when there is a revenue stream there will be a 
budget associated with the revenue stream and this will be 
available to the public at that time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, in my view, that simply is not 
acceptable. I don't understand why this minister, who claims to 
have such a thorough Treasury Board process for reviewing all 
projects, would want to hide from this Assembly on this issue. 
 
The Associate Minister of Finance told this Assembly that that 
casino may not turn a profit for four years — four years, okay? 
If it isn't turning a profit, that means that it is running a deficit; 
that means that it is drawing funds from the Liquor and Gaming 
Commission, Mr. Chairman. And if it's drawing funds from the 
Liquor and Gaming Commission, that Crown has less revenue 
then to turn monies back to the Consolidated Fund and it affects 
every taxpayer in this province. Every health care worker, every 
education worker, everyone in this province, can be affected by 
that decision, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Why in the world the Minister of Finance would want to hide 
from this Assembly on what should be a simple process . . . If it 
came through Treasury Board, the analysis had to be done by 
somebody and it went through and it said that this is a good 
operation, the revenue streams will be on the positive side, why 
would not the minister want to tell us? It is a matter of 
financing of the province when over $20 million of capital 
expenditure are made. And the minister, the associate minister, 
clearly said that this may not generate a profit for up to four 
years. Why wouldn't the Finance minister want to make it very 
clear that the due process was followed in this circumstance? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, unfortunately I have 
to take a fair bit of time because the member opposite takes 
comments made on this side of the House and then he twists 
them, he twists them. Because the associate minister never said 
that the casino is not going to make money for four years. He 
never said that at all. 
 
What he said is when we put before the people of Saskatchewan 
our four-year plan in the recent budget, on February 16, the 
details, the agreements, regarding the casino were not in place. 
That is it didn't exist from the point of view of the law, so 
therefore it was not included in those four-year numbers. 
Because they couldn't be because it wasn't finalized. 
 
So there is a world of difference between that and saying that 
the casino is not going to make money for four years. He never 
said that. It is simply untrue. 
 



May 16, 1995 

 
2279 

(1530) 
 
And so what we have to get back to is straightening out what 
the minister did and the minister did not say. What he said is 
perfectly legitimate. When the budget was prepared, the casino 
deal was not signed, it was not law, it was not legal; it didn't 
exist from a legal point of view. So therefore there could be no 
revenue put in the numbers; because the numbers went four 
years out, it was not in the numbers for four years out. 
 
That is a far cry from saying that it's not going to make money 
in over four years. And he did not say that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — All right, Madam Minister, you must have 
counter-evidence. It must be in that Treasury Board submission 
that we'd like to know about. The proposal that went through 
Treasury Board, what did it project for a revenue stream for the 
downtown casino? 
 
If the member from Churchill Downs is wrong, then what is the 
right information, Madam Minister, about the revenue stream, 
so the taxpayers of this province can be assured that you are not 
dipping into the liquor and gaming committee in order to 
support a white elephant. Tell us about the Treasury Board 
report; then that shows otherwise. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
knows that Treasury Board minutes are not public documents. 
And the member opposite knows that there cannot be 
subsidization of the casino occurring because it would have to 
be in this budget, and it's not there. 
 
So again the member opposite has got to come back to some 
basic facts. It's not in this budget for one simple reason: it's an 
issue of timing. When the casino is fully finalized and up and 
running, there will be all of this information, and it will be fully 
available. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well it seems strange to me, Mr. Chairman, 
that the Minister of Finance wants to hide behind the fact that 
. . . And it was amazing how a month ago she said, well of 
course we look after every penny and that normally this would 
all go through Treasury Board, and we would analyse it, and we 
would say yes or no to it because it involves very large sums of 
money. 
 
And now today, now today, Mr. Chairman, when we're getting 
in the dying days of this legislature and the minister is saying 
that we should pass this budget, she's going to allow the 
minister responsible for the casino, the Economic Development 
minister, to go play in downtown Regina with a $20 million 
project. And we the taxpaying public of this province, and 
particularly in this city, are supposed to say, oh go ahead, don't 
worry about it. When the information becomes available on our 
political timing, we'll make it available to you. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, that doesn't sound like the rhetoric I used 
to hear coming from the NDP benches when they were in 
opposition. There would have been particular Cain to pay over  

something like that. Over $20 million going into a building in 
downtown Regina, a Crown corporation set up under special 
rules, special circumstance  and this Minister of Finance who 
claims to be the most open Minister of Finance in the province's 
history wants to hide now. 
 
And why does she want to hide? The only reason I can guess, 
Mr. Chairman, is that there's something about that analysis that 
Treasury Board did that this minister knows would be 
repugnant to the people of this province. And if there's 
something about revenue streams surrounding the casino that is 
good news, why in the world this Finance minister would not 
want to tell the Assembly about it, I don't know. 
 
But instead, no I can't talk about it. We should deal with the 
other estimates. We should simply allow this $20 million-plus 
project to proceed in downtown Regina and let one of her 
cabinet colleagues do it with a free hand. And we, the rest of us 
in this province, are supposed to simply ignore or forget or 
applaud what's going on. And I don't think that's the kind of 
regime that any of us want, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The minister brings in balanced budget legislation into this 
House, says I'm going to balance over a four-year term. I'm 
going to show you how our four-year projection goes. We ask 
some questions about an integral part of that. Liquor and 
gaming, it's a huge industry, $90 million in profit. Minister 
doesn't want to tell us about it. 
 
I don't for the life of me understand that logic, Mr. Chairman. 
Why the minister wouldn't say, we went to Treasury Board. We 
used this individual or group of individuals for analysis. The 
analysis was proper. We project a revenue stream of X; it'll 
fully support the casino. The casino will make a profit. It'll 
support the lease payments. It'll support all the infrastructure 
costs. It'll support the staffing, and it'll support the social 
problems that will evolve around the casino. And I'm sure that 
that proposal went to Treasury Board — or at least Madam 
Minister says it did — and supported all of those suppositions. 
Why in the world she would not want to tell this Assembly 
about it, I don't know. 
 
Madam Minister, why don't you want to tell the Assembly about 
the Treasury Board work which you claim is so important to 
your administration, and yet you now say is not important to the 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, again I have to spend time correcting the facts. This is 
not being built by the government. It's a private developer that's 
doing the building. The building isn't even completed. So there 
is no subsidization in this budget for the casino. There is no 
revenue stream in this budget for the casino. When there is a 
revenue stream, it will be reported to the Assembly, and the 
information will be available. 
 
But what I want to ask the member opposite is why they are so 
interested in talking about what is not in this budget, why 
they're not interested in talking about what is in this budget  



May 16, 1995 

 
2280 

because there are important things in this budget such as . . . I 
would like to know their views on the tax cut for families — 
$150 per individual, $300 per family income tax cut. That's in 
this budget. That's something that's probably worth talking 
about. 
 
So I think we should try to focus on what is in this budget, not 
what is not in this budget because there is no subsidization for 
casinos and no revenue stream from casinos. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I assure you, 
Madam Minister, that we'll have ample opportunity to talk 
about taxes later on in our discussion. And we'll talk about them 
in great detail, about some of the promises you made, some of 
the taxes you've levied. And we'll compare that total tax 
increase of 225 million which you've admitted to in this 
Assembly, of imposing on Saskatchewan people over the last 
three and a half years. We will talk about it. 
 
But the reason we asked these questions, why my colleague 
asked you questions about the Crown corporations is, is that 
you seem to take great delight in keeping a big part of 
government — government expenditure, government revenue 
— out of this Assembly. 
 
We ask you questions about the Crown corporations which pay 
dividends, which you have a lot of control over. We ask you 
about a new Crown corporation which you formed just recently, 
one that is very unique, spending tens of millions of dollars, 
and you don't want to talk about it. You say no; none of that 
should be the business of the parliamentarians of this province. 
It shouldn't be the business of the taxpayers. You should just let 
us have a free hand to do what we want over on that side of the 
ledger. 
 
Well as my colleague pointed out, Madam Minister, the auditor 
doesn't agree. Most business groups don't agree. They would 
like to see all of those things brought before the Assembly, and 
we should talk about them. You know, the capital budgets of 
the Crown corporations, the depreciation allowance that they 
use, what type of rental agreement or promotional agreement 
that you have with developers in downtown Regina building a 
Crown corporation are important issues for the taxpayer. 
 
I'm sure that the Minister of Social Services' clientele, who are 
always strapped for cash in this province, would like to know 
what the Crown corporations are up to because you know what? 
The poor always pay. They don't have any choice about paying 
their utility bill. You know, they pay the power, and they pay 
the gas, and they pay the telephone, and it is a big part of their 
budget. And if those people who can least defend themselves in 
our society know that there is a cabinet minister fooling around 
in downtown Regina with tens of millions of dollars and you 
don't want to talk about it, I would think they'd be a little upset. 
If I were the Minister of Social Services, I'd be a little upset 
with you. 
 
So why in the world you would not want to tell the people 
about that side of government I don't know and why those aren't  

legitimate questions of you, when over 40 per cent of 
government is on that side. So once again, Madam Minister, 
confirm this for me then. Did the proposal for the downtown 
casino, the casino corporation, did it go through Treasury 
Board? Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, there is no money in this budget for casinos. And 
when that money is there, we'll give you the appropriate 
information. 
 
But I really want to emphasize the importance of the changes 
that have been made in the Crown Corporations Committee. 
The Chair of the Crown corporations and the members of the 
Crown Corporations Committee deserve a lot of credit. I want 
to stress that committee is open to the public and to the press, 
so the public and the press can have access to the information 
there. 
 
And you mentioned the auditor, and the auditor does say things 
about the Crown corporations. He makes a comment about our 
reporting and says our summary financial statements are fully 
disclosing to the public the facts of how we spent money across 
government, including in the Crown corporations. And he says 
this about the work of the Crown Corporations Committee, and 
I quote from the recent auditor's report, page 6, paragraph .21. 
 
 . . . officials of Crown corporations provided the 

Committee very useful information and explanations 
about specific policies and decisions. As a result, 
Committee members were better able to discuss the past 
performance and future directions of Crown 
corporations. Public accountability is strengthened. 

 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that was a nice little piece of 
information, Madam Minister, but it wasn't the question I asked. 
The question I asked — and it's very simple — yes or no, did 
the downtown casino corporation proposal go through Treasury 
Board or not? Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we've already told 
you that parts of that have gone through the process. But again, 
I'm very leery of saying these things to the member opposite 
because he takes them and twists them. 
 
I would say that the main part of what is occurring with respect 
to the downtown casino is being done by a private developer, 
has nothing to do with the government. So that's the most that I 
can tell you because it happens to be the truth. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, this just gets stranger and 
stranger. Minister will not confirm it went through Treasury 
Board when she told us earlier on that it has to go through 
Treasury Board. Now the government doesn't have anything to 
do with it. 
 
Madam Minister, who is paying the lease fee for the downtown 
casino then? Are you telling me you've got a white knight who's 
paying the whole shot, and you don't have to pay him back?  



May 16, 1995 

 
2281 

Madam Minister, who's paying the lease fee for the downtown 
casino? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, there is no lease fee 
because the casino isn't built. This is my whole point with the 
member. He is jumping light years ahead. 
 
We're talking about the 1995 budget. In there, there is nothing 
subsidizing any casino. There is nothing about a revenue 
stream. The member opposite is asking about a project that isn't 
even built yet. When the project is completed, when there is a 
revenue stream, all of these details will be made available. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, you're asking us all to 
. . . I mean, did you just drop down the rabbit hole and go off to 
Alice in Wonderland or something? I mean take a walk 
downtown. Construction is ongoing. The money is being spent. 
They had a picture of all the toilets lined up in the paper. 
Madam Minister, the money is being spent. Now, Madam 
Minister, somebody has to pay for all of that, okay? I'm sure 
that this developer isn't going to pay for all of that unless he 
expects to get paid back, unless you're going to let the 
developer run the casino and take the profits from it. 
 
So, Madam Minister, who is paying for all of the stuff in 
downtown Regina that is going on as we speak? It's being 
spent, okay. Thirty-day payable, 60-day payables, 90-day 
payables — I don't know. It's being spent. Who is paying for it, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I've said again and again is it's the private 
developer that is doing all of these things that he is describing. 
And the commitment of the province is that when this is 
completed, we will sign a long-term lease. 
 
But you know, everybody in this House has to be accountable. 
And we're talking about a significant budget here with 
significant tax measures and many, many other issues of great 
importance to the people of Saskatchewan. Why we go around 
in the circle of asking the same question and me giving the 
same answer about one issue which I've told the member 
opposite is not included in the budget, I don't understand. 
 
For the final time, there is no subsidization of casinos in this 
budget. There is no revenue stream of casinos in the budget. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I remember the role 
of opposition, whether it was New Democrats or Conservatives 
in that position, it's always been to ask questions about where 
the money's being spent. Okay? Now, Madam Minister, the 
government is going to pay back. 
 
And you could answer a few questions in this committee, and 
you would be on to all those big and wonderful things that you 
want to talk about. I simply asked a few simple questions — 
you know, yes or no. Did it go through Treasury Board? Yes or  

no? Is the government responsible to pay the developer? You 
know, very simple questions, Madam Minister, why don't you 
want to answer those? I mean it might make us believe you a 
little bit more in the rest of these estimates if you could just 
answer a few of the simple ones. We're only talking about 20 
million bucks here, you know, not the bigger picture of 5.2 
billion that the rest of your budget is. 
 
Why would you want to answer those simple questions about 
your processes, and then maybe we'd believe what you say in 
the rest of it. And I don't understand your hesitancy, Madam 
Minister, to be truthful about what processes take place, you 
know. Process is very important. Why don't you tell us? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I've said to the 
member opposite is, when there is a revenue stream we will 
bring it before this legislature. There is no subsidization. There 
is no revenue stream in this budget and it would be foolhardy to 
stand here today and say, well yes, let me tell you this about it, 
let me tell you that. When we have the whole picture 
completed, the public will be informed. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well why don't you start right now, Madam 
Minister? Real easy. Give us some soothing thoughts that you 
are a process-orientated minister in government. Did you take 
the proposal through Treasury Board and Treasury Board 
okayed it? It's easy — just say yes or no and we can get on with 
other things. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. Every measure that will cause the government to 
either spend money or receive money goes through Treasury 
Board. So this will have gone through Treasury Board in some 
preliminary stage and will continue to go through Treasury 
Board as it develops. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are making 
progress. It went before Treasury Board. Can you tell us who 
gave you the analysis? Who did the analysis through Treasury 
Board? It's easy. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. The final budget for this project is not in place. There 
is no revenue stream. There is no subsidization. And beyond 
that we can go in these circles for as long as the member wants. 
I have lots of time. But I do say that this is an important budget 
and I think he has to justify to the people of Saskatchewan, he 
and I standing here and going in our circles — because we are. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'm very happy to do that, Madam 
Minister. My guess is probably 50 per cent of this community 
are diametrically opposed to that project. And after the last time 
we visited this subject, I had a lot of phone calls from 
individuals who were very curious as to why you wished to be 
so evasive about what was going on down there. 
 
You just said, and I don't want to twist your words, that's there's 
been no final budget developed for this project. Are you telling 
the Assembly that the Minister of Economic Development has  



May 16, 1995 

 
2282 

got an open-ended budget down there that he can run with 
however he pleases? Is that what you're indicating? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. What I keep saying is the casino is not yet built. It is 
the private developer that is doing the building. By the time the 
casino is built, up and running, by the time there is a revenue 
stream, all of this information will be available to the public. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, Madam Minister. Does that mean that 
the developer has an open-ended budget? Did your Treasury 
Board perusal of this give the developer an open-ended 
budgetary process that he can do as he wishes with the 
development of the downtown casino? Is that part of your 
Treasury Board process? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
knows that the casino is not yet up and running. When it is up 
and running, all of this information will be available to the 
public. What I can say about it is that in this budget, which is 
the budget for the province of Saskatchewan in 1995, there is 
no revenue stream associated with the casino; there is no 
subsidization associated with the casino. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I just asked a really simple question that any taxpayer would ask 
you. Does the developer have an open-ended budget? I mean 
you projected it at 24 or 25 million. If he runs it up to 30, are 
you obligated to pay, basis that overrun? 
 
Is that the deal that you took through Treasury Board, that this 
developer can run with this thing as far as he wants and then 
turn around and get those lease fees from the liquor and gaming 
corporation to pay whatever it costs to . . . I mean what if he 
runs it up to 35 million bucks. Are you obligated to pay, to pay 
it off? Is that what you're telling me your Treasury Board 
process is like? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we go through this again and again. It's a private 
developer developing the casino. We will only pay a lease fee to 
that particular developer, and all of the information that we can 
make public will be made public at the time when there is a 
revenue stream available to the treasury. And that will be 
available. 
 
So as I say, I'm not sure that the member opposite . . . I'm not 
sure why the member opposite feels that this is the only real 
issue that he's concerned about in this budget, when you 
consider all of the many things, especially in the tax area, that 
are included in this budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I believe it's an issue, Madam Minister, 
because you want to hide. The Gaming minister wants to hide; 
the Economic Development minister wants to hide; and you 
obviously want to hide. And that makes it an issue. All you 
have to do is answer a few simple questions and the issue goes 
away, right? 
 

I asked you: does the developer have an open-ended process 
down there where he can spend as much money as he wishes in 
developing the casino with the full knowledge that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of this province, 
will pay whatever lease fee is required in order to cover off that 
expenditure? Do you have an open-ended agreement, or do you 
have a capped agreement, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I've said I will say again. It's a private developer 
doing the development. When the total picture is clear, the total 
picture will be made available to the public. There's no point in 
standing here trying to piecemeal and put together little pieces 
of the puzzle, because that is not available right now. 
 
What will happen is, when the information is available, it will 
be made fully public. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And, Mr. Chairman, I find that a terribly 
arrogant attitude to put to the people of this province for the 
very simple reason is that none of us, none of us as taxpayers, 
would go out and contract an agreement with a developer 
without knowing at the end of the day that there was a finite 
end to it. 
 
The minister, by evading the question, is basically telling us that 
they have given a developer free rein to build a casino in 
downtown Regina with no restrictions at all on cost, 
expenditures of money, knowing full well at the end of the day 
all of his costs will be covered off. 
 
Now I'm pretty sure, Mr. Chairman, that the average taxpayer in 
this province would like that kind of a deal. I mean maybe we 
should all be developers and we should all work with the New 
Democrats. Because it sounds fairly sweet to me: that if I can 
go build a building in downtown Regina, and no matter how 
much money I spend on it, the government's going to pay it off, 
that's not bad business at all — that, I think all of us would 
appreciate. I know I'd like to find something on my farm that 
worked that good. You know, I could just go out and sow it 
once and it would pay for ever. That would be a pretty good 
deal. 
 
Is that what you're telling the Assembly, Madam Minister, that 
you have an open-ended agreement with a developer; no matter 
what the cost, you'll pay the price? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, he knows full well that I haven't said that and he 
knows that he's twisting these answers. And he knows that if we 
want to get into deals with developers that had no caps and no 
conditions that protected the taxpayers, I have a litany of what 
happened here in the 1980s that will make everybody watching 
have their hair stand on end as we go through what we're still 
paying for, in terms of the open-ended deals and the no caps 
and the total lack of public information. 
 
I mean when you were on the Treasury Board benches, sir, you 
could create . . . 



May 16, 1995 

 
2283 

An Hon. Member: — Never sat on Treasury Board. That was 
just a guess. That was just a guess. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — When you were in the cabinet of the 
previous administration, you could create Crown corporations 
in this province, have them lose millions of tax dollars, and not 
even have the legislature know that they existed. 
 
What I've said to the member opposite is, when there is a 
revenue stream, when the project is built, up and running, there 
will be complete and open disclosure of all of this information. 
But the information is not available now in a comprehensive 
way and we're not going to sit here and piecemeal it together. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I've given up trying to get any details around the revenue stream 
or anything else. That's obvious that you aren't going to talk 
about that. I'm just back to some very basics. It's a basic 
question: do you have an open-ended agreement with the 
developer with no caps on it? I mean that's got nothing to do 
with your revenue stream. I won't ask you another question 
about your revenue stream. All I'm saying is do you have a 
process that allows that sort of thing to go on? 
 
And, Madam Minister, most of the things that you wanted to 
talk about are old news — old news. And you know the really 
important thing that stands in my mind though is that I ran an 
election campaign in 1991, and you did too, and you said, ah, 
we're different; we would never do those things — we're New 
Democrats. And now today you want to hide in this Assembly 
when you're asked some very simple questions about how much 
money the developer is going to spend on the casino. 
 
And I didn't even ask you how much. I just said, is the 
agreement capped or is it open? And you don't want to tell us 
how much money the individual is limited to or not limited to. 
You simply say it's none of our business. And I don't 
understand that. 
 
Why you would form a Crown corporation, specially designed, 
and then say that Crown has no limits at all on it? It can just go 
spend any amount of money that it wishes and there's no 
restrictions on private developers who do business with the 
casino corporation. Private developers that do business with the 
casino corporation can simply spend as much money as they 
wish because you've guaranteed them that the casino 
corporation or the liquor and gaming corporation will pick up 
the tab. 
 
Do you consider that to be a good way to do business, Madam 
Minister, an open-ended contract to spend as much as you 
wish? It's a simple question, and you can answer it very quickly 
and say it's either open-ended or it's not open-ended. And I 
don't know why you would want to not tell the Assembly that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what he is trying to do is to get little pieces to say, 
well it's not this, is it that. What I'm telling you is the project is 
not up and running; when it is up and running, all of these  

issues will be answered in a comprehensive way. 
 
I would also like to remind the member opposite of the 
measures that this government has taken to improve public 
accountability. We have changed our accounting system so that 
we're now on an accrual accounting system, which is the same 
as an individual tearing up their credit card that got them into 
such debt and forcing the individual to use cash. 
 
We now report to the public on a summary financial statement 
basis. What that means is that there is one document where you 
have to put all together, right on the table, all of the spending of 
the government, including across Crowns and all of the 
revenue. So we have done that. 
 
We have forced Crown corporations and other agencies to 
provide annual reports and to provide them on a timely basis. 
 
So in terms of openness and improving the accountability to the 
public, I think we have a record that does live up to our 
commitments in 1991 to open the books. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Why is it, Madam Minister, that you are so 
afraid of me knowing and this Assembly knowing little pieces 
of the deal? Why do you put it that way, that I'm trying to get 
little pieces? And why do you fear those little pieces so much? 
What is there about that that would frighten you as a Finance 
minister or frighten me as a member of this Assembly if I knew 
that knowledge? What is so frightening about the people of this 
province knowing about the little pieces surrounding your 
casino deal? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, there is nothing frightening to this government about 
the members opposite. What is frightening about the members 
opposite is what they did to this province before 1991. The 
questions they're asking now are not at all frightening. 
 
What we're saying to the people of this province is, when we 
have a situation such as the casino fully operational, we have 
figured out exactly what the revenue stream is going to be, 
exactly what the costs are, and we can give them an accurate 
picture of what the situation is, we will give it to them. 
 
We won't do what the members opposite did constantly when 
they were in government and unfortunately still seem to be 
doing in opposition: oh this looks good, let's try that, let's throw 
that out for a while and see how that floats; oh, sorry, wasn't 
exactly the right policy; we've got to now change it or we got to 
revise that or clarify it. 
 
When we have full information and everything is figured out, 
we will tell the public. But we won't sit here and guess what 
something might look like. That's not the way to govern. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — This answer surprises me, Mr. Chairman, in a 
big way. Because what the minister is saying is, we're going to  



May 16, 1995 

 
2284 

spend all this money, we're going to anticipate probably some 
things happening, and after it's all said and done, whether it's a 
good deal or a bad deal, we'll tell you what we want to tell you 
down the road two, three years, whatever seems to be politically 
expedient. Okay? 
 
Now that, Mr. Chairman, is not something the average farmer 
or business person or even the average householder in this 
provide would do — enter into a multi-million dollar project 
and then say, after it's all said and done we'll figure out if it 
works or not. 
 
Madam Minister, that's about the same logic that was applied in 
this province in the 1970s when you bought potash mines, used 
holes in the ground. You bought used oil wells. You bought 
used uranium mines. You piled all sorts of money into a bunch 
of stuff that should have been left in the private sector and 
taxed, and instead you invested all kinds of money — pension 
funds, you name it, the supposed Heritage Fund that we had in 
this province — and you piled it all into a bunch of used holes 
in the ground. And it made not a lick of sense, Madam Minister, 
not a lick of sense. 
 
And now you're back to the same old stuff again. You're saying, 
I'm going to sink, I'm going to sink a whole whack of money 
into a used hole in the ground called the union casino or Union 
Station downtown, and after it's all done I'll tell you how I've 
sorted it out. Well in the 1990s, Madam Minister, I don't think 
that's applicable. It doesn't work that way anymore. No more 
than you'd go out and buy a bunch of used oil wells or a bunch 
of used potash mines or a bunch of used uranium mines today, 
or buy a used car without thinking about the consequences of 
that economic move. 
 
But you're telling the Assembly today that I'm more than 
prepared to go do the same thing that the Blakeney 
administration did back in the 1970s. I'll take the Heritage Fund 
of this province and I'll sink it into a bunch of used whatever’s. 
And I'm going to do that with the casino and it's all right. It's all 
right. Trust me, folks. A couple of years from now I'll tell you 
how it all turned out. 
 
Well how it all turned out when you bought the potash mines 
and all the rest of that stuff, was nonsense. It was absolute 
foolishness. And world events prove that, over and over and 
over again. 
 
So, Madam Minister, one last time: do you have an agreement 
with the developer? Is it open-ended or is it a capped 
agreement? And you don't have to get into revenue streams or 
anything else. Just give the taxpayers of this province some 
idea, Madam Minister, that they aren't buying a never-ending 
hole in the ground called the Union Station. That's all I'm 
asking you. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I can assure the member is that we will protect 
the interests of the taxpayers with respect to the casino. 
 

And you know, to the member opposite, that if he wants to get 
into history, we're going to have an interesting afternoon, 
because we can talk about the '80s all we want. 
 
And I welcome a discussion about the 1970s. The Allan 
Blakeney administration in the 1970s had a balanced budget 
each and every year. When the members opposite were in 
government, not once did they have a balanced budget. In fact I 
can't remember, as a historian, when the Conservatives in this 
province have had a balanced budget. It would be, the earliest 
would be the '30s, or never. 
 
And I would remind the member opposite about the Potash 
Corporation. Them standing up in this legislature, talking about 
us and how we handle business deals when they managed to 
take shares in the Potash Corporation when they were in 
government and sell them at $18 a share — today they're $70 a 
share — losing 3 or $400 million tax dollars on the process, and 
tell us about how to run the business of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I mean if we want to get into this, we can. I'm here to talk about 
the 1995 budget of the province of Saskatchewan, and what's in 
it. And I'm very prepared to discuss all of those measures. But 
why the member opposite wants to stand here and talk about 
what isn't in the budget, and wants to talk about the 1970s and 
the 1980s, I'm not sure. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Chairman, I started out this discussion 
wanting to talk about May, 1995 and what was going on in 
downtown Regina involving the government. The minister 
doesn't want to talk about that at all. She wants to avoid that. 
 
You know I want to talk about today, Madam Minister, not 
ancient history but you won't give us any answers. You simply 
want to hide. You simply want to hide behind all sorts of other 
issues rather than what is actually going on today in downtown 
Regina where your government's involved in a megaproject. A 
large one. You're expending millions of millions of dollars. You 
don't want to talk about it. 
 
That's fair, I guess. That's fair if you're a New Democrat and 
you're in power, you don't have to talk about it. If you're a New 
Democrat in opposition, you talk lots about it. It's a good old 
double standard. 
 
It's like . . . I was just reviewing all of this campaign literature 
from the '91 election, about the PST comes off at October 21, 
you know, and it just goes on and on. And interesting here, your 
candidate is talking about the PST coming off of electrical and 
heating bills and gas bills. Well it never has. It never has. 
 
So it was just a litany of campaign promises broken. Premier's 
quoted, Assiniboia Times, October 17, four days before the 
election, that we're not going back to taxing Saskatchewan 
people. Oh no. Today we're at $225 million in excess taxation. 
 
So I'm really wondering what you do want to talk about, 
Madam Minister. Let's go to the $225 million then, in extra  



May 16, 1995 

 
2285 

taxation since you took office. Let's talk about that. Could you 
give me the anticipated revenue from the debt surtax on 
individuals? And I would presume you would like to give me an 
annual figure on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — In 1995-96 we'll be raising 77 
million, but that's not the annualized number. Because in fact 
the . . . because the budget occurred after the new year, we 
cannot implement this measure till July 1, so you only get half a 
year. So the figure for this year, for 1995-96, is 77 million. And 
if you want the figure for next year, I can get that, if you would 
like to have that as well. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — You can send that across at your 
convenience, Madam Minister, but I would like that number. 
 
Madam Minister, when you promised in 1991 to take the PST 
off on October 21, why did you not take it off of natural gas and 
electricity, even though that was a specific campaign promise? 
And how much money has been generated by leaving the PST 
on those two items over the last four years? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, it was taken off natural gas and electricity. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So neither of these components have accrued 
any sales tax since 1991? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, and I want to repeat, 
because the members opposite again twist what the 
commitment was in 1991, what we said in 1991 was the 
members opposite, when they were in government, added the 
E&H tax to a whole range of goods and services, including 
children's clothing, books, residential gas and electricity. And 
we made the commitment to remove the education and health 
tax from those items and we lived up to that commitment. And 
it included residential gas and electricity. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you tell me 
. . . I believe you were talking to the member from Estevan last 
week. You indicated there was 314 million in increases in tax 
since 1991, but that you had also cut 155 million. Can you 
break that out for me? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. Before I answer that question, I'd like leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I would like 
introduce to the legislature the former deputy minister of 
Finance, John Wright, who it seems cannot completely 
withdraw from this particular building to the other side of the 
pond but has to come back for a visit. 

So welcome back for a visit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

Item 1 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — A rough breakdown is total 
deharmonization tax reductions about 110 million; total income 
tax reductions, about 59 million; and total business savings, 
about 52 million. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So that leaves then a net tax increase of $225 
million. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I was giving 
you was the reductions. Now your member from Estevan had 
concluded on his own calculations that number that you're 
talking about, 225 million. And I said it was in the ballpark. But 
I'm giving you an estimate of the reductions. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I asked you about the 314 and you said 
there was 155 in decreases off of there. So you didn't deny that 
that was the number. My arithmetic says that that's about $225 
million in net tax increases in the province. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I said to the 
member from Estevan is that is in the ballpark of what the 
increase would be. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Could you tell me, Madam Minister, what the 
sum total of . . . you increased a number of corporate tax rates 
in 1992. There was a corporate income tax, a corporate capital 
tax, corporate tax surcharge — most of those things I remember 
going up. Can you give me a total of what the revenue of those 
tax increases have been over the last three years, since '92? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, we have done what 
we can to go beyond the bounds to give you some cumulative 
numbers going back to '91-92, but we don't have any capacity to 
do any further breakdowns here. What we have here are 
numbers for 1995, and we have some capacity to look back 
over 1994. 
 
And that's what we have available. We don't have any further 
capacity because we've already done extensive work in order to 
give you the breakdown that we have so far. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well the only reason I ask the questions, 
Madam Minister, it looks like we've got a 225-odd-million tax 
increase on our shoulders, as citizens, since 1991 and I'm just 
trying to understand components of it. I mean is it fair? Did 
business pay their fair share, or has the individual family been  



May 16, 1995 

 
2286 

the one that's picked up all of the load in this situation? I mean 
it's important, I think, as we go into an election campaign with 
you promising that . . . and promises don't mean much when 
you have this kind of a tax increase when you promised not to 
raise taxes. 
 
But I want to understand where individuals, where companies 
fit in this thing. Have individuals paid more or have companies 
paid more? Can you tell me that? How is it broken out in all of 
these tax increases? Who has borne more of the share of the 
burden — companies or individuals? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that is a complex 
calculation which we're not able to make right now. But what I 
want to say is when we looked at tax reductions in this budget, 
what our goal was was to ensure that individuals bore the 
majority of the benefits of the tax reductions. So that the tax 
reductions in this budget, 80 are borne by individuals, 20 per 
cent by companies. 
 
The tax reductions available to individuals of course will be 
$150 per taxpayer, $300 per family reduction in the debt surtax 
which will come into effect July 1. And some of the targeted 
tax reductions to business are targeted specifically to job 
creation in areas like manufacturing and processing. 
 
So what you're asking for is going way back into records which 
are not available in very detailed calculations. What I can tell 
you about though is what is the situation in this budget, and that 
is that 80 per cent of the tax benefits are going to individuals, 
20 per cent to companies. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Madam Minister, my calculations over 
the last two budgets show about 52 million bucks in tax breaks 
to business. That would be your last two budgets, shows about 
$52 million in tax breaks to business. 
 
Now you're telling me it's an 80/20 split. That means that the 
families of this province would need about $208 million in tax 
breaks. And if that's the case, I'd like you to point out to me 
where that is because . . . and that would be over two years of 
course — two years. I accept that. 
 
Am I wrong on the $52 million in tax breaks to business over 
the last two years? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I would refer the member to is 
to page 40 of the budget. What we're talking about is the budget 
announced this year and the budget that has financial planning 
going four years out. What the table on page 40 says is that 
commencing in 1995, going out to 1999, there's a total of $262 
million in tax cuts. Twenty per cent of those tax cuts go to 
business; 80 per cent of the tax cuts go to individuals. 
 
As I keep reminding the member opposite, we're talking about 
the 1995 budget, and we're talking about the four-year plan 
contained in that budget. And this table on page 40 illustrates 
the point that I'm making in a pie chart. 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it just gets curiouser 
and curiouser. The minister tells me I can't look back; that 
doesn't count. All I can deal with is last year's budget and this 
year's budget. 
 
So I just asked a simple question. I mean it doesn't involve too 
much, Madam Minister. It's the manufacturing and processing 
tax, direct agent exemption, tax reduction for small business. I 
mean there's some other stuff here. It's just over the last two 
years. I just asked you if it adds up to about 52 million bucks. I 
mean your officials must know that. And you told me it's an 
80/20, so I'm just trying to do the mathematics. Okay. I don't 
care about 1999. You said, let's deal with '95. That's what I'm 
trying to deal with — '94-95. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I agree. Let's just 
deal with 1995. We will not be talking about previous years. I 
understand that. Let's agree with that. And I won't talk about '95 
forward. 
 
In this budget, the tax reductions that are being provided are 
provided on the basis that individuals get the majority of the 
shares . . . the majority of the share of the tax benefits. 
 
The table on page 40 just takes that tax reduction and expands it 
over the period of time. But the tax benefit to individuals is an 
income tax cut which will begin to take effect this year, become 
fully effective next year. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — What is the tax break to companies, Madam 
Minister, in '94-95? You must have the number. It would be 
right there. How much is it? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we're talking about '95-96. We agreed that's the year 
we're going to talk about. What I would refer the member 
opposite to is page 72 of the budget. What he will find there is a 
list of the tax reductions. 
 
The manufacturing and processing profits tax reduction, .5; the 
investment tax credit for manufacturing and processing, 3; the 
aviation fuel tax reduction, 1.2. I would add that up to be about 
4.7. The personal income tax reduction, 35.5. So by far the vast 
majority that benefits the tax reductions go to individuals. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Okay, confirm these figures then, Madam 
Minister, and I'm sure you can. To date the manufacturing and 
processing tax credit is worth eleven and a half million dollars. 
Is that correct? The direct agent exemption from E&H is 
approximately $11.3 million. The tax reduction for small 
business is $7.2 million. And then there's the three other items 
that you mention. Are those correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, why we're getting confused is because we're shifting 
from years. All right? Now I had an understanding with the 
member opposite, I won't take him into 1999, fair enough; he 
won't take me back to '93-94. What we're talking about is 
'95-96. And the tax reductions that are in the budget for  



May 16, 1995 

 
2287 

1995-96 are listed on page 72 and they are the ones that I just 
outlined to this legislature. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I didn't ask you about '93-94. It was '94-95 
and '95-96. I said the last two years, because you said that was 
the only information you had available, that your officials didn't 
have anything before that — fair ball. I just want to get an idea, 
Madam Minister, of how much in those two years people in this 
province have either borne the load or dropped the load. I don't 
know why you're so hesitant to give straight answers to the 
House. 
 
What is wrong with asking? I mean, I haven't known a Minister 
of Finance in living memory that couldn't answer questions 
about the previous budget year and the current budget year, 
about taxes and exemptions. I mean, that's fairly common stuff 
that you'd work with over the last 18 months. Why are you so 
hesitant to answer that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what you're doing is you keep shifting from year to 
year. And then we agreed that we were getting confused 
because we're trying to compare apples and oranges. And then 
we agreed we would talk about '95-96. And I've given you the 
tax reductions for '95-96. I agreed also that we'd probably have 
comparisons to '94-95. But if you want to get back into '94-95, 
this is a whole other debate and we'll get you the numbers on 
'94-95 and send them across. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — It's very difficult doing business with you, 
Madam Minister. You are very reluctant to talk about anything 
that has any breadth or scope to it because it seems to frighten 
you that you may have to give an answer that would be 
politically unpalatable to what you've been telling 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And it's important when people go into this election campaign 
that they understand clearly who has taxed them and who hasn't 
taxed them and what the various proposals that are being put 
forward to the people on what taxes should look like in the 
future will be. And I guess your answers and the questions I ask 
you will go a long way to determining what trust people have in 
those promises that are being made, and yet you don't want to 
answer. I mean if there's $52 million in corporate tax breaks 
over the last two years, just spell it out. 
 
It seems to delight the Economic Development minister to go to 
places like the chamber of commerce and talk about those kind 
of numbers, and yet you don't want to talk about it in the 
Assembly. He goes back a lot further than that. He'll run her 
right back to 1991. And yet here we ask a few questions about 
those type of things and you're very hesitant to answer them, 
and I don't understand that. 
 
And it relates right back, Madam Minister, to the question that 
my colleague from Moosomin was asking. If we've got $225 
million in increases in the tax load in this province, and the 
auditor reports that we've got $6.295 million of built up funds 
in the Crown corporations, and we've had a series of tax utility  

rate increases, we've got SaskTel with a net profit of over $300 
million in the last three years, what process do you determine 
then, Madam Minister, to only come forward with a $50 million 
dividend in the proposed budget year from CIC, given that 
Saskatchewan people have faced a $225 million net tax increase 
over the last three and a half years? 
 
Can you tell me what the rationale was for you to only draw 
down $50 million on a $600 million surplus in the face of those 
kind of tax increases? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what you look at is you look at factors such as the 
economic conditions of the province, the fact that Crown 
corporations do not pay taxes. So what would be an equivalent 
amount to take as a dividend, that would be comparable to a tax 
if it was a private company. And you also look at utility rates in 
the province. I mean it's important to us that the package of 
utilities that people have to rely on — telephone, gas, 
electricity, insurance — that package of utilities in 
Saskatchewan is still the cheapest of any place in Canada. 
 
So it's important to us that we ensure that those utility rates do 
remain amongst the cheapest in Canada. And as I say, right 
now, as of this last budget, they are the cheapest in Canada. So 
we look at all of those factors in deciding what dividend to take. 
 
What the member opposite though hasn't mentioned is that 
some of those Crown profits have to be used to subsidize 
megaprojects signed in the 1980s by the previous 
administration, and projects that still require some subsidization 
because of the ways that they were initially financed. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're telling me, Madam Minister, 
is that the capital assets of the Crowns, less depreciation, are 
used as the basis for the dividend. That it is then the equivalent 
of a private corporate tax rate. Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. The member opposite says, why am I so cautious in 
answering it? Because I've never seen a party more interested in 
taking something and twisting it, just twisting it around. 
 
And so what I said is there's a variety of considerations — the 
state of the economy, what would be equivalent in terms of 
taxes, and also the utility rates that the average person pays. So 
there's a variety of factors, and those are the factors. Those are 
the sorts of factors that are considered. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — In other words, Madam Minister, you sort of 
look at what you need and you sort of say, my friend, Ching, 
this is what we need to make it work; have you got this much in 
the kitty? Because what you told me makes no sense at all. 
You're telling me there is no process around capital and 
depreciation and what, on the basis of that type of cash flow 
basis, what they charge for utilities; that that doesn't work when  



May 16, 1995 

 
2288 

it comes to declaring a dividend. Now that's why the auditor 
says that all of that should be before the House. That we should 
know what those capital expenditures are, we should know 
what . . . the depreciation allowance is being used, and then we 
should determine what the dividend is. 
 
I mean what you're telling me is, well I might twist something if 
I tell you anything. It's the same old story we've gone through 
all afternoon; any little bit of information that might be useful 
to the taxpayer is something you don't want to give out because 
it might hurt you in some way. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, that's not good enough. What is the 
process that you used to determine a dividend? If it's not capital 
assets and it isn't depreciation and it isn't the level of the utility 
rate, what else is there in a natural monopoly in order to figure 
out a dividend? 
 
They don't have any competition. They're it; I got no choice. So 
what else do you use, Madam Minister, to determine? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I've answered that question, but I'll tell you, I'm sure 
the viewers of Saskatchewan are at the very least amused to 
have the Tory Party of Saskatchewan standing up and talking 
about openness and accountability to the public. I mean, really. 
 
When they were in government, Crown corporations were 
created, lost money, and the public didn't even know they 
existed. There is openness with respect to the Crown 
corporations. The Crown corporations, as of our government, 
have to provide annual reports on a timely basis within a very 
short period of time after the year end, to the legislature and to 
the public. 
 
The Crown Corporations Committee has opened up its 
proceedings to the public. They are looking at information not 
just retrospectively, but looking into current decisions being 
made, and the auditor in his report — as I recently read into the 
record — congratulated the government for its openness in 
Crown Corporations. 
 
I mean there is a limit to the amount of nonsense that can occur 
here. To have the Tory Party of Saskatchewan talking about a 
government that is not open and accountable is quite simply, 
sir, laughable. The people of this province knew almost nothing 
about what was happening in corporations like this when you 
were in government. We have, as a government, made huge 
strides to ensure that the public is fully informed — and they 
are — as to what is occurring in those Crown corporations. Not 
only are they informed, they are informed on a timely basis. 
And you don't have to take my word for it; you can take the 
auditor's word for it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 
Minister. We'll start off easy here this evening. I noticed from a 
news article: Saskatchewan towns fighting PST. And I know 
the last time that you were here in estimates, we had a 
discussion in regards to the amount of PST that your  

government is now charging and in fact the harmful effects that 
high tax is having on not only the west, but I guess the east and 
south borders of the province. 
 
And in fact, as I recall some of your arguments — and you've 
made them in estimates, and you've made them to the media — 
was that in fact you couldn't lower the amount of the PST 
because it would affect the amount of federal transfers that you 
would get. In fact you felt it was better off receiving monies 
from the federal government than from the market-place, I 
guess, as the Agriculture minister said was a better place to 
receive monies for the province today in question period. 
 
So I think we want to touch just a bit on, in fact, what you're 
planning to do because I'm not sure if you attended in the last 
few weeks, Madam Minister, a meeting in the community of, I 
think it was Macklin. Yes, in the town of Macklin, there was a 
meeting. Did you attend that one? In fact I believe you are 
attending a meeting this evening in one of the communities — 
North Battleford or somewhere up there. Can you give us a bit 
of a rundown as to what the concerns are that you're hearing at 
some of the meetings that you're attending or will be attending? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, yes, to the member 
opposite, I certainly do hear concerns expressed about taxes 
across the piece. But what I'd like to ask the member opposite is 
why he has developed this sudden concern with the PST? What 
I really am interested in knowing — and I think the record of 
this legislature should show at some point — is why in two 
budgets, the 1992 budget and the 1993 budget, the member 
opposite stood up in this legislature and voted for an increase in 
the PST? 
 
So at that time, he felt that it was a good idea to increase the 
PST. Now something has happened to change his view of this 
matter. And if we're not talking about the 1995 budget — which 
I'm prepared to talk about and I'm here to talk about — if we're 
having an open-ended, free-ranging discussion, I think the 
member may want at some point to read into the record what it 
is that has changed his view; why he felt it appropriate twice in 
this legislature to stand up and vote in favour of an increase in 
the PST and now why he has suddenly decided that an increase 
in the PST is a problem. 
 
As I say, we're here to talk about the 1995 budget. If the 
member doesn't want to talk about that budget, that's fine. We 
will have a free-ranging discussion, but it will be on a variety of 
issues. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I don't know if 
you even came remotely close to answering the question. And I 
will give it to you again and slow so you can perhaps grasp it. 
Did you in fact attend a meeting in Macklin or are you attending 
a meeting in North Battleford tonight? What in fact are the 
concerns and what do you plan to do to address some of those 
concerns? 
 
Now those concerns that are being raised . . . and in fact the 
response to those concerns are of course going to affect the  



May 16, 1995 

 
2289 

1995 budget. So it really was the question that you're wanting to 
get into. So if you would answer that, then in fact I'll go on 
record as stating yes, I did vote for those first two budgets. But 
just so that the people know that no caucus member, none of 
the members in your back rows, have any option. If you're part 
of the government, you cannot vote against the budget. 
 
So now we've gotten that silly little game out of the way. In fact 
if you want to follow it, I have no problem. We've got the rest 
of the week, and in fact perhaps this should go beyond Friday, 
if you want to play those kind of games. Now it's up to you. I 
have a sense that you're going to be here a few times during the 
week. Because we just won't be wrapping this up quick with an 
attitude like you have, Madam Minister. 
 
If you want to answer the questions, and I'll keep the questions, 
I guess, so you can handle them easy enough, and I'll keep them 
more to the 1995 budget. But if you want to take the topics 
beyond that, I think that's great. It's going to take some time. So 
you make up your mind just how it is you want to handle it. 
 
Now if you want to get back to the original question . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I don't think I've seen such a condescending attitude in 
this legislature for some time, and it's quite an admission to say, 
that although he didn't really believe in increasing the PST, he 
stood in this legislature and voted for the PST. I'll tell you, tell 
the member opposite, members of this caucus stand here and 
vote for things because they believe in them; not because they 
feel some obligation to. 
 
With respect to Macklin, I have had no meetings with people in 
Macklin. The officials have met with Macklin. I have no 
meeting in North Battleford tonight. And I would be pleased to 
discuss the tax reduction measures that are in this budget and 
why we chose these particular tax reduction measures. 
 
We chose to reduce the income tax because it provides the 
greatest benefit to Saskatchewan families; provides $150 
benefit, tax reduction benefit, to an individual taxpayer, $300 
per family. And unlike a cut in the PST, a one-point cut in the 
PST first of all would cost more, but also a much smaller 
percentage of that benefit would go to families. A lot of the 
benefits of the cut if the PST was cut would go to 
out-of-province businesses and others. 
 
And our estimate is that a family at $50,000 a year gets a 
benefit of about $265 a year from the income tax cut that we 
chose. The benefit from a PST cut is less than half, at $114. 
 
And I would ask the member to please not be so condescending 
in his attitude. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, in the "Tax Fairness for 
the 1990s", Saskatchewan New Democrat Party caucus, January 
1991, there's several parts to the document which talks about 
the PST. In fact let me just quote a few lines so you know 
exactly what I'm talking about. And I think you're very familiar  

with the document anyways. 
 
 Over the past nine years, more and more people have 

concluded that the provincial tax system and provincial 
sales tax is failing to meet the basic test of fairness. 

 
And of course the former government raised that tax from 5 per 
cent to 7 per cent. But now your government, Madam Minister, 
has taken it quite a bit further. And in fact all throughout the 
document it refers to the PST as a regressive tax, because you're 
placing the same tax in fact on everyone in the province that are 
having to buy goods regardless of ability to afford those goods. 
 
And now you're telling me that in fact it's more fair, it's more 
fair in your eyes, to take a tax off of the income of people and 
in fact leave it on the consumption . . . leave a consumption tax 
on, and in fact your own document doesn't agree with any of 
these statements that you're making now. 
 
So I know that when you were . . . you made the statement that 
you have already attended a meeting in Macklin. Could you tell 
me how many people in the community of Macklin or how 
many of the businesses along the west side of the province 
actually told you that their biggest concern was the flat tax? Or 
in fact are they telling you that their biggest concern is that 
they're losing a large portion of their business to 
out-of-province businesses? I suspect it would be the latter. 
 
And you know, when I take a look at . . . here's a Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business survey, and you must have 
also gotten a copy of this in the last few days. I was just reading 
my copy here as we were listening to the debate from yourself, 
between yourself and the member from Thunder Creek. And in 
fact on the PST there's a few comments about retail competition 
from Alberta: 
 
 . . . is widely identified as a negative drain on our 

members' businesses throughout the west side of the 
province. The problem is most acute among 
communities closest to the Alberta border with a 
staggering 85 per cent of small businesses located 
within one hours' drive from Alberta . . . 

 
Indicating that it has negatively affected their sales. 
 
Now all throughout this document . . . it's actually quite an 
interesting survey that they've done, and I hope you have read it. 
If not, I'll ensure that you get a copy right away because I don't 
think that you have done a survey. Or in fact if you have done a 
survey, you've completely ignored the feelings of the rural 
people that are neighbouring the two provinces and in fact the 
southern States. 
 
You know the other day I recall there was some questions on 
gaming, but I don't believe it was the Gaming minister that 
provided the answer. I believe it was the Minister of Economic 
Development, the House Leader, made a comment in the House 
that the reason they had to bring in VLTs and in fact bring in 
expanded gaming was in fact because our neighbouring  



May 16, 1995 

 
2290 

provinces had gaming and VLTs, and those states to the south 
of us had VLTs and expanded gaming, so we had to have done 
the same. 
 
(1645) 
 
And yet in this CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business) survey, it's basically the same argument. These 
people are saying that along the two borders . . . or three 
borders, in fact the tax is so much lower and the businesses 
within an hour or two hours’ drive are losing such a high per 
cent of their business. In fact it was surprising, Madam 
Minister, that they're saying Saskatchewan's small-business 
retail sector is losing at least $85 million a year in sales to 
Alberta alone — that's just to Alberta. 
 
Now in fact if the argument is fine that we had to get into VLTs 
and expanded gaming because of what's happening around our 
neighbouring provincial boundaries and that with the American 
states, why the difference for the tax? Why wouldn't it be the 
same argument you used? If in fact we're losing people from 
Saskatchewan, doing the shopping there — that was the same 
argument that you used for the VLTs — why isn't the tax 
argument the same? Give me an answer, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, you raised a number of issues and I'd like to go 
through some of them. The member opposite talks about the 
1991 New Democratic Party election platform. And I would 
just say to the member opposite — he should understand fully 
what's in there because it's the platform that he ran on. And 
again I think the people of Saskatchewan deserve an 
explanation as to why he would stand up in this legislature, take 
the platform that he ran on to get their votes, to get into this 
legislature, and then stand up and say to this legislature, I'm 
sorry, I didn't believe it. 
 
Did you only believe that platform because there were 40 or 50 
other people believing the platform, the same as you only voted 
for the increase in the PST because there were 40 or 50 other 
people voting for an increase in the PST? As I say, I find it 
interesting that he would raise issues about that platform 
because that's the platform upon which he was elected to this 
legislature. 
 
With respect to sales tax, of course I hear concerns raised in 
some parts of the province. But what we have to look at are 
some facts as well. The Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business survey is purely anecdotal. How much do you think 
you've lost from the retail sales? — I think I've lost this. How 
much do you think you've lost? — I think I've lost that. How 
much do you think you've lost? — Gee, I think I've lost that. 
Let's add all of these numbers up. 
 
So again, it's the Liberal Party's use of statistics and facts. They 
come in and say, this is a fact, when they haven't done their 
homework to figure out what is the real, solid basis in terms of 
analysis and argument that can be validated by some 
independent source. 

The other point I'd like to make is there are varieties of tax 
regimes. If you lived in Alberta, you would be paying a health 
care premium well over $800. In fact if you look at increases, 
the increase in health care premiums in Alberta in the '90s has, 
on a percentage basis, been higher than the increases in sales 
taxes in Saskatchewan. 
 
You want to compare at the other border. The tax rate in 
Manitoba is lower on some items, but on restaurant meals, for 
example, you'd be paying taxes on restaurant meals if you lived 
in Manitoba. You don't pay taxes in Saskatchewan. So there are 
a variety of comparisons. 
 
But the final point I'd like to make is the Liberal Party is 
certainly the gloom-and-doom party. When I read the comments 
they make, I mean the province is in terrible shape, absolutely 
terrible shape. Nobody's going anywhere. Nothing's happening. 
They're in the doldrums. Now I'm not sure whether they're 
talking about . . . maybe it's not the province. They might be 
talking about the fortunes of their own party when they say 
those comments because again let's go back to some basic facts. 
 
The most recent retail sales figures we have for a full year are 
for 1994. The increase in retail sales in Saskatchewan was 8.9 
per cent — higher than Alberta which was only 7.4 per cent, 
higher than Manitoba which was only 4.4 per cent. So 
obviously these issues are of concern, and they're issues that 
have to be dealt with, but they're hardly issues that should lead 
us all into a gloom-and-doom mentality. 
 
The economy of this province is turning around; it's turning 
around dramatically. Of all the areas where the economic 
turnaround is being reflected, it is in retail sales. And retail 
sales in this province, to finish off my comments, have 
increased more dramatically than either of our two neighbours. 
And they have increased 8.9 per cent in Saskatchewan and only 
7.4 per cent in sales-tax-free Alberta. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, I guess we'll just keep 
exchanging comments probably for this evening, and maybe 
another day we'll get into more of the specifics. 
 
As far as your increased retail sales figures that you're giving, 
what you're not telling the people is in fact that we were in the 
basement. You had taken us right down to the bottom. And in 
fact it's a lot easier to come up when you're in the bottom, 
percentage-wise . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it is. You 
know you make a lot of comments, Madam Minister, but you 
never have to back things up. You know I hear you talk about 
the CFIB survey being purely anecdotal. Well can you table in 
the House today your survey? Can you do that? In fact, I'll let 
you answer that right now. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I want to read into the record that we have once again 
caught the Liberal Party red-handed, misusing statistics. And 
we don't have to say it's my guess against your guess. What we 
have here are retail sales increases for '94 and for the previous  



May 16, 1995 

 
2291 

year. 
 
The member opposite just stood in this House, and he said that 
we had an 8.9 per cent increase in retail sales in '94 because we 
were in the basement the year before. And if you're down so 
low, you've got so far to come up. And the member opposite is 
simply have to going to look at facts and recognize facts. 
 
What I will read into the record is 1993; 1993 retail sales 
increased in Saskatchewan by 6.5 per cent  higher than 
Manitoba at 4.2, higher than Alberta at 3.5. So the member 
opposite again is simply incorrect, is simply incorrect in terms 
of what he said. The member opposite stood in this House a 
minute ago, and he said retail sales in Saskatchewan increased 
by 8.9 per cent. And the member opposite said clearly that the 
reason that the increase occurred was because we were in the 
basement in '93. The member opposite is simply have to going 
to accept the facts. We were not in the basement in '93. In fact 
relative to our neighbours on both sides, we were number one 
in '93. 
 
Now what I'm saying to the member opposite, the Liberal Party 
cannot continue to misuse facts in this legislature. It happens all 
the time and it's not a fair or reasonable way to be dealing with 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, you're obviously 
becoming, you know, fairly good at spinning a whole blanket 
out of a few pieces of thread because in fact you've picked a 
couple of specific years. But you know full well, if you go back 
a little further, you will find out what I said was actually 
correct. 
 
You made some other comments though . . . Because obviously 
you don't have a survey. You're saying the CFIB survey is not 
correct or incorrect or . . . I mean you question their figures, but 
you can't put out anything yourself. So I mean all the people of 
the province can do is rely on those people that are concerned 
enough about our towns and villages along the borders to in 
fact use their figures because your government mustn't be 
concerned enough. You've never looked into it. They're prying 
you out of this city to get out to Macklin and North Battleford, 
so you can hear some of these concerns. You make sure that 
you're well protected here in Regina. 
 
But, you know, there's a world out there that is really struggling 
over some of your taxation policies. I really feel sorry for those 
people in trying to deal with you because I don't think . . . It's 
not that I don't think you don't understand their concerns; I 
really don't think you care. That's your problem. 
 
Now when you talked about neighbouring provinces having 
increases in health care premiums, well somehow that's giving 
everyone the perception that well other provinces are increasing 
costs to their residents in health care, and you're not. You 
couldn't be further from the truth. 
 
Let's take a look at what you've done with the prescription drug 
plan. You've taken a drug plan which was  wow  virtually  

no cost to it, and you've made it now into a $1,700 a year drug 
plan. Well what kind of drug plan is that? If you want to figure 
out, Madam Minister, the percentage increase in cost to the 
drug plan, you would be astounded. In fact it would make the 
neighbouring provinces look very small in any increases that 
they've made. And I'm not saying that any health care increases 
that they've made are correct. I don't call the shots for them. I'm 
only telling you what . . . the citizens within our provincial 
boundaries have a right to certain services from the 
government; they have a right that you're not going to gouge 
them. You've been breaking those rights. 
 
You know, we take a look at a few others. In fact senior care is 
another one. Tell us what the percentage charge, increase in 
charges that you've placed on seniors that are living in homes, 
care homes, now that you've went to an income-tested charge. It 
wasn't too many years ago there was a flat charge. I can't 
remember whether it was $300, $350; maybe it was less. What 
are you at now, 900-and-some? You have to add in all of these 
costs that you have placed upon the seniors of the province, and 
in fact those people that need prescription medication. And 
you've increased, I guess . . . probably in some cases it would be 
in the hundreds of per cent increases. 
 
That's you, Madam Minister. You're the Finance minister. 
You're the one that goes to Treasury Board, goes to cabinet and 
says, you know, I have got to raise this amount of money. And 
in fact we're going to do it regardless of . . . well especially 
regardless of your 1990 tax fairness paper that you've put out 
because you were right before when you said . . . and I 
campaigned on this document. There's a lot of stuff in here, 
Madam Minister, I still think is correct. 
 
But you know what? You've broken just about every one of 
these rules or guidelines or promises. You're the one, Madam 
Minister. Take a look at the back page . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well sure, you know, don't heckle unless you 
want to get into it, okay. 
 
Increases in provincial government licences, fees and charges 
since 1982 — and you've got a whole list of things here: 
resident white-tailed deer licence increased 100 per cent; 
driver's licence, 122 per cent. Can you, Madam Minister, 
provide me a list of each and every one of these items and how 
much you've increased them since you've come to power? 
 
Because I'll tell you, you know as bad as we believe and know 
full well that the Conservative Party were when they were in 
power — they didn't care a lot about the same people that you 
don't now, Madam Minister  but you've outdone them. 
 
On page 13 in this fairness for families document — let's take a 
look. You have a highlighted box here — increase in total 
annual provincial taxes for a family, at average wage, from 
1981 to 1989. Now you're using the Conservative government 
years. Now you've listed the item, okay. Provincial income tax, 
increase in those eight years, $414; utilities — because in this 
document it refers to utilities time and time again as taxation, a 
form of taxation, yet none of the members opposite will now  



May 16, 1995 

 
2292 

refer to utilities as taxation because you've taken it right through 
the roof — sales tax and gas tax, 182 bucks; prescription drug 
costs, $145; property taxes, 506; losses of property 
improvement grant, 230. 
 
So in this eight-year period that you have used, of what the 
Conservative government, the former Conservative government, 
used as increases . . . now this is on an average family  they 
increased the cost, $2,294. And that's a lot of increase. There's 
no question. 
 
But now let's take a look at your record. Since 1991 to, I guess 
it was 1994. Well three and a half years is what you've . . . 
You're sitting at, I think it's a little over $4,500 increases to an 
average family of four, Saskatchewan residents — 4,500, more 
than double what the Conservatives did in eight or nine years. 
 
I'm not saying what they've done is right, but how can you, 
Madam Minister, chastise anybody? And I don't think this 
$4,500 that I'm referring to even includes the extra costs of the 
prescription drug plan. So don't in any way, shape, or form let 
on like your government or your principles are somehow tied to 
this government about tax fairness, because you won't find 
anybody that thinks that's the case — not anyone. 
 
(1700) 
 
You know, and if you were to also consider, when you're 
talking about health care costs rising for the residents of the 
province, any time the government is going to put more charges 
on the people through any form or fashion, it's a tax. You're 
taxing the people; you're taxing their ability to make a go of it. 
 
But you know when you, Madam Minister, when you had to 
meet some targets, you and the Premier, you started closing 
hospitals. There again, you did it without a plan, holus-bolus, 
just . . . 52 hospitals you shut down. 
 
And I know in a year or two . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
you convert. You go out and talk to the rural people. There isn't 
one of you that would come out to south-west Saskatchewan 
and debate me on whether you've converted a facility or closed 
it down. 
 
Go to the community of Kincaid and tell them, you're okay, 
we've converted your hospital. Well I'll tell you what the people 
at Kincaid would tell you today. 
 
The fact of the matter is there's other costs that you've put on to 
the shoulders of the Saskatchewan people, rural Saskatchewan 
in particular. And those are when you've taken away services. If 
you close a hospital — pick a hospital — if you close the 
hospital in Coronach or in Rockglen or Lafleche or Gull Lake 
or Vanguard or Ponteix or Kincaid or Mankota or Climax or 
Eastend, when you take services out of those communities, you 
then are taxing the people. You're putting, you're putting a cost 
to the people of those rural areas that they now have to shoulder 
to get those services elsewhere. You don't even consider those. 
 

You see the problem is, Madam Minister, you consider only 
what is in front of you as far as the financial document, you 
know, that you're looking at. You don't see the ramifications to 
the people. 
 
If you close their hospital in a place like Climax, what you've 
effectively done is put quite an increase in cost for people that 
need a service but in fact have to use the ambulance service, or 
in fact stay in motels. The waiting-lists alone at some of these 
hospitals that you have are in fact . . . I don't think you could 
even guess at how many dollars are spent in hotel costs alone, 
hotel/motel costs alone, that you have placed on the rural 
people of this province in having to stay in these facilities 
because they can't get the service out in rural Saskatchewan any 
longer. So you know, I know you really love to use other 
provinces as your example or your analogies. The fact of the 
matter is, I don't think you have anything that you can brag 
about. 
 
You have completely shut down rural Saskatchewan. Now 
they're calling you out to places like North Battleford — I guess 
we'll get back to, I think it was the second question of the day 
— they're calling you back out to North Battleford to say you 
know, listen, we are having a really tough time of it. Our 
businesses are either going to close or we're going to move into 
Alberta. 
 
And in fact I saw that only minutes ago. It was one of the 
questions on the CFIB survey. And in fact it was quite high. 
Well I'll find it when I get a chance to sit down and listen to one 
of your answers, Madam Minister. But it was in fact quite an 
amount of businesses that feel that if in fact you don't give 
some relief, then what's going to happen is that they're going to 
have to move to Alberta. Or in fact if they're not going to move 
to Alberta, they're probably going to have to shut down their 
business. 
 
There we go, it's in table no. 5: what impact has cross-border 
shopping had on your business? And when we take a look at the 
response from some of the businesses, all right, for big-ticket 
retail items, lower employment levels, 80 per cent of these 
people — this is in the west side of Saskatchewan — 80 per 
cent said yes, there will be less employment; 60 per cent, lower 
capital investment. So they can't hire people. They can't invest 
monies to keep the business, well, going or in fact expanding. 
 
Of those that are dealing with big-ticket retail items, 30 per cent 
may be forced to move to Alberta and 45 per cent may be 
forced to close. I think these are the kind of questions that 
they're posing to you in Macklin and again tonight. Not the 
prescription costs or the health care costs in Alberta. I think 
what they're asking you, Madam Minister, is, is there anything 
that you're going to do — is there anything that you're going to 
do  that's going to give some relief so that these people can 
make a business viable, so that they can raise their families in 
rural Saskatchewan, keep those communities viable? 
 
I know you and the Premier haven't had a lot of desire to keep  



May 16, 1995 

 
2293 

some of the rural communities going up to now. But in fact I 
think that these retailers out in, you know, both the west and 
east and south borders of the province are now saying it's a 
do-or-die situation. 
 
Smaller-ticket retail items, and those figures are just about the 
same. Lower unemployment; 73 per cent said yes, they're going 
to invest a little bit less; 11 per cent feel they may be forced to 
go to Alberta; 27 per cent, be closed. 
 
And when you look at less than one hour from the border, we're 
back up to quite a high figure. For a one- to two-hour drive 
from the border, I mean, you've got 34 per cent of respondents 
are saying they may be forced to close. 
 
Those are the kind of questions that are going to be posed to 
you tonight, Madam Minister. And if you can give any response 
at all, if you can, then it's going to reflect on the 1995 budget, if 
in fact you're going to do something in this fiscal year. 
 
If not, then I suspect those people are going to do whatever they 
can to ensure you're not the one calling the shots after the 
election. Because you have put their businesses and their 
families and their communities at risk. You, with your high tax. 
 
The only economic development really that I can think of off 
the top of my head that your government's been involved in in 
the last few year is VLTs. Doesn't that make you feel perhaps 
like you've failed? You've failed somebody; you've failed the 
taxpayers. 
 
I mean surely somebody's getting a raw end of the stick here 
when all you can do is say that gambling is our only way out; 
that you in fact don't have any economic development plan, any 
way to bring in revenue to the province without in fact reaching 
into the pockets of the people that are needing these services 
that you're also taking way. 
 
I guess I've raised enough issues for awhile. I'm going to let you 
respond. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the members 
opposite, the children may want to consider the random 
ramblings of the Liberal opposite and the comment made 
recently by a University of Regina economist who said this 
about the Liberal Party: 
 
 I find the Liberals very hard to read in terms of what 

their actual economic policies are. I do try to follow it 
closely, but they don't seem to really have a philosophy 
of government or a vision of what they want to do. 

 
And, Mr. Chairman, I would say listen to the last five minutes 
and it's a perfect illustration of the fact that the Liberals have no 
vision, no philosophy. Well, you know, we shouldn't have cut 
the drug plan, we should cut taxes — ramble, ramble, ramble. 
 
What I will say to the children is this. When we became the 
government we inherited a very serious financial situation. We  

were on the brink of a financial crisis, almost to the point of 
being unable to borrow money. And we laid before the people 
of the province a plan, not only to balance the books, but to 
create jobs for your generation of children. And part of that 
plan to ensure that we do things . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. I will call the minister to 
order and remind her that it is not in order to involve guests in 
the galleries in the debate. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — For Saskatchewan's children 
generally. Good point, Mr. Chairman — my children, your 
children, everyone's children. And we put in place measures to 
ensure that there were jobs for them, things like targeted tax 
reductions for particular businesses. So that instead of 
exporting our resources out of this province in a raw state, we 
would process them here. So we're not just exporting oats out of 
the province in a raw state. In Saskatoon, right today, they're 
processing those oats into a very fine powder that then is used 
in cosmetics. 
 
So we had a plan to create jobs, and we still have more work to 
do on that plan to create jobs. And we had a plan to balance the 
books of the province, to ensure that we weren't every year 
spending more money than we were taking in. 
 
And with the help and the cooperation and the input of all of 
the people of Saskatchewan, we achieved that plan. And 
everyone in Saskatchewan contributed and everyone in 
Saskatchewan should be very proud, because people outside 
this province are saying that we should be proud of what we've 
achieved. And I'd like to read into the record a few of the 
comments made. 
 
For example, this is the Investment Dealers Association of 
Canada, a recognized agency that studies provinces all across 
Canada. And this is what has been said about the province of 
Saskatchewan. They said: 
 
 The deficit attack by Saskatchewan's NDP government 

is the most advanced in the country. They cut program 
spending by 3 per cent over the last two years, which 
compares to 6 per cent increases on average in the three 
years that preceded that. That's a hell of a turnaround. 
That's more than any other government has done in that 
period. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — And, Mr. Chairman, you don't have 
to go outside the province. You can look within the province 
and see what some of the newspapers have said about the plan, 
the plan that we all developed, we all contributed to, and we all 
now can see has succeeded. This is from The Melfort Journal 
and it says: 
 
 The New Democrat government became the first in over 

a decade to introduce a balanced budget in the 
Saskatchewan legislature when they tabled their  



May 16, 1995 

 
2294 

1995-96 budget Thursday. Certainly this government is to 
be congratulated for presenting a balanced budget. It has 
accomplished a goal it set for itself before being elected 
in 1991 and it has accomplished this goal at a faster 
pace than could have been expected. In presenting their 
balanced budget Thursday, the Saskatchewan 
government set a standard that should be copied by 
governments across this country, both at the provincial 
and the federal level. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I say to the children of this province, 
across this province, is they've seen what happens here. The 
Liberals ramble on endlessly with no sense of direction, no 
sense of purpose, no sense of vision. This government — yes, 
we've had to make difficult choices, but we've had to make 
those choices in the interests of our children to ensure that they 
do have jobs and they do have sound finances and that they're 
not spending their lives paying off our debt. 
 
We had a plan, we had a vision; that one has worked. We have 
a new plan and a new vision for the next four years, and I'm 
sure that one will work as well. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I want to thank 
you for the example of rambling on. But getting on with things, 
and I notice you were quoting into the record quite a bit, but let 
myself quote too: No to sales tax cut, by Randy Burton, 
Leader-Star services. And the provincial government . . . and I 
guess this is a quote from you directly, Madam Minister; in fact 
yes, it is: 
 
 The provincial government can't afford the economic 

development and jobs that would result from a sales tax 
cut because . . . 

 
Mr. McPherson: — So I mean you admit that there is going to 
be some economic development benefits and jobs from doing 
that, but let me go on: 
 
 . . . that would result from a sales tax cut because such a 

move would mean less in federal transfers, says Finance 
minister Janice MacKinnon. 

 
It's a quote, Mr. Chairman. And let me read on here: 
 
 It's an argument that astonishes Macklin mayor (I won't 

use his name) who watches his border constituents flee 
Saskatchewan to shop in the sales-tax-free Alberta. 

 
You know, you want to talk about reading things into record, 
that's damaging. That's going to stick with you for years, 
Madam Minister, because people are amazed at some of the 
things that you have come out with. 
 
In fact let me refer again to the tax fairness for the 1990s, New 
Democrat Party caucus. This is just prior to the winning of 
government. And this part of it is on gas tax. And I use this 
because I noticed in the CFIB survey — here we go: 
 

 High gas taxes as a contributing factor  the very high 
Saskatchewan gas tax was seen as a serious contributing 
factor to cross-border shopping. There's an added 
consumer bonus of travelling to neighbouring provinces 
to not only beat the PST but also fill up consumer tanks 
at four and a half cents per litre less provincial tax in 
Manitoba and gain an even bigger gas tax saving of 6 
cents a litre in Alberta. 

 
(1715) 
 
And it goes on to talk about the harmful effects of having a 
high gas tax. 
 
And in your tax fairness paper, Saskatchewan provincial tax on 
gasoline, you give some comparisons from 1981 when it was at 
26 cents a gallon, to 1990 at 45 cents per gallon. 
 
And in the paper, and I'll quote right from it: 
 
 In recent months Saskatchewan people have been 

becoming increasingly concerned about the rapid rising 
level of consumer prices for gasoline, diesel fuel, and 
home heating oil. They are acutely aware that the 
provincial government's significant gas tax increase has 
been a major component of the overall increase in 
consumer prices. 

 
Well I recall back in the early '80s when the Devine 
administration, when the former Conservative . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now I know the member just 
realized his mistake, and I'm glad that he corrected it, and I'll 
ask him to proceed. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The former Conservative administration 
actually had cut the gas tax only for the election to put it up 
shortly thereafter. 
 
So let me quote here: 
 
 Saskatchewan people know that they cannot expect 

miracles from the provincial tax system. 
 
And because the heckling is so bad, Mr. Chairman, I'm just 
going to pick out a few quotes here: “People don't want empty 
promises; they will not tolerate lies and betrayal; they demand 
integrity from the tax system; they deserve no less.” You had all 
the words down pat, Madam Minister, but in fact you failed. 
You failed. 
 
Out of the StatsCan document 1991, I look at a list of 
communities that they show right across the major cities in the 
10 provinces, and in 1991, the winter of 1991, Regina had the 
lowest gas price in Canada, right after . . . right at election time 
— right when you were doing this document; had the lowest. 
Now we're . . . now I don't know if we're just among the highest 
or we are the highest. Is there anywhere else in Canada where in 
fact it's lower in price? 



May 16, 1995 

 
2295 

And you know what's strange is that it's here in this province. I 
think we are the second highest oil producer in Canada and in 
fact refine, refine the products here. And look at the kind of tax 
that you've placed on fuel. And in fact the CFIB are now saying 
that your high taxes, not just the PST that they're asking you 
about in Macklin and in North Battleford . . . Even though that's 
really hurting them . . . And in fact it goes on to talk about how 
bad is it hurting them. 
 
Well they're saying, to Alberta alone, it's $85 million a year. 
The lost sales in turn could cause the loss of 3 to 5,000 jobs in 
this small-business sector. We'll have to come back to that 
because, Madam Minister, I know that these are concerns that 
are going to be raised tonight. 
 
I wonder if you would . . . I wonder if you have . . . Well I 
wonder if you have the nerve to tell us what you intend to do 
about the problem, if in fact you're going to announce 
something at these meetings tonight, or why are you attending? 
To hopefully finally convince them that high tax is the way to 
go? Well I doubt it. I doubt that's going to sell out there. But in 
fact you've really been part of sticking it to those businesses all 
along the borders. 
 
Now we get back to the job number, 3 to 5,000 in lost jobs. 
And I take it that this is still dealing with the west side of the 
province. I don't know if that's really dealing with the overall 
job loss that's expected. I don't know that; it's not in my survey 
and I haven't read all the way through it. But 3 to 5,000 jobs . . . 
And each and every day — I wish I would have brought some 
of them in here — each and every day your government . . . the 
Economic Development minister is sending out news releases, 
standing up making ministerial statements saying, well we're 
going to create 200 jobs here or 16 jobs there. I dare say there 
isn't a business or a person that would get a job in this province 
without it being in a headline right today. I've never seen so 
many headlines go out about . . . It's funny; you don't name the 
actual people that are getting the jobs. Lord knows, there's so 
few of them you could actually do that. 
 
But here, here you're willing to risk 3 to 5,000 jobs . . . Not risk, 
I mean it's a loss now. You're giving up on those kind of job 
numbers by taking the financial burden off the shoulders of 
Saskatchewan residents so that they can earn a living, right? 
And in fact with a lower PST, you could make those 
communities viable for years and years to come and in fact 
perhaps do away with this perception that rural Saskatchewan 
isn't going to be there in the future anyways. 
 
What about those 3 to 5,000 jobs? Why aren't some of these 
jobs coming back in those daily ministerial statements and news 
releases? You think nothing of spending millions and millions 
and millions of dollars on plugging money into some businesses 
right now, especially after chastising the former Conservative 
government for doing it. All you can say . . . well their numbers 
were bigger; you know, ours aren't that big. So what? Why in 
fact don't you get off the backs of the people of this province so 
that they can earn their own living without having to have you 
pull them down and in fact provide some  

relief to people when . . . 
 
You know the Premier said many times that in fact everyone 
has had to share in this pain. Well they did. But now if there's 
some gain, why can't we share in some gains? Why can't you 
give people a tax break, if in fact people like the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business are sending out surveys . . . 
and obviously you don't have one as a government. But why 
can't you give these breaks to the people that will actually 
provide the jobs and provide relief so that they feel that perhaps 
they shouldn't be moving out of the province? 
 
I'll let you answer for awhile. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. Again if there's anything that could reveal a lack of 
vision and the lack of an overview as to where this province 
should go on the part of the Liberal Party, it's the ramblings of 
the member opposite. I will at least say this for the official 
opposition. When the Conservatives get up, there's a track to 
what they're saying. You may not agree with what they're 
saying, but there's a purpose. They're going somewhere. 
 
This is just random rambling, so let me try to address some of 
the ramblings of the member opposite. He talks about the price 
of gasoline in the city. The most important factor affecting the 
price of gasoline right now is competition in the oil industry. It's 
the oil companies themselves who have increased the price of 
gas recently. There is a tremendous disparity in the price of gas 
in Saskatchewan relative to Ontario even though the tax levels 
are exactly the same. So he needs to talk to his Liberal 
counterparts in Ottawa about their competitions policy and why 
they aren't asking more serious questions of the oil companies. 
 
I would also remind the member opposite the last government 
to increase the gas tax was not the Saskatchewan government, 
but it was his federal Liberal counterparts — some bits of 
information that he may want to digest. Again, the way the 
Liberals use numbers is absolutely frightening. The member 
says you know somebody said that we've lost to 3 to 5,000 jobs, 
and somebody said that, and that's a fact. 
 
What we use is Statistics Canada, which Statistics Canada says 
this year, in the first three months of this year — the first 
quarter of this year — relative to the first quarter of last year, 
there were 10,000 more people working in the province. This 
isn't me going out and saying, well what you do you think? Do 
you think more people are working? Yes, I think more people 
are working. There's a fact. I think more people are working. 
 
It's not that. It's not that kind of use of information. A bunch of 
people said people aren't working. Statistics Canada say 10,000 
more people are working in this province than a year ago in the 
first three months of this year. 
 
Now we still aren't resting on our laurels. We're still committed 
to creating more jobs. But I would say to the member opposite, 
if there is an illustration of the comment made by the economist 
that that there no vision, no philosophy to the Liberal Party in  



May 16, 1995 

 
2296 

Saskatchewan, all they have to listen to is the ramblings of the 
members opposite. They're absolutely random. 
 
You shouldn't have cut this means we should have spent more. 
Okay we should have spent more, but we should have cut taxes 
too at the time. Should have spent more, should have cut taxes, 
and of course the debt and of course balance the books. People 
saw that gobbledegook in the 1980s, and they saw the effects of 
it, and they're not going to buy it again, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move we report progress. 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


