






















































March 13, 1995


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 13, 1995 

 

 
805 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions from the Consul and Swift Current as well as 
Maple Creek areas of the province. I will read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I want to thank Violet C. Demchenko for sending these in 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 
set of petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan and specifically firearms owners, in order 
to halt the federal Liberal government from infringing 
upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Saskatoon, 
Prud'homme, Mankota, Prince Albert, Vonda, Tisdale, 
Bjorkdale, all across the northern part of the province. Mr. 
Speaker. I present them. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition that I'll read the prayer of: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are constituents of mine from the 
communities of Woodrow, Assiniboia, Limerick. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated toward 
the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 31 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management: as the Battle Creek reservoir proposal has 
now passed through all of the initial surveys, 
environmental evaluations, and public hearings, will the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management, SERM, instruct his officials 
to complete the necessary process to activate this project 
and bring it to completion? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have another notice as well. I give notice that I 
shall on day 31 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Saskatchewan Water Corporation: will 

the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation agree to work in cooperation with the 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management, 
SERM, and initiate the reactivation of the agreement 
with Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration, PFRA, 
to bring about the completion of the Battle Creek 
reservoir project? 

 
I'm pleased to table these now. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly, a 
former MP (Member of Parliament) for Red Deer, Alberta, Mr. 
Doug Fee, seated in your gallery. 
 
He is today chief executive officer for the Canadian Angus 
Association and he's in Regina assuming his duties in that 
responsibility. And I'd like to have all of the members of the 
Assembly join me in welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly two constituents, Jack Twietmeyer and Ken Grandy  



March 13, 1995 

 
806 

from Oxbow. They're also members of the Moose Creek 
Wildlife Association and I'd like to ask everyone to welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Battle Creek Dam and Irrigation Project 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 
to thank the minister of the Saskatchewan Water for sending his 
top officials out to a water-user meeting in Consul, 
Saskatchewan last Friday evening. A large group of interested 
people attended with the hope of getting the Battle Creek dam 
and irrigation project back on track. This dam, far from being a 
major or a megaproject, will have a tremendous positive spin-
off for the area and for the province. 
 
First, it would provide the opportunity to properly regulate the 
water flow and sharing arrangements with the Americans. A 
representative from the American users association informed 
the meeting that they support the project and would benefit 
from it. 
 
Second, irrigation potential would benefit the local area as well 
as to have an enhancement for the existing projects throughout 
the Battle Creek and the Frenchman River basins. Increasing the 
feed and livestock numbers would certainly result. 
 
Third, the recreational opportunities as well as the benefits of 
water for migratory birds and for other wildlife would provide 
an obvious long-term increased tax base for the province. PFRA 
response to environmental concerns is that every negative 
impact can easily be offset by positive action. 
 
The need for water in a semi-arid region should be obvious. 
Friday's unanimous vote in favour of this project should clearly 
show that it is time to get on with this project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Brier Championship in Halifax 
 
Mr. Jess: — I would like to acknowledge the Brad Heidt rink 
of Saskatchewan which competed in the final of the Brier 
yesterday in Halifax. 
 
Although Saskatchewan was defeated 10-8 by Manitoba in the 
final end for the championship, we are still very proud of skip, 
Brad Heidt of Kerrobert; third, Mark Dacey; second, Wayne 
Charteris; and lead, Dan Ormsby. 
 
This Saskatchewan foursome was down 7-3 around the mid-
point of yesterday’s final, but came back to tie the match 8-8 
going into the final end, to show that they were not going to 
give up without a fight. 
 
It should be noted that Brad Heidt defeated Manitoba's Kerry  

Burtnyk 6 to 5 in an extra end to earn a bye into the final 
yesterday. So both matches were extremely close and I am sure 
the final could have gone either way. 
 
I know that the community of Kerrobert is proud of Brad Heidt 
for advancing to the final. His team's record was 8 and 3 in the 
round robin competition — good enough for second place. 
That's very good when you consider competing against several 
veteran curlers who had won the championship before. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the Manitoba rink and offer 
them best wishes heading into the world championship in 
Brandon in April. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to acknowledge 
the record of the Brad Heidt rink. But I would also suggest that 
they will be back, Mr. Speaker. They're a young team, they're a 
good team, and they just missed it by a whisker. And I'm sure 
they'll be back. 
 

Commonwealth Day 
 
Mr. Britton: — And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to, on behalf of the opposition caucus, join with the 
Lieutenant Governor in acknowledging Commonwealth Day. 
 
Commonwealth Day is observed by 50 very diverse nations 
around the world. The theme of Commonwealth Day this year 
is the year of tolerance. The Commonwealth itself is an 
excellent example of tolerance at work. In an age where narrow-
minded nationalism is on the rise and strife is rampant in the 
world, it is inspiring to see an institution like the 
Commonwealth that shows how many people from many 
different lands can cooperate for their mutual benefit. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are proud of our participation in the 
Commonwealth. And I am sure the coming year we will be 
mindful of this year's message of tolerance as we strive to live 
together in harmony in this very culturally rich, diverse 
province of ours. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Royal University Hospital Ranked Among the Best 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon is in a very real sense 
the flagship hospital of the provincial health care system. In 
patient care, research, and teaching, it is first rate and has been 
for the 40 years of its existence. 
 
This is not just the opinion of a proud Saskatoon MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), Mr. Speaker. It is also  



March 13, 1995 

 
807 

the published evaluation of the Canadian Council on Health 
Services Accreditation, the CCHSA. 
 
Recently a three-member survey team from outside the province 
conducted an intensive accreditation review of the hospital 
services and departments. The team also met with Saskatoon 
District Health senior administrative staff and board members. 
The CCHSA team awarded the Royal University Hospital a full 
three-year accreditation for quality service and management, 
among the highest award possible. 
 
I suppose some MLAs might claim that the team members were 
just bureaucrats with briefcases and calculators, but I trust the 
objectivity of the nurse, the doctor, and the hospital 
administrator who made up the team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the team reviewed how well services at the 
hospital met patients' needs and managed resources within the 
health system. It praised both medical and administrative staff 
in its final report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all University Hospital personnel deserve our 
congratulations. John Malcolm, Saskatoon District Health 
president said it best: excellence is a team reward. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retail Banking Outlet Opened in Vanguard 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a privilege 
for me this morning together with Canada Post, the Bank of 
Montreal, the village of Vanguard, to open a small retail 
banking outlet in that community. The community has had a 
devastating effect put on them by the Department of Health and 
this offsets many of the things that were done in that case. 
 
The special thing about this was, this morning as we gathered 
around to cut the ribbon and have a cup of coffee and cake, was 
the community's involvement, the community's wish to have 
this succeed. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I'm proud to have 
had that opportunity to be there this morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Accelerator Laboratory at 
University of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Where does NASA 
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration) go when it 
wants to study pulsars and other deep-space energy sources? To 
the University of Saskatchewan of course. And I'm pleased to 
report that the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) in my 
constituency has once again received significant international 
attention. This time the focus is the Saskatchewan Accelerator 
Laboratory which will play a key role in future NASA projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two scientists from the Goddard Space Flight 
Centre in Maryland are undertaking a month-long project at the  

U of S. Their work is part of the construction of an advanced 
gamma ray telescope which will be launched into space. The U 
of S linear accelerator was chosen because it is the sole source 
of calibrated, high-energy gamma rays in North America. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members will know that 
gamma rays remain a scientific mystery, but suffice it to say 
they originate in pulsars, the sun, active galactic nuclei, and 
other energy sources that are often referred to as the lighthouses 
of the galaxy. And as such lighthouses, the gamma rays 
produced at the U of S may provide important clues to the 
origin of life and the universe itself. 
 
And so for their continuing excellence in research, I want to 
commend the University of Saskatchewan and especially all 
those working at the Saskatchewan linear accelerator 
laboratory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ringette Association of Saskatchewan Tournament 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Ringette Association of Saskatchewan held its provincial 
tournament in Regina over the weekend. 
 
The Regina Stingers won the gold in Junior AA while the 
Saskatoon Selects took the silver. In the Junior A competition, 
the Hodgeville Red Devils won gold, Shellbrook Selects silver, 
and the Regina Seals the bronze. 
 
In the Tween A event, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Saints won 
the gold, the Regina Aces the silver, and the Saskatoon Jettes 
the bronze. 
 
In Belle A, the Zone-7 Ringers — that's in north-west 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — won the gold, Regina Cobras the 
silver, and the Saskatoon Warriors the bronze. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that I had special attention with 
the Saskatoon Warriors because my daughter plays on the team 
and I'm very proud of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Deb A action the Saskatoon Renegades took the 
gold, Regina Knix the silver, and the Regina Brewers the 
bronze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ringette was founded in Canada 32 years ago and 
the Ringette Association of Saskatchewan is now in its 20th 
season. Canada has 30,000 registered players while 
Saskatchewan has 220 teams with 2,800 players. 
 
The numbers do not include, Mr. Speaker, a multitude of 
coaches, parents, administrators, and volunteers who helped to 
improve and promote this sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to admit that like many others, ringette is a 
sport that was not completely familiar to me until about 12 
years ago when I began coaching. In the past 20 years it has  



March 13, 1995 

 
808 

spread across the country and around the world. The stick 
handling and skating finesse from these young women is 
phenomenal. 
 
I was impressed by what I saw, and I want to congratulate 
President Vince Kolack and all those involved who made this a 
very successful 20th anniversary tournament. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rural Emergency Services 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, on CBC morning hour of March 13, Dr. Kassett 
of Herbert said that your health reforms have taken a human toll 
that doesn't show up on the balance sheets. He said, and I quote: 
I guarantee that a lot of these communities that do not have 
emergency facilities are losing patients. It may not be 
documented as such, but we have patients that are brought in 
dead on arrival. If it's a 10-minute delay, that's one thing, but if 
it's an hour, then you're going to see a lot more patients arriving 
at the emergency, and they'll be dead on arrival. 
 
Mr. Minister, your closure of rural hospitals has resulted in 
rural residents being further than ever from emergency services. 
Have you done any studies to show how the number of patients 
who are dead on arrival has increased since your hospital 
closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 
question. I too heard the interview this morning. In respect to 
the specific allegation by the doctor, I've asked the department 
to contact the district, and we'll be checking into the accuracies 
there. 
 
But let me say this, and let me again correct the member for the 
benefit of members of the legislature and the public. Hospitals 
have not closed. Hospitals have not closed. The facilities that 
held acute care beds have had the funding for acute care beds 
withdrawn to be replaced with funding for other purposes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure that member that in each of 
those communities, emergency services continue; 24-hour 
services are available. We have, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, the 
best road ambulance system in all of Canada and we have been 
improving that with the network of first responders across the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, unfortunately, as I had the privilege of visiting one of 
the local hospitals in my community last night, that's not what 
people are saying. People are worried out there. And we're  

fortunate in the Moosomin area that we do have facilities a lot 
closer than we do have in the south-west. 
 
Mr. Minister, doctors are saying that you have created a serious 
and dangerous situation. People are further from emergency 
rooms, and that is resulting in more deaths. And you talk about 
clinics. If the door's closed at 6 o'clock and the lights are off, 
what good does that emergency service do? 
 
Doctors are telling you this, Mr. Minister. In fact there's a 
doctor in your caucus who has tried to tell you this, but did you 
listen? No. In fact your party went out and torpedoed his 
political career because he dared to speak out and represent his 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Minister, we would like some very specific information. 
Will you give us the number of patients who were declared 
dead on arrival at emergency rooms prior to your hospital 
closures and the number of patients being declared dead on 
arrival since the hospital closures have come into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will endeavour to provide 
that information for the member and for members of the House. 
But let me say this. The member says that the public of 
Saskatchewan are worried. Little wonder they're worried, when 
misinformation is brought to this House on a regular basis by 
members opposite talking about the closure of hospitals. 
 
I repeat that in each of those communities, emergency services 
are available on a 24-hour basis. We have the best road 
ambulance system in all of Canada. Combine that with our air 
ambulance service; combine that with first responders. And if 
there's anything we should all be worried about in this 
legislature and in this province, it's the level of federal 
government funding cuts that are coming that are going to 
challenge us deeply in every province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I've said I will endeavour to provide the 
information that the member requests. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, and again, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I find it interesting that you put the blame at the feet 
of the federal government when the closures were made long 
before federal restructuring of health care payments. 
 
As well, Mr. Minister, have you ever been in an ambulance, 
driving down some of the rural roads trying to get to an 
emergency room in time? I think, Mr. Minister, you would be 
very concerned if you happened to be living out in Willow 
Bunch or some of these other centres. 
 
Mr. Minister, we're asking you a straightforward question. We 
asked this question two or three years ago, and we're still 
waiting for the answer. You've indicated today you'll provide 
the answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you assure us that you will provide the  



March 13, 1995 

 
809 

information we've requested — the number of patients that have 
been declared dead on arrival at emergency wards prior to and 
following the closure of 52 hospitals across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there will always be 
the circumstance where individuals will arrive dead on arrival 
in our health care facilities. This is certainly not new and it will 
never, never stop. And yes, we will endeavour to put, as best we 
can, to put that information together for the member. 
 
But now this is the member and this is the party that's always 
recommending to do things in Saskatchewan the way they're 
doing it in Alberta. He wants to read the front page of The 
Globe and Mail today where on the front page of The Globe 
and Mail it's indicated that the Government of Alberta is 
literally closing hospitals — not converting, but closing 
hospitals in rural Alberta. He may want to phone his colleague 
and friends in Alberta to see what they're doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, your colleague in 
British Columbia, Premier Harcourt, is being investigated for 
conflict of interest over his government's awarding of millions 
of dollars in advertising contracts to a company with strong 
political ties to the NDP (New Democratic Party). The Conflict 
of Interest Commissioner said that he will launch an 
investigation under a law that sets out standards of conduct for 
B.C. (British Columbia) politicians. 
 
Mr. Premier, the parallel between the situation in B.C. and 
Saskatchewan is striking, yet you have refused our suggestions 
to have an independent inquiry into the matter. Mr. Premier, 
would you not agree that your involvement in rewarding 
millions of dollars of government contracts to Phoenix 
Advertising, the advertising agency of record for your New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, should be subject to a 
similar investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
member's question, let me say one . . . first of all, as I have said 
in the House before, that other than what has been the practice 
in the province before, this government does not have an 
agency of record because the policy under which advertising 
contracts are awarded has been changed. 
 
I think the member from Morse seems to be living in the past, 
as I indicated on Friday, in that he remembers a day when 
something in the order of a hundred million dollars worth of 
advertising was given untendered to two advertising firms 
under the former administration, Dome Advertising and Roberts  

& Poole, without tendering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not the case in Saskatchewan today. There 
are a large number of advertising firms who are able to 
participate in the advertising work of the government because 
the work is being done through a free and open tendering 
system, Mr. Speaker. Every advertising contract that comes up 
above $50,000 is tendered. There is representation on the panel 
other than from the government that makes a selection. And 
that is the way it is today. That is not the way it was in the 
1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, I remind you 
that the former minister of Justice agrees with us. He said that if 
someone was found guilty of the offence of accepting a 
kickback, it should also be an offence to offer one. 
 
Now Phoenix Advertising is the agency of record for the NDP. 
The president of Phoenix has said that political donations to the 
NDP is a common part of the cost of doing business with your 
government. 
 
In B.C. the Conflict of Interest Commissioner agreed to probe 
government's decision to award about 5 million in advertising 
contracts to Now Communications Inc., a company with strong 
ties to the NDP. And those contracts were tendered, Mr. 
Minister. It would appear that the situation is almost identical. 
 
Mr. Minister, why the reluctance to pass this on to our Conflict 
of Interest Commissioner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, had the member not 
been sticking so closely to his script, he would have not had to 
repeat something on which he is in error — and that is that 
there is an agency of record for the provincial government. 
 
There is not, I repeat again, because we do our contracting for 
advertising through a tendering process, Mr. Speaker, and when 
the contract comes up there is a selection panel which selects 
the advertising firm that will be chosen. On that panel is 
somebody who represents the client department, somebody who 
represents the communications unit, and somebody from the 
industry, in order to make sure that the public interest is 
protected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell the member that some other firms that are 
able now to take part in advertising, which they were not able to 
take part under the former administration . . . True, Phoenix is 
one of them. Cooper Quine & Fraser, Brown communications 
group, Palmer Jarvis, McKay Goettler, Wawryk Associates, 
Quest Communications, Smith & Smith, Tap Communications, 
and the list goes on. As it should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no reason why others should be locked out, as they 
were locked out in the 1980s, and as they are locked out at the  



March 13, 1995 

 
810 

federal government level, where the Liberals do the same 
approach as was done by the former Conservatives in 
Saskatchewan in the 1980s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, all of the 
things you said are all the things that I heard about from the 
Premier of British Columbia. Agency of record, Phoenix 
Advertising, has said that they are the agency of record. They've 
also indicated that it is a common part of the cost of doing 
business with your government. You hide behind the freedom 
of information Act instead of promoting it. And now you scoff 
at the conflict of interest provisions. 
 
Mr. Minister, one has to wonder, when you supported The 
Conflict of Interests Act, if you were not prepared to use it, why 
wouldn't you have said it at that time? Today is the time to 
stand up and admit that conflict of interest is where it should be 
and that's the commissioner that should be looking into it. Will 
you tell us why you won't? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there clearly are 
no grounds for allegations of conflict of interest, as the 
members opposite would like to suggest. And let me just tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, and the House and the members opposite, the 
level of satisfaction that there is in the industry who is directly 
affected by this. 
 
I refer to a headline on February 26, 1992, when this new policy 
was developed: New policy pleases advertising firm. They 
agreed. Another headline on May 27, 1992: Competitors for 
government advertising contracts pleased. 
 
A letter, Mr. Speaker, from Papp communications in which they 
say: 
 
 I remember a time not so long ago when there was no 

opportunity to bid on government work. The change that 
you have instituted is still very refreshing and we look 
forward to future competitions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is no better test on the fairness of a policy 
than the community which is affected by it, and the industry 
that is affected by this open tendering policy is satisfied with 
the policy because they say it is refreshing and it is fair. And I 
say so as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

VLT Revenues 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, NDP Gaming minister number five assured us that 
there was a moratorium on the number of VLTs (video lottery 
terminal) in Saskatchewan. NDP Gaming minister number six 
has a policy which indicates that there will be fewer machines  

in bars and restaurants so that the government can have 500 
machines in the new Regina casino and 500 more divided 
among the four or more casinos expected to open on reserves. 
 
My question to the minister of Gaming: some VLT machines, 
Madam Minister, will operate on the current 15 per cent 
formula to the operators; and some VLTs, it appears, will have 
special casino status where the government will get a bigger 
chunk of the revenue. Can the minister tell me exactly what 
percentage the government will take from the casino VLT 
machines? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It was always clear — at least I thought 
it was always clear — to the member opposite that the VLTs, as 
they relate to hotels, were separate from the revenue-sharing 
agreement that's developed for the casinos, both under the 
original Regina agreement and the later FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) agreement. The revenue-sharing 
policies are laid out quite clearly and those apply to the whole 
revenues of the casino as opposed to individual machines or 
games within the casino. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd 
like to table a letter to the minister, dated a month ago, from the 
Saskatchewan Restaurant and Foodservices Association, which 
states, and I quote: 
 
 Since the government has now decided to allow more 

VLT machines through the casinos, will it still be the 
government's policy to reduce the number of VLT 
machines previously allotted to our sector? It would 
only seem grossly unfair to penalize one sector, only to 
introduce VLTs to another competing sector. 

 
My question to the minister of Gaming: Madam Minister, how 
can you claim to be fair to all when you've broken every 
agreement you've ever had with exhibition associations, with 
the restaurant and foodservices association, and you've 
devastated charities in the process? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'm trying to understand what the 
member opposite is saying. It sounds like she's saying she wants 
expanded gaming, more machines, and more machines in more 
locations. I would wonder if that's accurate. 
 
The agreements that have been made have acted in such a way 
to protect the revenues. The exhibition association revenues are 
protected. And we have returned revenues both to the lotteries 
fund, the bingo association, and to the communities in terms of 
the VLT sharing of revenues — the 10 per cent which is going 
back to SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). 
 



March 13, 1995 

 
811 

So I would have to say that, in our view, the policy has been 
developed slowly and responsibly. We've set a cap on the 
number of machines. And we certainly will be having ongoing 
discussions with the hotel industry regarding making sure that 
it's a level playing-field within that industry so that one hotel is 
not benefiting at the expense of another hotel. But we're trying 
to establish as fair a playing-field for all the participants as we 
can. 
 
And I think our policies, where we've returned revenues to the 
various areas where we've seen impacts, is in keeping with the 
earlier minister's commitment to monitor the situation and to 
create solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
can continue to have a run-on sentence as long as possible, 
Madam Minister, but the truth is, no one understands the 
gaming policy of your government because each and every 
minister of Gaming has changed the policies over and over and 
over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all over Saskatchewan, charities are feeling the 
pinch from government competition. All one has to do is read 
the newspapers: high school sports lottery may lose $250,000; 
Arts Board funding cut; hospital foundations experience drop in 
Nevada ticket sales. The government's greed for gambling 
money is not just hurting those addicted to gambling, it's killing 
community fund-raisers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now the government actually wants more. They greedily 
refuse to give a share of the revenues to local business people 
who have VLTs in their establishments and community 
organizations. But then they go and cut a special deal for 
themselves and their casino partners. 
 
My question to the minister of Gaming: why does your 
government have one measure of fairness for small-business 
operators and exhibition boards and charitable organizations, 
and then quite another set of rules entirely for yourself? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I feel bad about this, but I'm going to 
have to remind the member opposite of all of her positions on 
gaming since we've started this discussion. On July of 1992, she 
was worried that first nations casinos would threaten provincial 
revenues . . . her favourites: racetracks, bingos, exhibition 
casinos, and video poker. 
 
FSIN vice-chief Roy Bird asked her to wake up and smell the 
coffee and support Indian people, instead of working against 
them. 
 
Then she told us to hurry up and start the VLT program 
regardless of public consultation because we're foregoing 
revenue, 50 to 60 million, that the province could have had. 
You didn't say that communities couldn't have; you said that the 
province couldn't have. 
 

Then in a letter to hotel owners, she indicated her support for 
the role for video lottery terminals to recirculate income 
through hotels and lounges hard hit during the recession. 
 
And then she flip-flopped again and attacked the VLTs for 
sucking money out of the public's pockets. And then in 1994, 
she said we don't need a referendum on this issue, and that was 
subsequently confirmed by Darryl Mills, who said, we're not 
committed firmly to any position. So I'd have a hard time 
understanding where the consistency is in your position on this. 
 
I think we're quite consistent. We believe that gaming dollars 
should go to public benefit. And the consolidated revenue fund 
into which these revenues go is certainly shared for highways, 
health, education, and that's the way we believe it should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find 
it most interesting that the minister has to read off some list. If 
she'd put them in context, they can table every word — every 
word, Mr. Speaker — that I've stated on gaming . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — They can look at every word in Hansard 
on gaming from this particular caucus. And it is indeed 
consistent, unlike the minister of Gaming one, minister of 
Gaming number two, minister of Gaming number three, 
minister of Gaming number four, minister of Gaming number 
five, and now this minister of Gaming number six. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to have the member ask her 
question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is this: Madam Minister, you indicate in fact that you 
have been consistent — that your government has been 
consistent. Would you tell all of this Assembly today exactly 
what your Premier's stand is on casino gambling in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If I recall correctly, the Premier's 
position on this issue, Mr. Speaker, is that he's not particularly 
fond of gaming in any of its forms. He thinks that an honest 
day's work for an honest day's wages is a good way to make a 
living. 
 
But the fact is that many people do view gaming as a form of 
entertaining and they do view it as part of the hospitality 
industry. And because of that we've made a number of 
decisions. One of them to, as far as possible, within giving our 
folks a level playing-field with other provinces, to limit, to 
control and regulate, to protect charitable revenues, to ensure 
public use of funds, to deal with problems such as education 
and prevention, and to involve all people in the benefits. 
 
And I would add that the only thing consistent about your 
policy is the fact that it changes every day. 



March 13, 1995 

 
812 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Rail Strike 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Transportation. Mr. Minister, it looks like 
Saskatchewan farmers are about to be hit again and this time by 
the rail workers' unions. 
 
The Canadian Auto Workers union are threatening to go on 
strike later this week. If that happens, Mr. Minister, there will 
be severe effects on farmers in this province. The federal 
government has moved to protect fishermen on the east cost 
from Spanish fishermen, and I'm wondering if Ottawa is 
prepared to act as quickly to protect Saskatchewan farmers from 
these national unions. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you contacted the federal transportation 
minister and asked him what he is doing in the event of an 
immediate rail strike and what actions have you taken on behalf 
of Saskatchewan farmers to stand and . . . hurt severely by a 
national rail strike. What have you done, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we have indeed been 
in touch with the federal government with regards to this rail 
strike for quite some time now. It's a grave concern of ours that 
grain will not flow, as well as other transportation goods, of 
course. 
 
I don't think we've gone so far as to suggest they take the tanks 
out and shoot across the bow, but we certainly do insist that the 
grain continue to move and that the federal government take 
whatever action is necessary to get us a national transportation 
policy, which they seemed to have abandoned with the Crow 
and other things. But certainly the least we expect is that the 
trains will continue to move in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, as you know this 
province is transportation dependent. In fact IPSCO have 
already issued lay-off notices to 563 unionized staff because of 
a national rail strike. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you specifically tell us then what the federal 
minister said in the way of an action plan if the national strike 
occurs. What kind of time lines is he giving you that will be 
implemented into action? What about that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we have not gotten a 
definite answer from the federal government as to what their — 
the federal Liberal government — as to what their action plan 
is. Given their record on a national transportation system and 
their disregard for it in removing the Crow benefit from all of 
western Canada, we're not sure they have a plan for a national  

transportation system. 
 
But we will continue to make the case. And they have heard the 
case from us, and the ball is now in their court. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, have you specifically asked the 
federal government to implement back-to-work legislation, 
either verbally or in writing? And if you have put that in 
writing, would you be prepared to table that in this legislation 
and share it with the farmers of this province . . . back-to-work 
legislation in event of a national rail strike? Are you prepared to 
do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we have not called 
specifically for back-to-work legislation. We believe that there 
are better ways to solve it. We believe the federal minister 
should get involved directly and get a solution not only that gets 
the trains rolling but gets peace in the sector, and that the grain 
flows and the trains run with a national plan and with some 
hope of continuing in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, we have heard that rhetoric 
from you and members of your party over and over and over 
again. When the crunch hits, we know in this country what has 
happened in the past that we've had to have back-to-work 
legislation in order to get the trains moving again and get the 
grain loaded. Why are you so hesitant, time after time in this 
legislature, to not call for it in advance so that everybody knows 
clearly in this province where you stand. Are you on behalf of 
agriculture or against it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that there 
are better ways to solve labour disputes than back-to-work 
legislation. That should always be a last resort, Mr. Speaker. If 
their settlement is done through negotiation and if the federal 
Liberals can lead the negotiation in order to get a peaceful 
settlement, it will last much longer and be much more 
productive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45 — A Bill respecting Trading in Real Estate, the 
Real Estate Commission and Brokerages, Brokers and 

Salespersons Trading in Real Estate 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill respecting Trading in Real Estate, the Real 
Estate Commission and Brokerages, Brokers and Salespersons 
Trading in Real Estate. 



March 13, 1995 

 
813 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46 — A Bill to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Wascana Centre Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — A Bill to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1415) 

MESSAGE FROM THE QUEEN 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, as has been 
mentioned earlier by a member in this House, March 13, 1995 
is Commonwealth Day in the Commonwealth. I have a message 
from Her Majesty the Queen. 
 
The General Assembly has proclaimed 1995 as the United 
Nations Year for Tolerance, a choice which is particularly 
appropriate for the golden jubilee of the United Nations 
organization itself. The same theme has been chosen for the 
year's Commonwealth Day. 
 
We in the Commonwealth can teach the rest of the world 
something about tolerance because it is at the heart of the 
unique association to which we belong. Although our countries 
are spread all over the world and face many different problems, 
we know a great deal about each other and it is therefore easier 
for us to understand each other's point of view even when we 
disagree. 
 
That understanding is essential to a tolerant society, which is 
not simply one which gives to the individual scope and freedom 
from restraint; rather, it is a society which actively develops the 
people who belong to it, brings out their gifts, and enriches 
their lives because it values their diversity. 
 
It does not condone persecution or the harming of some people 
by others, but it knows how to make allowances when things go 
wrong. It can forgive mistakes as well as giving encouragement 
and guidance on how to avoid them. It knows also that 
enhancing the quality of life of the individual brings benefit to 
the family, to the community, to the nation, and to international 
relations. 
 
That sort of tolerance is something which all of us must learn if  

we are to restore peace in the world. And here the young people 
of the Commonwealth have a special part to play. The young 
have the vision and ability to make the world a better place and 
are not fettered by experience. They can see where older 
generation have made their mistakes through intolerance, and 
they can do better. 
 
Over the last year we have been shining examples of this quality 
in action in the emergence of a new South Africa, which I shall 
be visiting next week, and in the recent signs of change in 
Northern Ireland. We pray that these examples will inspire 
everyone to try harder to make tolerance a universal rule of life. 
 
On this Commonwealth Day, as we make the traditional 
affirmations which are at the centre of the Commonwealth Day 
observance, I send to all of you, with these examples in mind, a 
message of encouragement and hope in the future. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd 
ask for leave to make a statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Education Week 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to take this opportunity, as the Minister of Education, 
Training and Employment, to call the attention of the Assembly 
to the celebration of Education Week in Saskatchewan this 
week. I have proclaimed March 13 to 19 Education Week, to 
focus public attention on the most important people in our 
province, and that is our young people and our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of the Assembly to 
participate in the special activities that may be happening this 
week in their home town, in your schools, and with the children 
and young people of your community. Many events have been 
organized by students, parents, teachers, administrators and 
support staff, to promote a very important theme — making 
tomorrow come true. 
 
Saskatchewan people, above all else in this country, have 
placed a high value on education and meeting the needs of all 
of our children and our youth. Excellence has been the hallmark 
of our educational system, and our quality of education has 
played a major role in sustaining the quality of life of our 
province. 
 
Our vision, our collective vision for education, includes every 
child and youth in this province. We're all concerned about the 
growing numbers of young people who have difficulty learning 
because of social, economic, and emotional problems that come 
with them to school. That's why we must all work to create an 
environment in which children can learn — a place that is 
sensitive to their culture and what they know. 



March 13, 1995 

 
814 

Breaking down the barriers, helping those children and families, 
is one of our greatest challenges. That is why $4.8 million is 
devoted to special needs children in this year's budget; and that 
is why we have taken a collaborative, integrated services 
approach to delivering education services. 
 
And that is why the Saskatchewan action plan for children has 
been so successful among families, communities, and schools. 
Investing in education and training is the very best investment 
we will ever make in our province. Together we believe we are 
making tomorrow come true for students, every day and every 
week in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure 
to rise to respond to the minister's . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I'll have to ask the House whether the member 
has leave to respond. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to respond to 
the minister's statement on Education Week? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — It's a pleasure to rise today to recognize 
Education Week in Saskatchewan, and I would like to thank the 
minister for sending over a copy of her ministerial statement 
prior to her delivery. 
 
The role of education, Mr. Speaker, has changed throughout the 
years. We have gone from one-room classrooms teaching 
grades 1 to 10 to the state-of-the-art institutions with modern 
technology, such as using the Internet on the information 
highway. 
 
However not all teachers and students are fortunate enough to 
have the most modern of benefits. Teachers in some 
jurisdictions of our province are struggling with fewer 
resources, a shortage of staff, and ever-growing classroom 
sizes, and at times deteriorating facilities — all told, a 
crumbling infrastructure as a result of cuts and downloading by 
the NDP government in this province and the Liberal 
government in Ottawa. 
 
Although many teachers, school boards, and administrators are 
facing such challenges, our children continue to receive a good 
education. Saskatchewan residents have risen to great heights 
over the years. Former prime ministers, even our own 
Lieutenant Governor, all born, raised, and educated in this 
province — accomplished individuals whose success can in 
part be attributed to Saskatchewan's top-notch educational 
system. 
 
It is important to recognize the talents of our teachers, the 
resilience of our educational institutions, and the eagerness of 
our students. 
 

On behalf of the opposition caucus, I would like to 
acknowledge Education Week and to offer our profound thanks 
to all the hard-working people and groups in our education 
system. 
 
I would like to extend a special thank you to the bus driver and 
teachers who are accompanying the grades 4 to 9 class from the 
Alida School who are going skiing today at Ochapowace. They 
are indeed dedicated, to take out a bunch of students skiing on a 
day of rain. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — With leave to reply to the statement? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 
join with the minister today in recognizing Education Week. 
Our society is built on the foundation of education, and teachers 
in Saskatchewan deserve the profound gratitude of all of us. 
They are responsible for educating our children for the 21st 
century. 
 
Despite their efforts, graduates of our education system are 
experiencing problems, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
share a letter from a Regina North West constituent, a 
constituent who is a prime stakeholder in education. She is a 
student. Her name is Lynsey Angielski. She writes: 
 
 The greatest problem facing me today is jobs, or shall I 

say lack of them. I am a second-year university student. 
I have sent out numerous applications to many 
organizations and establishments, yet not one has been 
called for an interview. 

 
 I realize that I have no job experience. I have never had 

a job throughout high school because my parents 
thought it was more important for me to study, so I 
could get excellent grades and be accepted in any post-
secondary program. That is exactly what I did — I 
studied, got good grades, and ended up in education. 
Because of having no work experience, businesses 
would rather not hire me even if they know how 
desperately I want to work. 

 
 I also have another problem. If I don't get a job this 

summer, I can't go back to school in the fall. Even 
though I live with my parents, student loans says that 
my parents make too much money, which is hard to 
believe since my father is unable to work any more. 

 
 I suppose my question to you is: what are you going to 

do to help students like myself find a job? 
 
Mr. Speaker, graduates of our schools are having difficulties 
making tomorrow come true. During education work, I believe  



March 13, 1995 

 
815 

it is time for the minister to more fully address the growing 
problem for the graduates of our education system. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, 31 guests from 
the United States, who just joined us in our Assembly. Perhaps 
it's appropriate as we celebrate Commonwealth Day and 
provincial Education Week that we have in the west gallery 31 
grades 9-12 students who are in the science club in Sherwood, 
North Dakota. They're here today travelling with their teacher, 
Arlyn Keith, and their chaperon, Nora Keith. 
 
As part of their attendance here in Regina, they'll be touring our 
Legislative Assembly building, as well as sitting in and viewing 
first-hand a little bit of our form of democracy, the 
parliamentary democracy that is part of our Commonwealth 
tradition here in Canada and in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll ask all members of the Assembly to extend a 
welcome to our neighbours from the south to Saskatchewan, to 
our Assembly, and we hope that you'll enjoy your visit here. 
' 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — With leave, I'd like to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I'd like to join my hon. colleague from 
Moose Jaw welcoming the guest students from Sherwood 
because my hometown is Carnduff in the south-east corner of 
the province, and I spent many, many times over in Sherwood 
playing ball against the Sherwood and the Mohall and some of 
the teams, that's right. And so that's only about 20 miles from 
my home town, as you will know, and so I have very, very good 
childhood memories of your community. And I know that the 
members will again welcome you warmly to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, to change a 
member on a committee. 
 
Leave granted. 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member on Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I too, before I start, would like to welcome the students from 
the United States, and as minister of trade just say that United 
States is obviously our biggest trading partner and you're a very, 
very important group to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member for 
Regina Churchill Downs, that by leave of the Assembly: 
 
 That the name of Lloyd Johnson be substituted for that 

of Evan Carlson on the standing committee on private 
bills. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Medical 
Profession Act, 1981 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to stand today to move second reading of 
The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we worked very closely with the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan since the fall on 
these amendments, and several provisions in the current 
legislation require amendment because of changes in our health 
system and because of the way physicians are regulated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current Medical Profession Act grants the 
minister authority to require the college to issue special licences 
to psychiatrists and medical health officers employed in the 
provincial public service, although they may not yet meet the 
full requirements for registration as a specialist. However, as of 
April 1, 1995, these positions will be transferred to the district 
health boards as part of the transfer of all community-based 
health providers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the amendment proposed will ensure that 
these physicians do not lose their special licences and allows 
for future special licences to be issued to psychiatrists and 
medical health officers employed by the health districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three other amendments before the House will 
ensure greater public accountability and are consistent with 
provisions of newer professional legislation. One change 
extends the period of time in which the public can take civil 
action against a physician for negligence from the current 12 to 
14 months. 



March 13, 1995 

 
816 

(1430) 
 
Another amendment allows the college's committee which 
investigates patient complaints, the ability to apply to the court 
for subpoenas for witnesses to testify. Mr. Speaker, this will 
assist the college in properly investigating complaints. A third 
amendment requires the college to file an annual report with the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment and the legislation concerning 
provisional or temporary licences will make the Act more 
flexible by removing reference to specific countries' 
qualifications. Such detail is subject to change over time and it 
is better suited to by-laws. The Minister of Health will continue 
to approve by-laws regarding all licenser requirements 
including those for provisional licences. 
 
Two other amendments concerning the use of the college's use 
of legal counsel and the assessment of fees are also proposed to 
make the Act more flexible. Matters regarding fee payment will 
now be included in the by-laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have consulted not only with the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons but also with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association during the process of working with the 
college on these changes. And as is currently the practice, any 
policy by-laws which might be developed by the college 
pursuant to this Act will be forwarded to the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association for comment prior to any consideration by 
the Minister of Health. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
this Bill, An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice in the 
explanations that the minister gave are similar to the 
explanation that we received on our desk when we received the 
Bill, and I want to just point out that there will be some 
significant questions as it relates to some of the ideas that 
you've brought forward, and particularly how they will be 
handled in relation to the Department of Health, relating their 
mandate to control and licence some of the medical professions 
as it's outlined here, and how they will be designated to be used 
through the health district boards. So we're going to take some 
very specific time to ask those questions. 
 
Also, we're going to probably be asking some pointed questions 
as it relates to the legal part of the Bill that you've identified — 
the way that legal . . . or the way that documents can be used by 
the legal profession and how they will be required to be used 
for disciplinary measures. 
 
There's also some significant questions that we're going to raise 
as it deals with extended limits of action prior to 24 months 
consistent with the new professional status of these individuals. 
And we're going to be in a position where we will be 
comfortable, I think, after we ask the questions, but because of  

the dynamic of the information that is required to be delivered 
to us, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The proposed 
amendments make changes in three areas of The Land Surveys 
Act. We bring them forward for the Assembly's consideration 
after full consultation with the surveying industry. 
 
The changes are, first, to allow the minister to make regulations 
defining what constitutes a legal survey monument and assign 
responsibility for distributing the monuments. 
 
Second, to transfer authority for the instruction manual which 
guides surveyors to The Land Surveys Act from The Highways 
and Transportation Act. 
 
Third, and most importantly, the amendments will allow 
surveyors to use new technology in locating and setting 
boundary lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's geographic information system is 
in the midst of modernization. The Central Survey and Mapping 
Agency is a part of Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
Saskatchewan geographic information system has the reputation 
that's just about the best in Canada when it comes to involving 
users and industry and building a solid foundation for this new 
technology. The result will be improved and better integrated 
management of our land-based resources. 
 
The new system is targeted for completion within the next three 
years, and it will be as economical as it is successful. A total 
cost, Mr. Speaker, of about $27 million — a quarter of what it 
cost in B.C. and a third of the cost in Alberta. What's more, in 
Saskatchewan the cost is shared among the provincial, 
municipal, Crown, and industry sectors. 
 
Local governments, provincial departments, and private 
business are already using the new system. Saskatchewan cities 
use it for planning and managing transportation, recreation, and 
social programs. For Weyerhaeuser and the PFRA the uses 
include water, forestry, and soils management. It's part of Ducks 
Unlimited waterfowl and land management activities. And the 
list goes on. 
 
Above all, it's an active and dynamic system. One that 
emphasizes cost sharing, data sharing, and development of new, 
practical uses through an ongoing land information users 
committee. The present Bill arises from such consultation and 
it's part of the effort to modernize land information, to make the 
best use of the latest in satellite and digital technology as well 
as the surveyors' traditional transit and chain. 
 
I will of course be pleased to detail the changes in committee,  



March 13, 1995 

 
817 

Mr. Speaker, but it may help members if I outline them now. 
They're hardly earth shaking, and there's no financial 
consequences. 
 
The first change allows the minister to make regulations 
defining what constitutes a legal survey monument. This 
proposal is the result of consultations by CSMA (Central 
Survey and Mapping Agency) with the Saskatchewan Land 
Surveyors' Association, and the private survey industry. 
 
It isn't a high-tech change, Mr. Speaker. A new, standard iron 
survey post has been developed, and proposed changes to the 
Act will accommodate the new monument. Related changes 
anticipate further modifications of monument inscriptions and 
identifiers. 
 
The second change relates to the manual of instructions 
provided for the guidance of surveyors. In the past, authority for 
the manual resided in The Highways and Transportations Act, 
which made sense as the Central Survey and Mapping Agency 
was part of that ministry. It no longer resides there, and it's 
therefore only appropriate that the authority for the manual 
move as well. 
 
The final changes relate to the manner in which boundaries are 
determined. The present Act does not reflect current advances 
in technology such as satellite surveying and digital mapping. 
Proposed changes  that professional surveyors use whichever 
process fits the situation, and the result will benefit the survey 
industry and property owners with more efficient demarcation 
of property lines. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the Bill proposes changing The Land 
Surveys Act in three principal respects: greater flexibility with 
respect to survey monuments; transfers authority for the 
surveyors’ instruction manual from the Highways Act; and 
permits the land survey system to keep up with new technology. 
I'm therefore pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Land Surveys Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just before I move 
adjournment of the debate on Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend 
The Land Surveys Act, I'd like to make a few comments. 
 
It appears to me from the minister's statements that the minister 
and her government and her officials did take some time to talk 
to the surveyors’ association and representatives from that 
association. And as the minister has indicated, it appears that 
this association is in agreement with the number of the 
recommendations made in the Act. 
 
I think the need to review the Act and do some consulting is 
important. Because, Mr. Speaker, we've seen in the past where 
the government has talked about consultation, and at the same 
time, depending who they brought in to consult with, that the 
types of regulations that have been brought forward have not 
necessarily met the needs of all the folks involved through the 
legislation and through regulation. 
 

And so I think it's, as well, important that while the minister has 
the ability to put in place regulations, we trust that the 
regulations will indeed meet the need of the surveying sector 
out there and the surveying industry, versus maybe just a few of 
the individuals or certain surveying groups. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that some of those 
questions be addressed. If, as the minister has indicated, that 
this has all taken place, that everyone's been consulted, and 
there has been concise feeling that these changes are necessary, 
these changes would indeed help the industry, and that the 
regulations would not be stepping on anyone's toes but will fit 
within the realms of the guidelines, then certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of the day we will be more than willing to support the 
minister. 
 
There's no one disputes the fact . . . or I shouldn't say there's no 
one. No one disputes the fact, Mr. Minister, that changes have 
taken place in technology. And every sector of our society, 
every industry, and every group of individuals that work within 
the different sectors of our society, look at ways of making their 
area of expertise more efficient, to help it to work better as well 
as taking advantage of the new technology. 
 
And I'm sure that, Mr. Speaker, when we get into committee we 
will find that certainly there have been a number of changes that 
address some of the changes in technology the minister has 
talked about helps modernize the information. And I certainly 
think that's important. And it's not just the surveyors’ 
associations that are interested. This falls into other areas as 
well. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while on the surface we appreciate the 
comments that the minister has made and bringing to our 
attention the different areas that the Bill deals with, we feel that 
it's important that we take somewhat more time to review the 
Bill, review the comments made by the minister, and the 
direction of the Bill, so that we can indeed address any 
concerns that are brought to us, or any questions that may arise, 
more properly in the future. 
 
And therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to bring 
forward this piece of legislation on behalf of Saskatchewan's 
land surveying community. As minister responsible for SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) and its 
Central Survey and Mapping Agency, we've been working hand 
in hand with the surveying community for several years to 
ensure their governing Act was modernized and met the needs 
of a rapidly changing and growing business sector. 
 
While the Act is non-controversial and originates outside 
government, I'll briefly cover its intent. The current Act has not  



March 13, 1995 

 
818 

received major amendments in some 30 years, so the Act is, 
realistically speaking, a new piece of legislation. The Land 
Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Act is similar in title to 
The Land Surveys Act which is being amended this session, so 
some clarification may be useful. 
 
The Saskatchewan Land Surveyors' Association has been 
working on the Act for several years and has consulted with its 
memberships, related disciplines, and government, and over the 
past two years they have worked with the legislative services to 
refine the legislation. The Bill reflects the trend towards a more 
integrated approach to surveys, mapping, and land information 
management systems. In the years since the last major 
amendments, the surveying industry witnesses the same 
technological changes that are transforming the rest of society. 
 
For its part, government and the Central Survey and Mapping 
Agency are ensuring a healthy and growing mapping sector. 
CSMA's leadership in modernizing Saskatchewan's land 
information infrastructure depends heavily on the private sector. 
Government depends on the capabilities of some 40 firms to 
undertake its projects. Put another way, CSMA employs only 
two survey crews of its own; private firms do the rest of the 
work. We depend more on the private sector for our survey 
work than any other province in Canada. And by modernizing 
land information, we also help modernize the land surveyors. 
 
For example, having the capacity to offer satellite-based surveys 
sets them apart competitively and allows them to offer superior 
service to clients. There is a market for sophisticated geomatics 
products and services both inside and outside the province. 
Saskatchewan is already in the forefront of these developments 
and our surveyors are attracting attention internationally. But to 
keep pace, our surveys must adapt as well, and this is where the 
Act comes in. 
 
For surveyors, the 1990s mean dealing with the satellite 
information as well as traditional surveying transit and chain. In 
turn, that means a greater degree of knowledge and training. 
The profession is growing, Mr. Speaker, and the governing Act 
must grow with it. This Bill will update the association's 
discipline procedures so they meet the standards set for all 
professional legislation in the province. 
 
Other changes will bring the legislation in line with 
professional legislation in areas of public representation on 
council, right of appeal for rejected membership, by-law-
making provisions, and upgrading educational standards. 
Surveyors will retain the exclusive responsibility for 
determining boundaries. Changes will allow people in related 
disciplines to become members of the association, reflecting a 
more integrated approach to land information systems. 
 
(1445) 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the land surveyors Act is more than 
30 years behind the times. The new Bill will better reflect the 
current needs of the surveying industry. 

Saskatchewan Land Surveyors' Association has been working 
on changes to the Act for several years. Our government feels 
it's appropriate to advance these changes at this time. I'm 
therefore pleased to move second reading of An Act respecting 
Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again, Mr. Speaker, 
the Bill presented to us, Bill No. 41, An Act respecting Land 
Surveyors and Professional Surveyors, appears to be an 
updating of an Act that certainly has had a lengthy time period 
before it's really had any update in the Act and modernizing the 
Act. 
 
And I certainly don't have any problems with that, and I'm sure 
that our caucus won't really find any problems in the fact that 
we're modernizing the surveying association, of land surveyors. 
And I'm sure the professionals out there are more than looking 
forward to this Act being brought forward. 
 
The minister made a comment about the private sector 
involvement, and no doubt there are many private companies 
that do surveys across this province, and certainly there isn't a 
municipality that doesn't rely on the professional help of 
surveyors in developing, designing, lots or farmsteads or land 
locations within their particular jurisdiction. 
 
As well it's interesting to note the minister mentions satellite 
surveys, and the business, whether it's agriculture or whatever 
sector we're involved in now, satellite surveys certainly are 
playing more of a major role. And I am certain that as we 
discuss this, it will be interesting to have discussion on this Act 
regarding satellite surveys and the role they play and how they 
are utilized to come up with a better way of or more complete 
way of identifying areas and laying out surveys in . . . as well as 
using the chain as well that has been used for years. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that will 
arise, and we don't have all those questions in front of us today. 
It would be appropriate, I think, for us to review this legislation 
a little further, and therefore at this time I move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to abolish the Rules Against 
Perpetuities and The Accumulations Act and to enact 

Consequential Amendments 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. At the 
conclusion of some brief comments, I will be moving The 
Perpetuities and Accumulations (Repeal) Act. 
 
I want to says to hon. members briefly that this Act was passed 
a very long time ago, designed to discourage the tying up of the 
great estates of England through various generations. It was 
possible in English law to leave property to children but to 
leave it in such a way that they could never sell it, thus ensuring 
that the estates of the landed nobility could never be alienated 
and would always form the dukedom of Marlborough, to use an  



March 13, 1995 

 
819 

example of Churchill's family. 
 
That caused some problems in English law, and this Act was 
passed some hundreds of years ago actually. That has ceased to 
be a problem, to put it mildly, and there's now little danger in 
farmers wanting to tie up their farms through generations yet 
unborn. 
 
The law has now got to the point where it's causing some 
problems in different areas. This law is causing some very real 
problems in the area of oil and gas law, with oil companies. 
Scarcely a week goes by but what the Attorney General's 
department does not have someone from some oil company 
calling us, complaining about this particular law. It serves no 
use. It is causing some considerable problem, and we're 
therefore going to repeal the rule. 
 
I therefore move second reading of The Perpetuities and 
Accumulations (Repeal) Act. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, as complex as the minister has 
made this Act appear, we probably will have significant 
questions as it relates exactly where all of the problems have 
arisen in relation to this. 
 
I guess one of the other things that we will be looking into is 
how it will impact if it's taken away, and the areas of concern 
that people may have, and then we will be asking the minister to 
explain those details to us. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move 
adjournment of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 43, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act establishes a level of 
provincial assistance to be allocated to both urban and rural 
municipalities. The amendment provides for an overall 
adjustment in the funding provided to urban and rural 
municipalities through the revenue-sharing program. 
 
This year there will be no reduction in the revenue-sharing 
pools for urban and rural governments. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
another $2 million is added to the revenue-sharing pools this 
year. This funding had been previously redirected to the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency in 1994-95. It 
is now being restored. The provincial government has taken this 
initiative in consultation with the urban and rural municipal 
officials. 
 
These changes to revenue sharing will provide needed financial 
relief for municipalities. I am confident that the municipalities 
will continue their efforts to keep local tax increases to a 
minimum while still being able to provide essential services to  

their residents. 
 
Municipalities have made a considerable contribution to 
assisting the government with its balanced budget plan. They 
have done this while maintaining local tax increases to a very 
modest and reasonable level, and I want to say thank you to 
them. 
 
In closing, the total revenue-sharing funding of $79.8 million 
represents a significant level of financial support to 
Saskatchewan municipalities, and I urge the members to 
support this Bill. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 
43, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am going to 
adjourn debate at the conclusion of some brief remarks. 
 
However I just want to say that we're glad that the revenue 
sharing is up the $2 million. However, the questions that we 
will raise have to do with what SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) is doing without it. 
 
And the other thing that we're probably going to raise as a part 
of the discussion, Mr. Speaker, is the value that municipalities 
are going to lose because of reassessing, because of loss of 
elevators and loss of rail lines in relation to the whole process 
of rationalizing the whole system in grain transportation. And it 
very seriously impacts into this area because their volume of 
taxes . . . or their volume of assessment is going to be down so 
their taxes are going to have to significantly increase. 
 
So we're going to be asking quite a number of those questions, 
both in the discussion of this Bill, but also in the discussion of 
your estimates, Madam Minister. 
 
Revenue sharing is an important part of an overall view that the 
municipalities had at the time that it was initiated. 
Municipalities could then assume that if the economy went up, 
they would get increased benefits; if it went down, it would 
move down. And we've understood that. And with the changes, 
I'm not sure that the economy went up that much in order to 
deliver that, but the volume of dollars, the $2 million, will be 
greatly appreciated by the municipalities, both rural and urban. 
 
And so with these few words, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment 
of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Local 
Government Election Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 44 amends The 
Local Government Election Act. The purpose of this Bill is to 
remedy the existing provision dealing with candidates' deposits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1993, at the request of the Saskatchewan Urban  



March 13, 1995 

 
820 

Municipalities Association, government amended the 
legislation regarding local elections. The amendment required 
each candidate running for a seat on a council or the school 
board in the province's four largest cities to make a financial 
deposit of $100. Under the Act, each candidate would recover 
their deposit if they won their seat or received at least 10 per 
cent of the vote. 
 
This formula worked well for elected positions involving only 
one office, such as the office of a mayor or the office of a 
councillor for a ward. However, questions arose when the 
formula was applied to at-large elections, where more than one 
candidate is elected in a city-wide contest for a council or a 
board. 
 
When the Department of Justice looked into this, we discovered 
that the formula made it impossible for a losing candidate in an 
at-large election to retain their deposit. 
 
The losing candidate in a city-wide election would have to 
receive 10 per cent of the total number of votes cast for all of 
the candidates. This was certainly not intended when we drafted 
the Bill. 
 
This Bill makes it clear that losing candidates will retain their 
deposits in an at-large election if they receive at least 10 per 
cent of the average vote cast for all the positions to be filled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is retroactive to July 1, 1993. Some 
candidates who lost their deposits in the fall election of 1994 in 
the four major cities will have their deposits returned in keeping 
with the intent of the original legislation. 
 
The cost to the city and school boards is estimated to be about 
$4,000 in the four largest centres. Most will go to the school 
board candidates, but some civic candidates in Moose Jaw will 
get their $100 deposits returned since the city did not use a 
ward system in 1993. 
 
This Bill will keep local election legislation up to date and 
respond to candidates' concerns. I therefore urge all members to 
support this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 
No. 44, a Bill to amend the local elections Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe 
the Act and the amendment that the minister's talking about 
today is certainly something that is appropriate and long 
overdue. 
 
As the minister has indicated, in an at-large system certainly 
you could be left out in the cold. And I think what we need to 
do is include . . . make sure we encourage people to come 
forward and seek municipal election. And if we have rules in 
place that make it difficult and indeed that put people on an 
unequal footing, it certainly makes that difficult. And at the end 
of the day, you're going to find . . . you will find, as many 
communities have, even in our area in this past municipal 
elections, they had to go and call a second election because 
there weren't enough names coming forward. People just  

weren't that interested. 
 
(1500) 
 
And the election day had gone by; the nomination period had 
gone by, then the election had gone by, and people hadn't come 
forward, until finally they had another election call. 
 
And so I think the amendments that the minister's bringing 
forward are certainly appropriate. And I believe as well that as 
we review it closer, we'll find that there are some questions that 
will be coming forward. And we look forward to be presenting 
those questions. However at this time I would move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 23 — An 
Act to establish The Agri-Food Innovation Fund be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
made most of the comments that I wish to on this Bill the other 
day. I come back to the fact that we aren't talking about a great 
deal of money here, yet we are talking about a very large board, 
and we seem to have a mandate that perhaps can't be lived up 
to. 
 
So what I'm going to do, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, 
is move this Bill on to committee. But I think at that stage we 
have to really find out from the minister whether there's any 
meat and potatoes involved in this particular piece of 
legislation, or if this is just some kind of a bone that's been 
thrown out to the agricultural community after all of the 
devastation that this government has wreaked on them in the 
last three and half years. 
 
And I guess the minister's going to have prove in committee 
that there actually is something here worthwhile with the 
amount of funds that he's allocated in order to do the type of job 
that they've talked about doing  to diversify the agricultural 
community in this province  particularly in the face of what 
has transpired with the changes to the method of payment and 
everything else that is going to happen surrounding that. 
 
Certainly rural Saskatchewan is looking forward to 
opportunities, and the minister I guess will have ample 
opportunity in committee to show us how those opportunities 
can occur with the vehicle that has been designed. So with that, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move that this Bill go the committee stage 
and that we then review it that way. 
 



March 13, 1995 

 
821 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 37 — An Act 
respecting Medical Laboratory Technologists be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
make a few comments regarding Bill No. 37, An Act respecting 
Medical Laboratory Technologists, and then before I would 
move to adjourn debate as we are still waiting for some replies 
to some of the responses we've sent out in order that we may 
address the Act more carefully as we move it to committee . . .  
 
As the minister indicated, the background for the Act was 
centred around the medical laboratory technologists, having 
been represented by the Saskatchewan Society of Medical 
Laboratory Technologists, come to the government and 
approaching the government in 1992 for legislation to regulate 
the profession for the first time in our province. 
 
And I understand from the comments made by the minister and 
from some of the discussion we've had that the society had the 
support of its 1,200 members to approach the government for 
regulatory legislation. And indeed, prior to this legislation 
coming before the Assembly, there was consultation between 
the government and the society on the legislation. 
 
The highlights of the Act are that it provides the society with 
the power to make by-laws, and by-laws that affect the public 
will continue to require the approval of the Minister of Health, 
and I think this is appropriate. 
 
I think we don't want . . . I believe we want to have the ability 
for individuals and the public at large to indeed be able to 
address concerns regarding legislation. And we certainly don't 
want to put all the responsibility in the hands of the different 
groups or societies or specialists that may have an interest. 
 
The Act outlines the society's responsibilities with respect to 
investigation and disciplinary hearings. And here again it's a 
point that is certainly appropriate. 
 
I believe, whether we're taxpayers or whether we're involved in 
an organization, each and every one of us at the end of the day, 
Mr. Speaker, want to know that the organization we're involved 
in does have the ability to follow up and if disciplinary action is 
needed the organization, or the association we're part of, can 
make those rules, versus somebody else on the outside. And I 
think that's why the society asked for that. 
 
The Act ensures that complaints of incompetence or misconduct 
are acted upon in an effective manner, and it establishes 
investigation and discipline committees that have authority to 
investigate complaints, apply to the court for subpoenas, and 
levy penalties, including fines up to $2,000. 

Mr. Speaker, it also indicates that disciplinary decisions may be 
appealed to Court of Queen's Bench. So if a client or an 
individual feels that they've been treated unfairly and the 
discipline they've received is not fair, or isn't appropriate or that 
they haven't received due consideration, they do have an avenue 
to appeal. 
 
And I believe that's appropriate, as in our society we all believe 
that people certainly are innocent until proven guilty. But at the 
same time we must always look at the fact that, whether it's an 
organization or professional association — whether it's a 
member or whether it's a client — everyone must know that 
disciplinary actions that are taken are done in full compliance as 
well as being judicially responsible and that the truth then is 
specifically brought forward and heard. 
 
A public representative will sit on the discipline committee. The 
person who laid a complaint against the medical laboratory 
technologists will be entitled to attend the disciplinary hearing 
and will be informed of the outcome of the complaint. 
 
And certainly I think that's appropriate, because what this does 
is indicates that when a complaint is brought forward — the 
complainant on many occasions in the past has felt that they 
brought a complaint forward and basically it was brushed off or 
it was filed in file 13 and nothing was really done with it — the 
fact that the hearing, the disciplinary . . . or the complainant will 
hear and be informed of the disciplinary hearing and will be 
able to attend gives them the opportunity then to see for 
themselves that yes, their concerns were not only raised but 
action was taken, and indeed this action will then either clarify 
. . . or it will clarify for the complainant whether or not that was 
a legitimate complaint or whether it wasn't. But at least 
disciplinary action was taken and undertaken. 
 
The society will be required to submit an annual report on its 
activities with Saskatchewan Health. 
 
The minister also indicated that a number of groups were 
consulted regarding the Act. Groups included the Saskatchewan 
Society of Medical Laboratory Technologists; it included the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan; it 
included the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations; and the Saskatchewan society of clinical 
chemists. 
 
And I believe as well the minister also noted a number of other 
professional organizations were consulted and were supportive. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, what I would also say is that while 
these organizations were consulted, we trust that the 
organizations themselves did consult amongst their members 
regarding the Bill . . . regarding the changes to the Bill, so that 
indeed we will find . . . and as we consult with the member 
organizations out there and individual members, that we don't 
find individual members coming to us and saying yes, but we 
didn't realize that this is what our association was asking for, or 
we didn't necessarily understand that this was what was the 
intent of the changes to the legislation. 



March 13, 1995 

 
822 

And so I trust that, as the minister indicated, there was a full 
consultation process that made the government members and 
the minister and her officials — or his officials . . . were aware 
of the fact and made sure that the associations indeed covered 
their membership so that the appropriate actions were taken and 
everyone will be supportive. And we wait for a final response 
from many of these associations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is certainly a pleasure to speak on this particular 
Bill and it's nice to have a piece or two of legislation on the 
Table that has been drafted in consultation with affected parties. 
And as I've indicated, Mr. Speaker, it's certainly appropriate that 
the Society of Medical Laboratory Technologists, of which they 
are 1,200 strong, did come before the government, not the 
government — if I understand it correctly — not the 
government going to them, but they came to the government 
asking for this Act. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, as we further debate this, it will be 
interesting to note what role unions may have had, what role 
they will have in this disciplinary hearings. I suspect that 
medical laboratory technologists are unionized much the same 
as the nurses. What role does the union play during a 
disciplinary hearing? And I'm interested in hearing from the 
minister who else was consulted on the Bill. 
 
The minister did note during his second reading speech that 
Saskatchewan Society of Medical Laboratory Technologists 
were consulted as well as the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons. But as I indicated a minute ago, a number of other 
organizations which . . . I don't have the full list in front of me 
right now. I think it's appropriate that we take the time to further 
review the statements by the minister in his second reading 
speech as well as continue the consultative process ourselves 
amongst these organizations, so that when we do get to 
committee we will indeed be addressing the concerns that were 
raised prior to the legislation and any concerns that they may 
have with regards to some of the technical details regarding the 
legislation. 
 
And therefore I believe, Mr. Speaker, it's appropriate that we 
adjourn debate at this time to allow that process to continue. 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 
amend Certain Health Statutes be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few comments 
regarding Bill No. 38. I believe, as we heard in the minister's 
speech, the amendments will help streamline existing health-
related legislation. The amendments would also consolidate 
authority under The Department of Health Act for costs of 
insured medical and hospital services that must be recovered by 
the department where those costs were incurred as a result of  

negligence on the part of someone else. 
 
It's also been mentioned that the amendments are necessary 
because of no-fault insurance and the introduction of the new 
population-based funding arrangements. 
 
The Act also allows Saskatchewan Health to continue to 
recover negligence-related medical and hospital costs in the 
new insurance and health funding environment, and I believe in 
regard to the Act that was passed last spring, it appears that this 
Act was necessary to bring everyone under the same guidelines 
and regulations. 
 
Prior to no-fault, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Health could 
directly recover medical and hospital costs caused by 
automobile accidents where those costs were due to negligence 
on the part of someone else, and how . . . as we brought to the 
attention of the House and the debate regarding the no-fault 
insurance. That is no longer possible, and it appears to me that 
what this Act does is indeed addresses some of the points where 
we raised last year and brings the Act into conformity with the 
no-fault Act that was introduced last year by SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). SGI has agreed to 
reimburse Saskatchewan Health for these costs. Costs are 
expected to be around $4.5 million annually. Saskatchewan 
Health will still be able to recover health costs incurred due to 
someone else's negligence with claims unrelated to automobiles 
and with respect to non-resident auto accidents. 
 
The Bill also, Mr. Speaker, accommodates cost recovery for 
third-party liability medical claims in situations where fee for 
services is not applicable. More specifically, for a population-
based funding to medical doctors. The amendment will allow 
for recovery of hospital costs where payments have been made 
under The Health Districts Act in keeping with the new global 
funding arrangements for hospitals. 
 
The legislation, Mr. Speaker, as we see it, also will provide 
authority under one piece of legislation for medical and hospital 
costs to be recovered in all situations where the costs are the 
result of negligence on the part of someone else. Section 32.2 
of The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act and section 
26 of The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act will be repealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that what this Act does is indeed 
brings the Act into conformation with the no-fault Act that was 
introduced and brought to this Assembly last year. And as I 
indicated, I think it's also appropriate that while the government 
talks about consulting with the people in the industry and 
consulting with interested groups, that it is appropriate for us to 
also take the time. And we're waiting some responses from a 
number of the organizations and groups before we enter into the 
committee phase. 
 
So we indeed, if there are any questions that may not have been 
addressed in the Act, as we see now that were not addressed last 
year when we were discussing the no-fault insurance Act, that 
it's important that we have that time period to indeed have all 
the questions before us before we reach committee, so that we  



March 13, 1995 

 
823 

can bring those questions forward. And that at the end of the 
day, by the time this Act has passed, we will indeed address any 
concern or any situation that may arise that someone may think 
of that maybe the department and the minister and his officials 
may have overlooked, and even some of the industry may have 
overlooked. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, for that process to happen and for us 
to make sure we've covered all the details that should be 
brought forward in this legislation, I believe it's appropriate to 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Chair: — Order. Before we proceed to item 1, 
administration, we could ask the minister to please introduce 
the officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to my 
right, Graham Mitchell, the acting deputy minister of Labour. I 
have to my left, Jeff Parr, the executive director of policy and 
planning. Behind myself, to the right, is Terry Stevens, the 
executive director of occupational health and safety. And 
behind me, to my left, is Janis Rathwell, the assistant deputy 
minister. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
we've been taking a look at the Supplementary Estimates book 
as well as the Estimates for '95-96 under the Labour minister's 
portfolio and checking how things have been going financially 
in this department. 
 
I want to welcome your officials as well, Minister. And I'm sure 
that we will profit the province a considerable amount in the 
next little while as we try to discover for the taxpayers of this 
province where in fact you have been spending their money and 
what you plan on doing as a course of action through your 
departments. 
 
We want to talk to you, Minister, about studies and projections 
and direction that you see your department going in, and we 
want to talk about of course the ways that you are allocating the 
spending of the money. 
 
We are, in the outset here, somewhat amazed at some of the 
shocking statements that are coming out of government 
ministers in the past few days. For example, of course today we 
heard the Ag minister saying that he doesn't defend the farmers 
in an action to have back-to-work legislation ensure that the 
CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) workers would get back to  

work and move the grain that is so vital to the economy of 
Saskatchewan and to Saskatchewan farmers. That's certainly a 
shocking kind of a statement. 
 
But even more shocking to us, Mr. Chairman, was the statement 
made by yourself with regards directly to those issues that 
pertain to your department. And that was when you said that 
pay equity for women is not a Labour issue. 
 
Over the weekend it is reported that you have stated and 
shocked your own people in the labour union movements by 
saying that this issue, pay equity for women, is not a Labour 
issue but in fact should be referred to the minister who is in 
charge of the Women's Secretariat, and that comes as a rather 
significant surprise to them but also to myself. 
 
I'm not shocked by this kind of move of course, because I can 
see why you would want to duck this issue and not discuss it 
with the Saskatchewan people at this particular time. But I'm 
sure that the women of this province aren't that particularly 
interested in your vested interest going into an election mode at 
this time. They are more interested in getting the answers to 
their questions. 
 
So having heard those kind of shocking and remarkable 
statements, Minister, we find ourselves wondering just what 
exactly the government has got as an overall plan for the entire 
government, but more specifically today for the Department of 
Labour. 
 
So I'm going to ask you just in general to start with: what is 
your direction and your policy towards the labour movement 
and towards protecting the workers of our province? What is 
your ultimate goal for achieving from your portfolio some kind 
of fair play, some kind of a base, a job base, some kind of 
encouragement for the labour force to look forward to 
expanding opportunities in our province, or do you have any 
kind of a plan along that line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I thank the hon. member for his 
question. The ultimate goal is to make sure that labour laws and 
regulations work. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, I think as we have been in 
consultation with one of your back-benchers on this issue, it'll 
be important that we explore a lot of the areas under the labour 
issues. Oh yes, and I found the number, page no. 91 here. We 
are going to be looking at the direction that you want to take 
this province in through your portfolio under the Labour 
mandate. 
 
We find that you have spent significant amounts of money with 
regards to The Occupational Health and Safety Act. We find 
that you have spent a very significant amount of money on 
labour relations and conciliations in our province. We find that 
you have spent a lot of money on the labour standards as they 
relate to the Acts that you have introduced through your 
portfolio and through your predecessor's work. We find as well 
that these expenditures have an impact on the job base for the  



March 13, 1995 

 
824 

people of our province and whether or not in fact there will be a 
job base. 
 
And so we want to know what your long-term plan is with 
regards to providing those kinds of incentives that would bring 
people in from the business sector for example, or even from 
the point of view of bringing in a job base with expanded 
Crown corporation activities or government projects. 
 
What do you have for a plan that will help us to get job 
numbers up in our province and provide long-term stability for 
the workers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The question applies to the Department 
of Labour, Mr. Chairman. The role of myself as Minister of 
Labour in the province is to make sure that labour legislation 
regulations have a balance  to protect the interests of working 
men and women in this province and at the same time not deter 
economic development. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, it is clear that you don't have 
a plan and that's of course . . . we tried to get you two times 
now to answer the very fundamental question as to what your 
plan is as a government, and obviously you as a minister are a 
disaster and a failure in all of these aspects because you don't 
have a plan. You haven't got a clue what you're doing or where 
you're going, and you state that automatically as a reflex action 
the first time you get up to answer any questions in this 
particular estimate period on Labour and the direction of your 
department. 
 
You don't know what kind of a plan you've got because you 
don't have one. All you've got is an agenda to serve the needs of 
the union leaders of this province, and you have no agenda 
whatsoever in terms of creating a job base for this province or 
providing any incentive for the people of the business world to 
bring in a job base for our province. 
 
And so you very frivolously get up and say very quickly, well 
we're just bringing in good legislation. Well let me tell you; 
there's a few hundred thousand people in this province that 
don't believe your legislation is any good whatsoever. It is not 
only a disaster for the province; it's a bigger disaster for the 
people who work in the workforce. 
 
The only people who are benefiting by this whole procedure of 
the laws that you have been bringing in over the last three years 
are the bosses of the labour unions, and you're doing it on the 
backs of the workers. You're probably the worst enemy that the 
workers of this province have got because you don't have a plan 
to create jobs. You don't have a plan to create a job base. All 
you've got is plan to try to make your big union bosses get 
onside in time for the next election so that they will carry your 
job to the hustings in the next election. 
 
It's got nothing to do with what's fair. It's got nothing to do with 
what's right. All you're doing is an attempt to create an election 
atmosphere to get your union bosses onside. You haven't got a 
plan. That's why you can't talk about a plan — because there  

isn't one. Clearly and simply, Minister, you are spending 
hundreds of millions of dollars of the province's money, of the 
taxpayers' money, and what are you spending it on? You're 
spending it on the creation of laws and the implementation of 
laws that will clearly drive business and surely drive jobs out of 
this province rather than to bring them in. 
 
Let's talk for a minute about the women of our province and the 
issues that they bring up: the pay equity issue. Why are you 
against pay equity for women, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I thank the hon. member for his 
question. I'm not against pay equity. The article that the hon. 
member refers to appeared in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix this 
weekend. 
 
What I was saying is that it's not the Department of Labour that 
is responsible for forwarding the agenda for pay equity in this 
province, regardless of how that's gone about. And I would say 
that the Department of Labour is very concerned about pay 
equity. There are people who study this almost as a science 
within our department. But the questions that are specific as to 
the agenda of pay equity in this province would be better 
addressed when the Women's Secretariat comes up before 
estimates, and the member can then get very detailed responses 
as to how pay equity will unfold in this province. 
 
We think that we can stand in some appreciation of pay equity. 
And across the board in Saskatchewan, pay equity has been 
addressed in real terms as much as any other province or any 
other jurisdiction throughout Canada. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well Minister, once again you must be 
viewed as the biggest disappointment to the ministry of Labour 
that the women of our province has ever seen, because very 
clearly they will not agree with you that the Women's 
Secretariat should, in itself, deal with the issues of pay equity 
for women. This is clearly a labour issue, clearly a Labour 
department issue. 
 
Women's Secretariat, as far as I understand it, is a secretariat 
that deals with other issues and other problems for women, 
more accurately I think described as the social services kinds of 
issues that women run into in our society. And I believe that I'm 
not totally wrong when I say that Social Services have in the 
past, before the Women's Secretariat was set up, basically dealt 
with the issues that the Women's Secretariat now deals with; the 
issues of a labour nature and of wages' nature has always, 
traditionally, and under precedents of our province, been dealt 
with by the Department of Labour. 
 
So, Minister, I'd say to the women of this province that you are 
ducking, that you are passing your responsibilities, that you are 
attempting to deflect a political hot potato at a time when you 
want only to do those things that you can to get the labour 
union bosses onside to fight the next election for you. 
 
And clearly this is an issue that you don't feel you can win any 
votes on, and so you're ducking. And the women of  



March 13, 1995 

 
825 

Saskatchewan, I think, will realize that and will remember that 
when they in fact do have the opportunity to pick a new 
government in the next election. 
 
(1530) 
 
Let's talk, Mr. Minister, about some of the things then that, 
seeing as how you refused to talk about the important issues of 
women's equity in the workplace and you refused to discuss 
with the women of this province how you are spending the 
money in your department and not showing to them that any of 
it is going for their benefit, let's talk about some of the other 
issues then. And perhaps you will want to discuss them a little 
more openly and fairly. 
 
Not that we are really, truly expecting that, because in all 
fairness to the people of Saskatchewan, we don't believe that 
you have a plan in your department to do anything except play 
partisan politics. But we will give it a try and we will talk about 
the views of the people and the taxpayers as far as the Labour 
department is concerned. 
 
Just in passing, because you're so negative to the area of 
women, I also wondered, Minister, what your feelings are about 
the opening of the Moose Jaw plant. Did you do any surveys or 
studies in your department, Minister, that would show us how 
expensive the strike at the Moose Jaw meat-packing plant, 
which I understand is going to open today, how expensive was 
the strike there? 
 
Have you done any studies to find out what the implications are 
here for the labour force in the province? Have you done any 
studies or research to find out who benefited in the long run or 
who paid the biggest bill there? And what was the outcome 
from your department's point of view? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — In the particular issue that the member 
refers to, we were involved in conciliation and like to think that 
our employees had a helpful role to play in the final resolve. 
 
In terms of overall studies as to the cost, the socio-economic 
impact — if that's what the member's getting at — we have not 
conducted a study in that regard and do not feel it's our 
department's responsibility to do so. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
maybe you should take a look at this sort of thing a little more 
closely. Because my research with some of the people down at 
Moose Jaw clearly indicated that there is a need for your 
department to take a long, hard look into this type of situation 
and find out what's going on there. 
 
The people that I talked to made some very direct observations 
as to the unfairness that went on in that whole strike process. 
The people that I talked to clearly indicated to me that again the 
union bosses who orchestrated the walk-out in that plant, who 
orchestrated the whole process of the problem of the strike, 
were paid full benefits, as compared to the labourers themselves 
who got practically nothing during that strike period. They got  

very little pay. 
 
We also had some federal people who were working in the 
plant who continued to work there for year after year at full pay 
without ever having to show up for work. They simply were 
hired and paid. 
 
So the workers got only a very small fraction of the wages that 
they should have been getting, while the union bosses and the 
federal employees got full benefits and took full advantage of 
the situation and in fact had a paid holiday. 
 
So why would you not think it was important to survey that or 
to study it and research and show to the people of the province 
what the effects would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well we wouldn't study that because it's 
neither within the role or the mandate of the department to do 
that. And if we did, the member would likely change his hat and 
be critical of the department for doing so. 
 
I do want to reiterate that we do have mediation and 
conciliation services within the department. There was a 
conciliation role that was played, and we like to think that we 
were beneficial to the situation which finally ended up in 
resolve. And hopefully the employer and employees can put the 
situation behind themselves and get on with on a productive 
future for that particular business. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, wouldn't you think that it 
might be important to know what happened in this whole strike 
situation in terms of using that kind of information in the 
future? Perhaps another situation will occur. And I say, quite 
frankly, I believe that there is no question whatever but that 
there will be future problems between labour and management 
that will almost exactly parallel the one that happened here. 
 
So why wouldn't we do a research into the circumstances 
around that strike and lockout and the whole process? Why 
wouldn't we research that to try to discover how we could offset 
something in the future of a similar nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well there have been labour-
management disputes since the Industrial Revolution, and I'm 
sure there'll be management-labour disputes in the future. The 
role of the Department of Labour is not to study in depth each 
occurrence that might come about. 
 
The member asking the question seems to have some fairly firm 
opinions. And we'd be happy if you'd take the time to put them 
in writing and submit them to the department, and we'll work 
them into an analysis and provide you with a response to your 
astute observations. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, that is really an astounding approach to estimates. I 
don't think I've ever seen anything quite like it. Now you would 
rather I put into writing my questions and submit them to you 
when I'm standing right here and just asked you the question in  



March 13, 1995 

 
826 

person. 
 
Why would I bother to write things down that you won't answer 
when I'm standing here? Wouldn't that be a kind of a waste of 
my time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the member obviously wasn't 
listening to my answer. I was referring to one particular issue 
that you're referring to in Moose Jaw, and if you want to 
provide your analysis . . . and I wasn't answering a particular 
question; I was trying to give some value to the comments that 
you make. But if you see no value to the comments that you 
make, don't bother putting it in writing to the department and 
we won't have to answer you. 
 
I would want to point out to the minister that Saskatchewan's 
labour relation climate's likely the most stable in Canada. The 
number of person-days lost to a strike or lockout in 
Saskatchewan over the last 10 years has been a little more than 
one-third the rate for Canada as a whole. 
 
And I think that speaks very well. It's equivalent to the rate in 
Alberta or Manitoba, whichever example you want to use. We 
have a very stable climate for business and labour within this 
province. 
 
And I think to attest to that you can only look at some of the 
announcements over the past few months that we've had in 
Saskatchewan. There'd be the CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank 
of Commerce) Call Centre; whether it be the Cargill situation; 
Hitachi's announcement in Saskatoon today; or the IMAX 
theatre where a community in your very own constituency, 
Eastend, will be advertised at likely a couple of hundred IMAX 
theatres throughout the world, be advertising for your own 
constituency to attract economic development into that area. 
 
And I think the member should not try and exaggerate the 
situation as to whether or not there is, in his opinion, situations 
in Saskatchewan that deserve greater attention. It's statistically 
correct and in reality correct that Saskatchewan has one of the 
most stable relationships between labour and management of 
anywhere in Canada, maybe even North America. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, I 
want to compliment you on the efforts that you and your 
government have done in the IMAX area and in the Eastend 
area. But we had probably better straighten out the record just a 
little bit. That's not my constituency just yet. It may be in the 
future with the new boundaries and that sort of thing, if I 
choose to run again; and if I then after that am elected again, I 
may possibly represent that area. But at the moment, no, that is 
not my constituency. 
 
But I certainly feel very close to those people because it is close 
to home. And I would view them as my friends and neighbours 
and wish them every success in the world in not only that 
adventure, but in any other adventure down in that area. There 
are a lot of needs that can help the province tremendously. In 
spite of the fact that the population numbers of people are 
rather  

low, the economic benefits that that area of the province can 
bring to the entire province, those economic benefits are 
tremendous. And the spin-off there can be many, many dollars 
to go into General Revenue Fund for the government to spend 
on the rest of the province. 
 
So realistically, sometimes that's the way things happen. I guess 
the resource industry is a little like that. Where you find 
uranium, there aren't very many people sometimes. And yet the 
economic spin-off of that industry can be tremendous in terms 
of tax dollars for the rest of the province. 
 
The oil industry is another example. And of course tourism 
related to something like the dinosaur bones from the T-Rex 
find in Eastend also falls into that category. I think that does 
justify of course, the expenditures of many more dollars in 
those sparsely populated areas than what the population might 
for example suggest would be warranted. 
 
But the spin-off and the good that can be done and the potential 
to rebuild the population base on those types of things is 
tremendous. And I'm sure that you know that, and I congratulate 
you for that. Certainly we have never been in a position, 
Minister, of wanting to be critical of the good things that your 
government does. However, we do believe that there are some 
things that need some straightening out and some attention to. 
 
The reality is, Minister, in spite of what your opinion is about 
the Moose Jaw situation, is that it gives Saskatchewan a really 
bad name when you have industries that are shut down for years 
and years and years with no resolution to the labour-
management problems. That kind of thing is a very bad 
atmosphere for business. You must realize that. 
 
So if we did a study and an analysis of what went wrong in the 
Moose Jaw situation, certainly you must be able to see that that 
could be good as a tool to use to apply in future circumstances 
that might be somewhat similar. Certainly there must be some 
way that we can offset these kind of things from happening or 
short-circuit them or get in the way of them or cut them off at 
the knees or whatever term you want to use over there. But 
certainly that kind of information and analysis would be a 
benefit for the people of the province so that we could get our 
name as a good place to do business established and enhanced 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I guess I'll let you respond to that before I get into my next 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well if the member is saying that we 
can some way assure in future there will never be a strike or 
never be a lockout by an employer, that's just not the case 
unless you were to take that democratic right away. And if the 
member believes in collective bargaining, the member would 
also agree that there will be lockouts and there will be strikes in 
the future. 
 
In terms of the particular case that you refer to in Moose Jaw  



March 13, 1995 

 
827 

Packers, this took place as a backlash of major changes in the 
beef industry. I want the member to be very clear on that. The 
restructuring is still ongoing as I understand it. The Moose Jaw 
start-up is particularly encouraging to us. It should be 
encouraging to you, the employer, and employees. Its 
restructuring will greatly enhance the marketing of 
Saskatchewan beef producers. And finally, Saskatchewan is 
better placed to compete with the beef kill operations with 
Alberta and other Canadian jurisdictions. 
 
I would want to say to the member in terms of the particular 
question he's asking about doing a study, is that we have many 
experts in the industry, we have experts in the unions, we have 
experts within the department who have a good understanding 
as to what happened. 
 
And I'm not prepared to direct the department to spend large 
amounts of money to do an in-depth study with one particular 
dispute in Saskatchewan which we now see has been resolved. 
There's ongoing progress; there's continued improvements 
being made between the managers and between the organized 
workers of that particular plant. And we're satisfied at this stage 
with the progress that is being made in that area, and we're 
happy, as you should be happy, to see Moose Jaw Packers back 
in operation. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well certainly, Minister, we're happy to see 
that the workers are back to work and that the operation is 
operating. 
 
But it didn't operate for a very, very long time. And it didn't 
operate because there was a labour dispute in which the 
employees and the management could not agree. The unions 
represented the employees and of course management 
represented I guess itself. But they came to an impasse that 
stopped that whole process for a very long time. 
 
There has to be some reasons why that happened. Certainly it 
would be a benefit to society in Saskatchewan to know exactly 
what caused these problems, to see if we could come up with an 
analysis that could determine how we could offset this 
happening again in the future. 
 
And that's what we're saying to you. We're saying, let's see what 
we can do to stop this sort of thing from wrecking our 
reputation in this province as a place to do business. Because 
right now we don't have a very good reputation in the business 
world. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I disagree with the member. We have a 
very good reputation in the business world. Otherwise you 
wouldn't see the Cargill plant, you wouldn't see the Wheat Pool 
wanting to do expansions within Saskatchewan, you wouldn't 
see the CIBC Call Centre, the Sears Call Centre — national, 
international businesses, I venture to say, that see Saskatchewan 
as a very, very attractive place to do business. 
 
Back to Moose Jaw Packers. Why did it last so long? It lasted 
so long because there was a very basic difference in terms of  

what is happening there between the union representing the 
working people and the managers who represent the owners of 
the business. 
 
And you either believe in collective bargaining or you don't 
believe in collective bargaining. Just because collective 
bargaining sometimes is very painful for either the employer or 
the employees, or both of them combined, you can't just then all 
of a sudden say I don't believe in collective bargaining any 
more. You either believe in it or you don't believe in it. Where 
do you stand in the Conservative Party in regard to collective 
bargaining? 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, I probably should remind you 
that you answer the questions here and we ask them. But in this 
circumstance I will answer the question because it's a very 
simple answer. 
 
We believe in collective bargaining, as you do, from that point 
of view in the very broad sense of the term. However, let's not 
take this too literally in the finer analysis, because you can't just 
have a blanket policy that collective bargaining must be let run 
rampantly through society without some control over what its 
outcome will be. There are such things as essential services 
where a society cannot survive if people don't play their role in 
society. And you and I of course then would sit down and argue 
what is an essential service. 
 
I think if the doctors were all to walk out on strike in 
Saskatchewan and all of the nurses were to walk out on strike at 
the same time and all of the medical institutions in the province 
were shut down at the same time and you were to cut your foot 
off in a grain auger, you would say that medical care is an 
essential service and we should not allow collective bargaining 
to be the vehicle that stopped the whole process so that you 
could get your foot sewed back on. 
 
So realistically, sir, we are very much in favour of collective 
bargaining but we do believe that there are essential services 
where things have to be done in order to save society from 
serious, serious problems. 
 
But in the Moose Jaw instance, that of course is not an essential 
service. And we have never said that you should have back-to-
work legislation, for an example, to force those people back to 
work. What we are saying here today is that you should do an 
analysis of what went wrong there. 
 
I say, in my own philosophy, that something went desperately 
wrong when a plant with workers has to be shut down for a 
couple of years' time. A few weeks, that's collective bargaining; 
a couple of months, maybe that's still collective bargaining; but 
a few years? That's not bargaining; that's shut down — 
everything is finished, stopped, ended, over with. Nobody's 
talking. You can't tell me that's collective bargaining when 
nobody's talking to one another. 
 



March 13, 1995 

 
828 

Certainly there must be something that we could study from this 
situation that would tell us how to do things better in the future. 
Minister, I'm going to let you think about that, because you also 
alluded to the other business areas that are attracted to our 
province when I suggested to you that we have a bad business 
climate in our province. 
 
You say that you're very happy that Cargill is going to build a 
plant — use that as an example — and nothing wrong with that. 
I'm glad they're going to build a plant too. I have a vested 
interest in that kind of thing because I'm a grower of the 
primary product and I'm really happy that they're going to come 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
But let's tell the whole story, which is that in spite of this 
government they are going to locate in Saskatchewan because 
this is where the product happens to be grown. It's just like any 
other natural resource, only this is a resource that can be grown 
on our kind of soil in our province. 
 
And so they're coming here in spite of your labour legislation, 
and they're doing it, of course, with another part of the story 
that needs to be told — with tremendous tax breaks and a 
tremendous amount of government money and taxpayers' 
money being poured into this sort of thing, the very thing that 
you and your government used to condemn so vehemently when 
you were in opposition. And of course somebody said this is the 
old soap opera of how the worm turns or something like that. 
 
But the truth of the matter is, sir, that you do have some success 
coming in the province but it's in spite of what you've done and 
not because of it. And we think that you could do a better job 
and that's why we're here today. 
 
We think that you could have tenfold the opportunities that are 
awakening in this province if you would face the reality that 
you have to give everybody an equal playing-field, and not just 
a few special friends that happen to come along and decide to 
play the game your way. 
 
The truth of the matter is that you've got a calling centre coming 
into this province with tremendous taxpayer-dollar input into 
that process. And we're going to say to you that you ought to, 
when you allude to this sort of thing, also provide those 
opportunities to the people who are already in the province, 
who have stayed and paid the shot through the higher taxes and 
through all of the higher utility rates that they've had to pay. 
They've paid the price to stay in this province and you give the 
breaks to outsiders that come in. 
 
And that is good for the province and we want those people to 
come, but we say that what is good for the goose should be 
good for the gander; you ought to provide these opportunities 
on a fair, level playing-field for everybody involved and not just 
for a few. This ought to be an exercise of fair play, not an 
exercise of pick and choose and then try to take all the credit for 
it. 
 

So, Minister, I should let you respond to that, and then I'll get 
on to my other questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — You're absolutely so inaccurate in the 
assertions that you make that I think that you must not have 
attended the Legislative Assembly since it opened for this 
session. 
 
There's no special treatment. The programs that are there are 
across the board. Any company that is existing in Saskatchewan 
or wants to come into Saskatchewan and be new business 
partners in this province will have the same treatment. The 
programs that are there are across the board programs, that's 
been explained many times by the Minister of Economic 
Development in this Assembly in answer to your questions 
during question period. 
 
But you might hearken back to the days of your administration, 
whereby there were secret deals cut within your departments 
that nobody ever knew about until after the election was over 
and had to be exposed by due diligence of investigations into 
some of those activities. So don't mislead the Saskatchewan 
public by special treatment for special friends that you're talking 
about, because that doesn't exist. The Minister of Economic 
Development has explained that to you. 
 
And my response to you is that you are inaccurate, you're 
misleading the public within Saskatchewan, and I think that 
maybe you should try and get back to the Labour questions and 
save the Economic Development questions for the Minister of 
Economic Development, who is more capable of answering 
specifics on that than what I would be here today with the 
officials from the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do want to ask 
the Minister of Labour some labour-oriented issues. And I'm 
glad that he's telling us that the Minister of Economic 
Development is going to be so forthcoming. Those eight 
questions we asked about the CIBC Call Centre the other day 
maybe will get answered, now that the Minister of Labour is on 
our side in eliciting the truth from the Minister of Economic 
Development. 
 
Minister, earlier in the day I had the opportunity to pose some 
questions to the Agriculture minister, who chose to act on 
behalf of the government, and my responses to some questions 
dealing with the potential crisis in the national transportation 
network that the ongoing strikes are . . . being posed to CP 
(Canadian Pacific) at present; potentially to CN (Canadian 
National). 
 
And I'm wondering, given that you're the Labour minister, have 
you also been watching the situation evolve, and are you of a 
similar view to the Minister of Agriculture, that given that some 
of these contracts have been in abeyance for a year and half — 
a year and three-quarters — and a lot of the normal bargaining 
process has evidently gone on without success, do you agree 
with the Minister of Agriculture that you would not be in favour 
of calling upon the national Liberal government to  



March 13, 1995 

 
829 

implement back-to-work legislation in the event of a full-blown 
national rail strike which would prohibit the export of not only 
Saskatchewan grain, but would see companies like IPSCO lay 
off all of their unionized staff and others who we are all hoping 
will do well in the province of Saskatchewan in the 
manufacturing sector? 
 
Are you of the same view as the Minister of Agriculture, that 
that isn't what you as a Saskatchewan government should be 
calling upon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The Department of Labour has been 
watching this situation quite closely as it's developed over the 
months, I suppose could be some description, but certainly the 
more recent weeks, as to what has transpired between rail 
workers and associated unions and the rail companies in 
Canada. 
 
I first point out very clearly — and the member should know 
this; I'm sure he does — that the rails are a federal 
responsibility, and the authority that we have are by 
encouraging the federal government to do something, or as the 
case may be, to not do something. 
 
Both the Minister of Highways and Transportation and the 
Minister of Agriculture have written to the federal Minister of 
Transport and the federal Minister of Labour. They've also 
contacted the unions that are involved. 
 
I would encourage the member to understand that the situation 
exists today is a lockout. The rail company has locked out some 
of their employees. I would further want to point out that out of 
the five major unions that are involved with the rail companies 
in Canada, three of them have reached tentative agreements I 
believe this past week, if it's not mistaken, or maybe just on the 
weekend. Some of them might have been as recent as that. The 
situation is one to be watched closely. 
 
I am hopeful that the collective bargaining process will have the 
other two unions, the one that is locked out right now and the 
other union, the Canadian Auto Workers . . . that they are both 
able to come to an agreement as the other three unions have 
come to, so that the grain and other products that Saskatchewan 
have can move freely through the Canadian rail transportation 
system. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, are you implying to the House that 
those lockouts are occurring without any corresponding 
picketing action of behalf of the unions — that they're simply 
locking people out with no locals walking off the job? Are you 
telling the Assembly that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — It is my understanding that the 
maintenance of way union staged a one-day walk-out. As a 
result the rail company locked out the employees. 
 
I have no intention of misleading the House. I think the hon. 
member knows the situation and I think that I portrayed the 
situation accurately to him in this House. 

Mr. Swenson: — Well no, minister, I think it's accurate now. 
You said that in response to a walk-out there's been a lockout 
and I think that's fair, that when we talk about these things we 
put them in the proper context for anybody watching the 
proceedings today; that you don't normally lock people out 
unless there's been some corresponding action on the other side. 
 
But I go back to the question I asked you before. The minister 
today said that he did not favour back-to-work legislation. 
Agriculture in this province today has been hit with hundreds of 
millions of dollars in losses. The GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) fund, which your government retroactively 
changed the legislation on, has effectively removed . . . 
effectively removed by the federal government, $317 million; 
by your government, $188 million; and your government is 
going to remove a further $150 million in 1996 demanding 
repayment of GRIP premiums paid. 
 
Now in the face of that, we also have the federal government 
now dismantling the Crow rate, method of payment’s changing, 
and we are going to see western Canadian farmers and 
particularly Saskatchewan farmers now potentially hit with the 
full cost of moving their grain to market. They're talking 
anywhere from $16 to $35 a tonne in the new crop year. In the 
face of that, the federal government said there's going to be $1.6 
billion, in some form yet to be determined. 
 
Now, Minister, the reason the question was asked today  we 
are at the height of the transportation season for a number of 
those products because as you know, in this province road bans 
come on in the spring and farmers are prohibited from 
delivering their product. So everything right now is going 
absolutely full bore. 
 
What I asked the minister and what I ask you, in the face of a 
shut-down, and a few days means tens of millions of dollars to 
this province, to an industry that has already been devastated by 
both provincial and federal governments, are you prepared to 
see that situation continue on, or are you prepared as part of this 
provincial cabinet to request the federal minister to move ahead 
with back-to-work legislation? 
 
And I remind the minister that in the past, whether it was dock 
workers, or the grain workers’ union in Vancouver or Thunder 
Bay, or national rail strikes, that because we don't seem to have 
anything else in place, that has been the practice rather than see 
the industry devastated. 
 
So I ask you again, are you prepared to help the Minister of 
Agriculture with your federal counterparts and call for back-to-
work legislation if this situation gets out of hand and we see the 
rail shut-down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the political party in Saskatchewan 
that's done the most to see grain transportation shut down is the 
party now sitting in opposition. I remember Eric Berntson 
appearing before the national committee as it met here in 
Ottawa, telling us that the Crow rate should go, the western 
Canada grain transportation subsidy should be gone. I  



March 13, 1995 

 
830 

mean your party has a long history of destroying grain 
transportation in western Canada. 
 
So let's get that straight right off the bat, is that no party has any 
more responsibility that should lay on their backs than your 
party, sir, for what you've done to destroy western grain 
transportation prior to any of these events ever coming along. 
 
I say to the member again, as I said in my opening answer to his 
question, we favour a collective bargaining process to work. I'm 
not going to talk about some hypothetical situation in the future. 
I've laid out the situation as it exists today. Three of the unions 
have reached tentative agreements. The other two unions have 
ongoing talks and I hope that they will arrive through their 
collective bargaining process at an understanding that will 
continue to have Saskatchewan's grain and other products 
moving. 
 
If that event does not occur, then we will have to look at the 
situation, depending on the seriousness of it to Saskatchewan, 
and we will act accordingly. We believe in the collective 
bargaining process; we encourage the employees and the 
employer to sit down and try and resolve their differences; we 
will do whatever we can to be helpful in that situation. 
 
As a Department of Labour and a Saskatchewan government we 
stand behind Saskatchewan's economy. We also stand behind 
Saskatchewan's working men and women as part of the 
economy of Saskatchewan, contrary to the views expressed so 
often by your party. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, maybe the minister 
would like to put a monetary value on what he considers to be 
serious. Perhaps he'd like to tell us how many millions of 
dollars rural Saskatchewan has to lose before he thinks it's 
appropriate that some action should be taken. 
 
And obviously they don't mind losing a little money. I mean 
they let the federal Liberals walk out of this province with $317 
million in Crow money that had already been budgeted. So 
maybe the minister would like to give us an idea. Minister, 
before you start chastising my party on the Crow, I'd remind 
you that there was about $7.2 billion on the table. And if your 
government and some of your Ag ministers would have been 
not so ideologically hidebound, some of that money would be 
in this province today and in the pockets of farmers. And you 
know it. You know it. 
 
You sat in the federal parliament as an MP, and you know full 
well, sir, that the issue could have been solved a long time ago 
with a lot more money than what you've put on the table today. 
And you people should hang your heads in shame for letting the 
Liberals take that money out of this province; that's what you 
should do. 
 
So, Minister, would you like to try and tell me how much 
economic loss Saskatchewan farmers should suffer before  

you're prepared to join in asking the federal government to put 
these people back to work? What would be the dollar figure that 
you think would be appropriate then for rural Saskatchewan to 
suffer before you're prepared to act? What would you think, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Not 1 cent. We in this government have 
strove to make sure that Saskatchewan's economy grows and 
prospers. We've done that by trying to find ways in which 
Saskatchewan working men and women and Saskatchewan 
business reach accommodations whereby it's to the benefit of 
both parties, plus the people of Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
So we aren't the ones who want to drive Saskatchewan's 
economy into the ground. It's the negative doom and gloom that 
you and the Liberal party preach in this House, flying in the 
face of the real facts that Saskatchewan's economy is doing as 
good as anywhere else in Canada under the circumstances in 
which your former government left it. 
 
So not 1 cent is the answer to you. Saskatchewan's economy 
will be grown by this government, by the working men and 
women of this province, and by the businesses that choose to 
invest here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm glad to hear that 
because we're going to hold the minister to it. And I hope the 
Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Transportation 
listen to those words very carefully, because if it's not 1 cent, 
then if the inevitable I believe happens, because I think there's 
other fish being fried in this national rail dispute than simply 
wages and hours of work, that if those other fish get fried — 
and they tend to fry Saskatchewan along with them — then, sir, 
we're going to hold your other ministers to your word that not 1 
cent of the economic loss should happen in the province of 
Saskatchewan by a national rail strike. And that you will join 
with the opposition in requesting back-to-work legislation to 
put such a strike to an end almost immediately. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't have any more questions. You've answered 
my question, that you're prepared to stand on that and live with 
it. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome you and your officials here today. 
 
I have only a few questions, Mr. Minister, and we'll start out 
with some of the concerns that have been brought to my 
attention in the last few days regarding group homes, which I 
guess would fall under your department. In fact it would have to 
do with the regulations that are under The Labour Standards 
Act regarding group homes. 
 
And I guess you can fill us in on what some of the problems are 
as far as the employees of group homes are concerned. Because 
what I'm being told is that under these regulations, employees 
can be expected to work up to 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,  



March 13, 1995 

 
831 

Mr. Minister. And I think what a few of the questions would 
come from this is, you know, that to me sounds likes some form 
of slave labour almost. 
 
And I was wondering if you could fill us in on why these 
regulations would be this way. And in fact what are the impact 
on some of the individuals that would be involved, and in fact, 
what impact would we have? And what sort of quality of care 
would we be expecting? If these are the kind of regulations that 
you have coming from The Labour Standards Act, an Act which 
is becoming more evident as each and every day passes by that 
that not only is it not working out for employers, but even 
employees are now questioning the many aspects of this Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the member brings up what is a 
very difficult situation, and has been a persistent situation on 
governments over several years. In my analysis of the problems 
for the employees of group homes, is that they do work too long 
and they get paid too little. If I was in a group home situation I 
would not be happy with that. And we strive to improve the 
conditions for those who have to work in group homes. 
 
The member is accurate about his 24 hours a day, although it's 
different than you would view a normal work day. The 
reasoning behind the 24 hours is that they like to provide as 
much of a home situation as possible. So it may well be that for 
an extended a period of time . . . I'm not sure that it is actually 
seven days at a time; it may be. I'll get the details for the 
member on that. But it's to provide consistency with the home-
like atmosphere that's developed in a group home as opposed to 
what the alternative would be in some cases. It would be 
institutional care. 
 
And so I recognize the plight of group home workers. We've 
heard that for quite some time. I know that the Minister of 
Social Services is also aware of the problem. And we try very 
hard to make budgetary allocations to recognize the problems 
that actually exist within the group home atmosphere. 
 
If there's more specific things that the member would like in 
regard to this, regarding our legislation — which is a difficult 
situation, I recognize — we'd be more than happy to provide 
those to the member. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 
appreciate the fact that you're aware and you're concerned. And 
as you were stating, these group home workers are working too 
long for too little pay. 
 
But the question that I was really getting at is, what are you 
prepared to do about it if you see this isn't consistent with what 
we think people in the workforce should be having to put up 
with today? 
 
And I appreciate what you're saying as far as, you know, 
providing a home, a consistent home-like environment for the 
clients of group homes. But still, I mean, as minister in charge  

of Labour, what you've got to be also concerned about are the 
conditions in which these employees have to work under. 
 
So let's just get back to the question: what are you prepared to 
do to perhaps adjust the regulations of The Labour Standards 
Act? Fill us in on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well we're not being inconsistent. We 
have continued to dedicate what resources we can to group 
homes and group home workers. I point out to the hon. member 
for the Shaunavon constituency that you may well want to have 
your leader contact the federal leader to find out why in the past 
year and a half we've had a reduction of, I believe, some $62 
million in offloading that would affect this fairly directly. 
 
And so it would go a long way if the federal government would 
put back the $62 million, that we could dedicate a very healthy 
portion of that to the group home situation. This is a situation of 
offloading. 
 
I want say we're not being inconsistent. What we want to do 
with the labour legislation and labour regulations in 
Saskatchewan is to find the legislation regulations that work to 
serve the province and the people that it affects. 
 
We were not able to reach that accommodation in terms of the 
current situation with the regulations that came into place. I feel 
that that's unfortunate. We'll continue as a government, not only 
the Department of Labour and the Department of Social 
Services, but we as a government will continue to work with 
group home workers to find an accommodation for them that's 
better than the situation they find themselves in today. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but here 
you are now, saying that you're doing whatever you can to 
dedicate resources to the group homes, and yet you're wanting 
us on the other hand to talk to our federal counterparts about 
some of the offloading. So are you then telling us that the 
regulations to The Labour Standards Act are as they are now 
because of some federal offloading? Is that why you made these 
regulations? 
 
So you're essentially saying that you're a little short of cash, so 
we're going to now put regulations in place having employees 
be on the work site 24 hours a day, seven days a week. I just 
can't accept that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well you don't have to accept it. There's 
two issues here. There's one of the legislation regulations that 
protect working men and women and protect employers. The 
other issue is one of funding. And you'll find that people are 
willing to put up with greater extenuating circumstances if 
they're paid a bit more for it. I think that's generally recognized. 
 
So there are two issues. One is in terms of the protection that 
those workers have. The other is in terms of the pay that they 
get. The federal funding that has been cut back from this 
province would go a long way to reconciling one of those issues 
that the group home workers have. 



March 13, 1995 

 
832 

The other issue that I want to bring to your attention is that 
during the consultations with The Labour Standards Act, there 
were extensive consultations, and presentations from group 
home workers to the government. And I think that the 
Department of Labour has a better understanding than ever 
before. And I think that group home workers, although they 
haven't got everything they want, have a better understanding of 
what their situation is. The regulations enacted are to ensure 
that the group home workers are paid at least the minimum 
wage, which wasn't necessarily the case in the past. 
 
So there have been improvements there for the group home 
workers. I recognize that there's a case where many of them feel 
that the protection they had should have gone further. We're 
looking at that. I'm not able to respond in the immediate future 
to that, but certainly we do recognize a difficult situation and 
the valuable role that group home workers, in most cases that 
work for non-governmental organizations, have played within 
our society and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, but you yourself are saying 
that there's two issues here. One is the protection of workers, 
and the second is funding. And I'm asking you that the 
regulations of The Labour Standards Act which are forcing 
people to work 24 hours a day, seven days a week, is that a 
funding question entirely, or are these regulations in place to 
protect workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The regulations have to do with both. 
Some regulations have a financial impact. Other regulations 
have a minimum or no financial impact to them. 
 
There's not as much money in the system as I know the Minister 
of Social Services would like to see for group homes and non-
governmental organizations. That's a reality of the world that 
we live in today. 
 
I'm the one who's responsible for labour legislation in the 
province, and I take that role very seriously. We continue to 
make sure that the role of group home workers is recognized 
within our system. 
 
And I point out again, it's not insignificant to point out, that 
there could be a case prior to our regulations coming into place 
where a group home worker, on a 24-hour basis, would earn 
less than minimum wage because of what's referred to as sleep 
time. We've ensured that that will no longer happen. 
 
In the regulations, we assure that the group home workers make 
at least minimum wage for the 24-hour period. That's an 
improvement. Has it gone as far as group home workers would 
like it to go? No, it hasn't. Has it gone farther than group home 
operators would like it to go? In some cases likely yes, because 
they're concerned about where they pick up the extra funding to 
pay for that particular regulation that's in place. 
 
We not only want to work with the workers, we want to work 
with the group home operators as well, whether they be a non-
governmental organization or someone else. And so I think that  

we've arrived as close to a balance as what we can get at this 
point in time. 
 
We'll continue to monitor the situation, and hopefully there will 
be a better future for those who work in group homes. And as 
I've already done, I recognize the importance they play within 
our society. And I know that I wouldn't want to work in those 
situations, but obviously there's some people who feel there's 
gratification in the job they do, and they do do a very good job 
in working in the group homes throughout the province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But the fact 
of the matter is that you're saying that there's some sort of future 
for group home workers and that you've brought them from 
below minimum wage up to, I guess, minimum wage. In fact, I 
think most of these workers are what, five or five fifty an hour? 
And you're saying that it's acceptable to have people on the job 
site for 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and as Minister of 
Labour you're not prepared to do more than what you're talking 
about — up the pay a little bit? I mean you don't see problems 
in delivery of care or quality of care that may be reduced 
because of people having to be in that situation? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I can't make an assessment on that. I 
don't know the quality of care in group homes, but I would have 
to assume that the quality of care in group homes is quite good. 
The people who work there, for far the most part, are very 
dedicated. It gives people who are in group homes an 
opportunity to live in a home-like atmosphere as much as 
possible, as opposed to care they would get in an institutional 
setting. And as I say again, the government has looked at this 
very closely. 
 
I know the Minister of Social Services has looked at this and 
would like additional funding. The 62 million I talked about 
that's been offloaded from the federal government would go a 
long way to remedying some of those particular items. 
 
So I think that we've got to a point whereby the group home 
workers know that we understand their problems; we've made 
some movement on it. Have they gotten all they would have 
wanted to get? No, they've not gotten all they wanted to get. But 
in today's situation there are very few in our society that get 
everything they want. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, then can you tell us . . . 
because your government is the one that's doing the regulations 
on The Labour Standards Act, surely you've done some sort of 
an impact study on the individuals of these group homes to see 
exactly what the ramifications of your regulations are. And can 
you tell us what your findings are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well Price Waterhouse has done a study 
on the impact, financial impact, for employers in regard to 
labour standards. The exact amount, I don't know whether or 
not we have that figure here today? I'm informed by the 
officials it was less than 1 per cent of payroll — the particular  



March 13, 1995 

 
833 

benefits that were provided under the Price Waterhouse study. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us if there's 
another sector or group of employees or anyone else that you 
would be looking out for as far as being Minister of Labour, 
that would have these kind of restrictions placed on their lives 
as far as that? That sort of a workload — 24 hour a day, seven 
day a week — or are group home workers the only ones that 
would fit in this category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well in regard to the way the member 
describes it, group home workers are in a fairly unique 
situation. And if you understand the desire to have the home 
situation reflected as much as possible, then you would 
understand that that is correct, but because of the reasons that I 
have already given. 
 
And there are other working people in Saskatchewan who 
would have as difficult a working situation, but for different 
reasons. But certainly in the way that the member describes it, 
is to the stress of continual service in that type of atmosphere, I 
believe that group home workers have one of the more difficult 
situations in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So, Mr. Minister, obviously by listening to 
what you're saying, that unless somehow we can get a bunch of 
money from the federal government, you're not prepared to do 
any more for the workers of group homes than what you're 
presently doing. And it doesn't sound satisfactory to me. 
 
But it does lead us into another area, one of pay equity. And my 
understanding is that you were at a convention only a few days 
ago discussing some pay equity concerns. Can you perhaps fill 
us in on what your particular stand is on pay equity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — We support pay equity. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Because at the convention, Mr. Minister, 
you told the delegates there that it was actually a women's issue 
and you would leave it up to one of the women in your cabinet 
to deal with. Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I didn't see you there. I didn't see 
you at the convention. There were three ministers there. There 
was the Minister of Health; there was the Minister of 
Education; and there was myself as Minister of Labour. So you 
don't know what I said. 
 
What I said at the meeting on Saturday was that we support pay 
equity, and that the minister responsible for pay equity is the 
minister in charge of Status of Women. And the pay equity 
issue will be forwarded into that agenda by the minister who's 
in charge of the Status of Women because that happens to fall 
under her ministerial responsibilities. 
 
And so when the Women's Secretariat comes before here, you 
can find out exactly what the agenda is and what the agenda has 
been in terms of the very important topic of pay equity. 
 

Mr. McPherson: — Well just a few quick questions then. Is 
pay equity, is it a monetary issue basically, or what is the issue 
here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — There's two issues with pay equity. One 
is the recognition that people want . . . that women in particular 
want for the contributions they've made to the workplace. The 
second is a monetary issue because there are cases exist that 
there is not equal pay for work of equal value, and women are 
on the lower end of that. And so it's a monetary issue in that 
society should be wanting to get women onto a pay equity 
situation all across the province regardless of what they do. 
 
It's a more difficult situation when you go into the private 
sector. I think what we're talking about in the short term is how 
pay equity can be enacted within government. We've made 
some accomplishments in that regard. And I believe if you look 
across the playing-field for the public sector in Saskatchewan, 
you find that the lot of women has increased, maybe not as fast 
as what some women would like it to, but it certainly had 
improvements within it. 
 
So there's two issues. There's one of recognition for the value of 
women in our society in the workplace, and second is a 
monetary issue. And both of those can be quite adequately dealt 
with when the Women's Secretariat appears before the estimates 
in this House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but now 
you've raised another point because the former minister of 
Justice — he was the minister of Labour before that — the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview, actually when he was at a 
convention shortly after the 1991 election, he informed the 
delegates that pay equity really was a non-monetary issue, and 
now you're saying it is a monetary issue. And so I'm just 
wondering, why is this now being changed, and if you could 
perhaps explain that. 
 
And in fact, to look at this a little bit further . . . I mean, for you 
to say, well you support the pay equity, you know, and in fact 
moving along to something better tells me that you see all the 
inequities in the system now, and you referred to some of them 
a moment ago. But can you tell us what studies the government 
has undertaken to have a look at these inequities and the cost 
associated with perhaps coming out with a pay equity program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well there is a monetary cost. That's 
inaccurate of anybody who would say there's no monetary cost 
involved in pay equity. 
 
In Ontario, for example, I understand it's cost the government in 
Ontario $15 million to enact just the bureaucracy to deal with 
the issue of pay equity. So you can't say that there isn't a 
monetary cost to it, even if it was just for the setting up of the 
administration of pay equity. 
 
There's also a great spread in some areas of Canada where there 
is not equal pay for work of equal value. If you're going to pay 
those that are paid less and they aren't getting paid equal for  



March 13, 1995 

 
834 

work of equal value, someone has to put in the money to bring 
them up to equal pay for work of equal value. So there is a 
monetary cost. 
 
The question you asked specifically about studies within my 
department, it's not our department's responsibility for 
forwarding the agenda for pay equity, therefore we haven't done 
studies. The questions about studies would be better addressed 
to the Women's Secretariat when they appear before estimates 
in the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, you are the Minister of 
Labour, and I'm asking you questions of people that work in the 
labour force. And what are you prepared to do? Have you done 
studies? Are you prepared to do studies? Or have you looked at 
some of the costing of bringing in pay equity programs? That 
falls under the Department of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — And you're the MLA from Shaunavon. 
And I'm telling you that it's the responsibility of the Women's 
Secretariat. So when the Women's Secretariat comes here, ask 
them the questions about the agenda for pay equity because 
they're responsible. 
 
It's not upon me to answer questions that are going to be 
coming up, another minister who's the minister responsible. The 
nature of estimates is to look at the department's responsibilities 
and mandate. Ask me questions about anything you want within 
my department, but don't try and pressure me for answers to 
questions that fall within another minister's responsibility. 
 
Agree to an agenda. Agree to an agenda as to what estimates 
will come up when in this House, and then you can ask the 
appropriate minister. Just ask me questions about labour, and 
I'll be happy to answer the questions about labour as it applies 
to the mandate and the responsibilities of the department of 
which I have the ministerial responsibility. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, in Manitoba the 
Department of Labour undertook studies on pay equity and 
spent millions of dollars to do it. Now why would this fall 
under the Department of Labour in Manitoba, and yet you as 
the Labour minister are shirking all your responsibilities and not 
dealing with this, trying to say it's another department that 
should be doing? 
 
This is a labour question; it has to do with the workforce of the 
province. And you're not prepared to answer it at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the pay equity in Manitoba, first 
off, applied to the public sector. And so what we're doing is it's 
at the negotiating table in Saskatchewan is where pay equity is 
being dealt with today. And the minister in charge of the 
Women's Secretariat, I think will maintain to you quite 
effectively, is being dealt with by the minister in charge of the 
Women's Secretariat. 
 
Now for you to compare us to another jurisdiction, whether it's  

Manitoba or Alberta, we don't want to be compared to those 
other jurisdictions. Or maybe we do, but you can't compare us 
to those other jurisdictions because on every count we're doing 
better than those other jurisdictions are. I don't care whether it's 
pay equity for women. I don't care whether it's economic 
development. I don't care whether it's unemployment figures. I 
don't care whether it's gross domestic product. We're doing 
better in Saskatchewan because we have a sound, responsible 
government that's putting Saskatchewan back on its feet, to look 
forward into the future for better times, whether it be for 
working men and women or whether it be for business. 
 
And especially in the area of pay equity, we're doing quite well 
in that regard. And the minister responsible for the Women's 
Secretariat will answer those questions when she appears here 
before this House in estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, heaven forbid that I 
would want to compare your administration with any other 
jurisdictions in this country. 
 
But let's do some comparisons. I'm going to ask you to give me 
some in regards to the group home operations that we just 
talked about. In what provinces where they use a group home 
environment have they had these sort of regulations in any 
labour Act? Can you provide us with that comparison, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well we would have to provide that. I 
mean the jurisdictions in other areas of the country don't have 
that readily available. But I would venture to say that in other 
jurisdictions across Canada, the lot of group home workers is 
not appreciably better in any of them than it is in Saskatchewan. 
I mean when you put them on the scale and compare them to 
other workers in Saskatchewan, we already talked about some 
of those difficult situations. 
 
In terms of how they compare in other jurisdictions, I'll give 
you my undertaking that we'll have a look at that and provide it 
to the member from either our department or the appropriate 
department. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
we have talked to you a little while ago about some of the areas 
that you would be spending some of your money on in terms of 
research in order to find out how policies that you either do 
have or don't have are affecting the future of our province. 
 
Now when we talked about the problems over at Moose Jaw, 
you told us that you weren't really spending any money over 
there. Yet I do note though that we have in the Labour 
estimates, Labour Relations Board, that you pay to sit and to 
talk about trade union problems and employers' and employees' 
problems and you spend something like 446 thousands of 
dollars on that area alone, just trying to mediate and resolve  



March 13, 1995 

 
835 

issues. 
 
Now, Minister, having spent all of that kind of money resolving 
problems, wouldn't it also be fair to say that some of your 
money should be spent researching to find out if there's ways of 
stopping problems from happening to begin with? And I want 
to allude to you for a minute the regulations process that your 
government has gone into with regards to setting up policy in 
this province. You did it through The Labour Standards Act and 
you did it through The Occupational Health and Safety Acts 
and you did it also in the Workers' Compensation area. 
 
And all of these areas . . . Now you have brought in legislation 
and you used the process of regulations, after the fact when the 
House is not sitting, to actually in fact develop the policies that 
are in effect in our province. 
 
You also did that same process in the Crown tendering area just 
lately. You used a sort of through the back door approach of 
developing a policy that everybody in this province knew that 
you were going to come in with. Nobody would of course, in 
the government, admit it, because you didn't really want the 
press to ever catch on to the fact you were doing it. You tried to 
slip it through the back door. 
 
The truth of the matter is though that this greatly affects the 
labour force in our province, it greatly affects the playing-field 
for business in our province, and it should certainly be under 
your jurisdiction in your department to do some research and do 
some studying on how this kind of an approach to the labour 
force and labour questions will affect the economy of our 
province in the future. 
 
So have you done any studies to determine, Minister, what 
exactly the new payroll tax of 21 cents per hour for each 
employer in the Crown sector for tendering, how much will that 
cost the province? And how badly will that put us out of sync 
with the rest of our neighbours, like Manitoba and Alberta? 
And what are the numbers of people that will be coming in to 
take jobs away from Saskatchewan people as a result of this 
policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The policy, Mr. Chairman, is under the 
purview of the Crown Investments Corporation. The Crown 
Investments committee or the Crown Corporations Committee 
is the place where you would ask those questions. I have no 
ultimate responsibility for answering those questions or 
developing that particular policy. And I would draw to the 
member's attention that the accurate place and the proper place 
to put those questions is to the minister in charge of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
again you're going to try to duck this issue because you know 
how important it is to the province, and you also know how 
terrible it puts our business people in a position to be 
competitive. 
 
The truth of the matter is that if the former minister, now the  

Minister of Justice, had an opportunity to deal with this issue, 
he probably would have dealt with it in a forthright, out-front 
manner. He would have assumed the responsibility as the 
Minister of Labour and he would have said yes, it is our 
responsibility to talk about the needs of labour; it is our 
responsibility to talk about the needs of the workers of this 
province and how they will be treated. And he would have told 
you and me that there is no question whatsoever that the work 
force in Saskatchewan, if put on an unlevel playing-field, would 
certainly affect the Department of Labour. 
 
And if in fact another minister of a different Crown brought in a 
policy that was going to adversely affect the entire province and 
it had to do with labour, he would have jumped right on this. 
And he would have gave us a forthright answer and told us that 
he was going to go to work right away and use some of his 
budget to research this problem and to find out exactly what the 
effects will be on the labour force. 
 
Because quite truthfully, Minister, what we have here is a 
situation where every Crown contract from now on will have an 
additional cost of 21 cents per hour for every employee-hour 
worked. That cost is not a cost that is deducted from the wages, 
Mr. Chairman, of the employee — not deducted from the 
wages. This is paid by the employer over and above all of the 
wages, all of the collective bargaining process agreements that 
include every other cost involved in hiring a person for a Crown 
corporation project. This 21 cents is an additional cost on top of 
everything else that the employer must pay with regards to an 
employee's hour worked. 
 
That makes it a payroll tax because it is an additional tax on the 
payroll that has no deduction from the employees, no deduction 
whatsoever off of any other portion of the monies that has to be 
paid. It is an added outright 21 cents an hour increase in the 
cost of doing business in Saskatchewan. 
 
That cost of doing business, Minister, is going to greatly affect 
the ability of workers in this province to be able to be 
employed. Therefore it falls under your jurisdiction, as the 
minister in charge of and responsible for Labour because if it 
affects labourers, that makes it your business. 
 
The workers of this province are going to suffer as a result of 
this, Minister. And of course the business people are going to 
suffer. And the integrity and reputation of Saskatchewan to be a 
place where you can do business on a fair playing-field is 
definitely going to be hindered, and it's definitely going to be 
downgraded. 
 
There's no question in my mind whatsoever that you're going to 
find people who employ folks to do work in the Crown sector 
are no longer going to attempt to tender in that process. They're 
going to pass that by because they don't want to qualify for the 
other rules that go along with this particular 21 cents. Some of 
the other regulations are that you have to have 75 per cent of 
your workers unionized. 
 
If that's a fact, some companies will say, if I take a Crown  



March 13, 1995 

 
836 

corporation job and if I live up to that expectation of bringing in 
75 per cent of the people into a union process and have them 
become unionized workers, then when I no longer am working 
on that Crown corporation project and I go out to take on a 
private sector tender, I will have those workers now all certified 
and working for the union. And if I want them to work on the 
next project, they will already be unionized. 
 
My new employer in the private sector may say, I don't 
particularly like that because you now have additional costs. He 
might also find that he's not able to tender in the private sector 
because he has the additional costs of unionized workers, and 
therefore he may not be able to compete in the free-market 
process of tendering. And what's going to happen, Minister, of 
course that some people then won't tender on the Crown 
project. 
 
If they don't tender automatically, the less people you have 
tendering, the more chance you have that the bids will be 
higher, even higher than they would have been before. Now 
they automatically have to be 21 cents per hour for the project 
higher for all of the numbers of hours of all the employees 
involved. There has to be that escalation of cost built into it. 
 
Who would pay that, Minister? What has your research shown 
in this term of who would pay for that 21 cents per employer 
for every hour that they work on the Crown corporation 
contracts in this new process that has been announced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — That's not a question that's appropriately 
placed to the Department of Labour. I tried to answer during the 
last question of the hon. member that this falls under the 
purview of the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Obviously the member from Maple Creek has done some in-
depth analysis. I'm wondering if maybe you could table the in-
depth analysis that you have to make all these allegations 
against what we think will be something very positive, that you 
turn into a complete negative. Maybe you should be tabling 
your studies that you've done. If you don't want to do that, save 
your questions for the appropriate time for the Crown 
Corporations Committee and ask the minister in charge those 
very specific questions you have. 
 
We're here today to answer questions that come under the 
purview of the Department of Labour, sir. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, on 
one hand you say I should go to CIC. On the other hand, you 
say I should table some information so that you can deal with it. 
I don't know if you're flip or flop today, but the truth of the 
matter is that this issue is of great importance to the Department 
of Labour. 
 
If you truly represent the labour force of the province — and I 
think that's what the Minister of Labour is supposed to be doing 
— you would want to take an opportunity to spend some of 
your budget to defend the interests of workers in this province. 
And you obviously are not doing that. People want to know if  

this 21 cents . . . who's going to pay for it? People want to know 
where it's going to go. 
 
The truth of the matter is that I do have an article here that 
would be very interesting, I think, to everybody, but I don't 
really think it needs to be necessarily tabled because it is public 
property already, from the Leader-Post here in Regina: "NDP's 
Fair Wage Policy certainly isn't." That's the headline. 
 
You've no doubt seen that, sir. But because you seem to not 
know what's going on with this issue and want us to table some 
opinions and some thoughts with regards to this, I will quote 
from it a little bit for you so that you can get your mind around 
the importance that your department should take in this matter 
in defending the needs of fair play for the workers of this 
province which you are not doing. What you're doing is making 
a very strong union base in this province to fight the next 
election for you and your party. You're not defending the 
interests of workers. 
 
And it says and I'm going to quote a little bit of this: 
 
 When is a Fair Wage Policy not a fair wage policy? 
 
 When it's (an) . . . NDP government's Fair Wage Policy, 

which is anything but. 
 
Now the rhetoric goes on about how you are not, in your 
government, telling the whole story. And you don't need to hear 
that again, but it does go on to say that: 
 
 Accordingly, the government says (that a) . . . new 

Crown construction tendering agreement ensures "a fair 
tendering (policy) . . . for Crown construction work." 

 
 The government also says (that) the new five-year 

agreement ensures "work is awarded to the lowest-
qualified bidder." 

 
 And, they say, the agreement provides a "level playing 

field" by allowing non-union contractors to bid and non-
union workers to work on government projects. In 
reality, the Fair Wage Policy is fair only to unionized 
contractors and tradesmen. It's patently unfair to 
everyone else, including non-unionized contractors and 
tradesmen who represent the majority of the 
construction industry in this province. 

 
Now that's a quote from a Mr. Bruce Johnstone, Minister. And 
the truth of the matter is that when we researched a little bit on 
the things that Mr. Johnstone had alluded to and the things that 
your government have alluded to, we found that 80 per cent of 
the present contractors in this province are not unionized and do 
not fall into this category. And if they don't fall into this 
category and everything has to be changed upside down and 
turned over, then it must be an important issue for your 
department. It has to be something that the Minister of Labour 
would take a hard look at. Simply by trying to dodge the issue 
or escape answering the questions of the issue by saying that  



March 13, 1995 

 
837 

this is the CIC that's responsible is simply not fair to the 
workers of this province. 
 
Now CIC of course is a ministry within the Crown that has tried 
to slip this policy in through the back door so that the Minister 
of Labour wouldn't be caught with yet another egg on his face 
after he did all of the other regulatory changes that we're going 
to talk about before we finish with this department. 
 
But when you made all the changes to the occupational health 
and safety, the Workers' Compensation Board program and to 
the legislation on labour relations and also the labour standards 
issues and you let all of those regulations come in through the 
back door when the legislature wasn't sitting, now I find of 
course ironic that CIC would slip this policy through the back 
door and try to take the heat off the Labour minister. 
 
Well, Minister, we're not letting you off of the stove; you are 
squarely on it, and the heat is on. And we're going to demand 
that you take responsibility for the labour force of this province 
and answer the questions as to what is going to happen to our 
labourers as a result of these kinds of policies. 
 
Now in order for you to understand fully what other people 
think of you, I think it's fair that I quote a little more of this 
article because it says it better than any words than I could ever 
use myself. Now it goes on to say: 
 
 It does this by forcing all contractors, including non-

union ones, to pay union scale when bidding on 
construction projects of more than $50,000 in urban 
areas and more than $150,000 in rural areas. 

 
 Aside from (the increase in) the cost of government 

projects, the fair wage policy requires contractors to hire 
union tradesmen almost exclusively. 

 
Now how, Minister, can that be a benefit to the workers of this 
province and how can that keep them on a fair level playing 
field? 
 
 The rules (it goes on) require that three out of four 

employees hired must be union members and that the 
non-union contractors must collect union dues from all 
employees, whether union or non-union. 

 
A couple of questions arise out of that, Mr. Minister. How is 
that fair to the workers that are non-unionized to have to pay 
union dues? How is that fair, Minister? Could you explain that 
to us. Tell the world; what is fair about non-union workers 
having to pay union dues in Saskatchewan? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — That's an issue that will come up under 
the Crown Corporations Committee. What the member is 
referring to is the Crown construction tendering policy. And the 
details of that are not contained within the Department of 
Labour. It's not within my purview of responsibilities as  

Minister of Labour within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the minister is charge of the Crown Investments 
Corporation will be very happy to answer those kinds of 
detailed questions at the appropriate place and at the 
appropriate time. The appropriate place is when the Crown 
Corporations Committee is meeting, and at that time you'll have 
every opportunity to get detailed analysis of those questions 
which you asked today. 
 
As I understand this policy, just very briefly, it's not much 
different than policies that have been used in many places 
across Canada in other jurisdictions. And I would ask the 
member to quit preaching this doom and gloom about things 
that other people view as being positive for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The most negative thing that happens in Saskatchewan is what 
the Conservative opposition says about positive, proactive 
issues that are helping our province, not only in the terms of 
working men and women in Saskatchewan, but also in terms of 
our provincial economy as a whole. 
 
And I think the only thing that's important to me right now in 
trying to get across to the member that you are asking the wrong 
questions, although they are very important, in the wrong place 
at the wrong time. I think that you were likely born 100 years 
too late; you would have made an excellent snake-oil salesman 
in a former life. And I'd like you to try to focus on what it is that 
we're doing here today. We're here today for the estimates of the 
Department of Labour. I'd be happy to answer any questions 
that are the responsibility of myself as the minister in charge of 
those particular areas of responsibility or within the mandate of 
the department that my officials can answer here today. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
it's rather ironic again that here you are now trying to pass the 
buck to the Crown Corporations Committee meeting so that you 
won't have to answer the questions that relate to your 
department. 
 
It is a plain, simple fact, Mr. Chairman, that the minister is the 
minister in charge of Labour, in charge of the Labour 
department. What is the Labour department supposed to do in 
the province of Saskatchewan? It is supposed to take care of the 
problems of labour, labourers, people who work for a living. 
That's what the minister is supposed to be doing . . . is taking 
care of the problems of the labour force. 
 
Here we have a tremendous issue of importance to all labourers, 
where a very large segment of the labour force in this province 
is now being forced to pay union dues even though they're not 
members of a union. What are you going to do about that, 
Minister? That's not right, and that's not fair. And you as the 
minister in charge of Labour should be the minister for labour, 
not in charge of. 
 
You should be defending the labourers of this province. You  



March 13, 1995 

 
838 

should be coming out strongly against this kind of proposal in 
the Crown sector because it is bound to spread like a cancer 
throughout our society, and it is bound to end up being in the 
private sector and all other segments of our labour force. If you 
don't stop it here and now, it'll spread through the entire 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you have got to do is stand up and take 
responsibility for your ministry. Stand up in this House and say 
what you're for or against or explain your policies and the 
policy of this government and show the people of 
Saskatchewan that you're right so that you can defend what 
you're doing . . . because you can't do that. I don't believe that 
you can. It's not fair and it's not right. You are charging 25 per 
cent of the people working in the Crown tendering process 
union dues when they're not members of the union. That, Mr. 
Minister, is wrong. And you ought to defend these people and 
not be sitting there trying to duck under the guise that the wrong 
department is being asked the wrong kind of questions. The 
truth of the matter is that these are your questions; these are 
your responsibility. 
 
The Crown Corporations Committee meetings are not the place 
that these questions should be asked exclusively although we 
can further go into them in that area. The truth of the matter is 
that this is your portfolio. This is your responsibility, and you're 
the one who has to answer to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Keep giving people the run-around here. Continue to say, I'm 
not going to answer the question. Believe me, the people from 
the business community are watching your actions today, and if 
they aren't watching we'll see to it that they hear about it. 
 
So we'll give you another try because this man, Mr. Johnstone 
who wrote these articles, made some excellent points. And it's 
important that you have an opportunity to respond on the record 
to what these people are accusing you of doing. It is important, 
Minister, even though you say things that they don't agree with. 
But I will go on. I want to quote just a little more of this, Mr. 
Chairman, so that the minister will know exactly what we're 
talking about. I quote: 
 
 The agreement also sets up a fund, which skims off 21 

cents an hour of employees' wages (union or non-
union), to "create, support and promote programs to 
continually enhance the unionized construction 
product". 

 
What this gobbledegook means is anybody's guess, but it 
sounds better than a union slush fund, which is probably closer 
to the truth. 
 
Minister, is that a fact in defending the labourers of this 
province? Are you going to sit in your seat as the Minister of 
Labour and justify and allow someone in the Crown sector, 
somebody in CIC, to perpetrate onto the people of this province 
a policy that creates a union slush fund, as called and alluded to 
by the people of the press? 
 

Are you going to sit there and say that this is not your 
responsibility to defend your department and your government? 
Are you going to sit there and say that people can make these 
kinds of observations, and you have no argument in favour of 
what you're doing? 
 
Minister, I think you're not only letting down the people in the 
labour force; you're letting down your Premier and your 
government. Obviously you must have some kind of an 
argument that would justify what you're doing in these areas. 
Surely you must have some kind of a plan put into place, with 
all of the monies that you've spent on research and 
development, and all of the money that you've spent on doing 
programs of legislation for labour standards and for the Labour 
Relations Board. 
 
You've spent all of this money . . . of the taxpayers' dollars, and 
you must have a plan. You must have some kind of explanation 
for what is going on and the long-term effects of these policies 
that are going to happen in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Surely you're not going to let people from the press and the rest 
of the world go on to say things, as I will quote a little further 
here, without some kind of a rebuttal, without some kind of a 
plan. It goes on, and I quote: 
 
 Of course, (the) government spin doctors say (that) 

other jurisdictions have fair wage policies for taxpayer-
funded capital projects, including the federal 
government. 

 
 What they don't say is that (the) federal fair wage 

policies don't use union scale as (a) . . . minimum wage 
rate, but use an average rate of comparable projects in 
(the) . . . area. 

 
Now, Minister, isn't that just a little bit far off from what you've 
been suggesting here today? There is nothing, nothing fair 
about what you are doing. There's nothing fair about the 
policies and the programs that you are putting into place. 
 
We have got here, very simply, Mr. Chairman, a payroll tax that 
has been placed on everybody that works for Crown 
corporations — a payroll tax, nothing more, nothing less. 
 
It wouldn't even be so bad if that money, Mr. Chairman, went 
into general revenue so that the Minister of Labour could share 
that money with the rest of the government expenditures and 
take his share to do the research and to put his programs into 
place. But that money doesn't go into general funds; it goes into 
a slush fund for the union bosses. What do the union bosses 
need a slush fund for? Minister, obviously all they need it for is 
to fight an election for you at a time when you're getting close 
to one. 
 
You've also got a plan here to build and enhance the union 
movement. You're going to have 75 per cent of the people 
working on these projects by necessity of a regulation, not even 
by necessity of a debated legislation in this Assembly, but by a 
regulation brought in by the minister in charge of CIC. You're  



March 13, 1995 

 
839 

going to force 75 per cent of the people that are working on 
these projects to be unionized. That, Mr. Minister, is not fair, 
and you should be defending the workers of this province 
because they are not going to get the jobs. 
 
We can show you how the union hall process works, just in 
case you haven't been keeping track of it. Obviously you could 
go down to the union hall and find out. But the reality is that as 
soon as you're short of a few technical people in a certain area, 
within the framework of this tendering policy that you have set 
up, as soon as you're short of tradesmen, what's going to 
happen? 
 
They're going to go to Alberta and Manitoba. In your own union 
hall here in Regina, they're going to be bringing in workers 
from the other provinces to do the work of Saskatchewan 
people. You are forcing them to displace those people because 
in rural communities most of the people that work for the 
Crown projects are not unionized, and they will not get 
unionized in time to get registered with your union halls in 
order to qualify for these tendering programs. 
 
And so what's going to happen? You're going to run out of 
tradesmen that are unionized, and you're going to have to find 
that you've some in Alberta and some in Manitoba that are 
registered with the union halls here, and they're going to get the 
jobs, and they're going to get priority, and the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to end up with zilch. 
 
And that's not right, and this is your department, sir. In spite of 
everything you've said about this policy, it is the workers of 
Saskatchewan that fall under your department that are going to 
be hurt by this very policy that you are putting into place. 
 
You are not helping the labourers of this province. You are 
hurting the labourers of this province, and I am challenging you 
to do your job and stand up for the workers of this province and 
strike down this onerous type of regulation that has been 
brought in through the back door by the minister in charge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — This government, Mr. Chairman, has 
done nothing by the back door. If it was done by the back door 
and hidden away, certainly with the intellect of members like 
the one opposite just speaking . . . would have never have found 
it. The test of this government in this ministry is to be honest, to 
be fair, and to be accurate with working people. 
 
Again, you don't stand up to any of those tests. You are 
deceiving people by the statements you make in this House. 
You are inaccurate in the information that you give. You preach 
doom and gloom upon this province. You purport to support 
working men and women. And you and your party would like 
nothing better than the cut the legs out from all organized 
labour and all working men and women in this province. 
 
The very first Bill of Bills introduced in this legislature was 
introduced by your leader, the member from Kindersley, to 
move first reading of a Bill to repeal The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 1994 and The Trade Union Act, 1994. What  

protection can you pretend to put out for working men and 
women in this province? Absolutely none. Be honest. I hope 
you don't lose your scales as you leave the Assembly here this 
afternoon. 
 
This government stands for working men and women. We stand 
for an environment in which working men and women can be 
involved in the business climate of this province with the 
private sector or the public sector for the good of the province 
as a whole. 
 
Our economy is doing well. Our working men and women are 
doing well. Most people acknowledge in the province that we're 
doing well, except the doomers and gloomers that sit in the 
opposition party of this legislature. 
 
When are you going to come clean with the people of this 
province to support the good will of this province throughout 
this land, throughout other jurisdictions, for the good things that 
we've done, for the messes that we've cleaned up from the 
previous administration that was here, that almost put into total 
decay the province of Saskatchewan? Ran up deficits, ran down 
people, ran down businesses, made underhanded deals behind 
closed doors that nobody knew about, writing contracts on the 
backs of cigarette packages — that was the modus operandi for 
the administration that you now represent in the opposition 
benches. 
 
And don't worry about slush funds being built up for election 
time  of which there are none  because when it comes to 
election time, you should be more worried about struggling for 
the very existence of the party that you and your leader ran into 
the position they are today, one that will have a great deal of 
difficulty even getting their deposits back after the next 
election, let alone electing any seats in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


