






















































February 27, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 27, 1995 

 

 
475 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to establish the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation and to enact a Consequential 

Amendment 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would now 
like to introduce a second reading of The Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation Act. 
 
In speaking to this Bill I would like to touch on several 
important points. The Transportation Partnerships Corporation 
Act is being created to enable the Department of Highways and 
Transportation to pursue opportunities with federal and local 
governments and the private sector in funding transportation 
improvements to infrastructure and services. This Act will 
provide $20 million to the corporation from the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I announced the creation of the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation and 20 million initial funding on 
November 15, 1994. We pledged at that time 50 million over 
the next five years to a federal-provincial highways 
improvement program. At that time the corporation was 
intended to allow the province to participate in the national 
highways program, but on December 15, 1994 the federal 
government decided not to participate in such a program. Our 
focus now is for the corporation to partner with private industry 
and other governments on transportation infrastructure projects. 
 
Industry has been telling us they will participate in 
transportation upgrading and they have shown strong support 
for a mechanism to allow more private sector involvement in 
projects where there is a benefit to both parties. 
 
Highlights of this Act are, subject to the approval of Treasury 
Board, the corporation may enter into agreements to construct, 
maintain or operate public improvements. The Act specifically 
prohibits the corporation from hiring employees and requires all 
administrative functions and expenses to be borne by 
Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation. The consequential 
amendment to The Highways and Transportation Act is also 
included in this Act to provide the department with the ability 
to issue permits in consideration of a party meeting terms and 
conditions necessary for the corporation projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Transportation Partnerships Corporation will 
mean direct economic benefits to Saskatchewan with new jobs. 
Road improvements which result in transportation cost savings 
for truckers and shippers will lead to reduced consumer prices 
and increased competitiveness of Saskatchewan products. This 
program is consistent with the department's strategic goal of 
preserving the province's road network and improving safety. 
 
We create this new Crown corporation with a commitment to 
economic renewal. We hope this corporation may have benefits  

for twinning our major highways, in particular Highway No. 1 
and Highway No. 16. There may also be new partnerships 
realized with the private sector for road servicing, tourism, 
mining, forestry, and agricultural processing. We believe the 
Transportation Partnerships Corporation will pave the way to a 
new spirit of cooperation between governments and the private 
sector and to the benefit of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to move the second reading of 
this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition have 
a great number of questions dealing with this newest and latest 
Crown corporation. We think that it deserves some very close 
scrutiny because we wonder why the government thinks that 
this particular Crown is even necessary. 
 
The minister has stated that the reason this Crown was 
originally thought up and going to be put in place was to work 
in partnership with the federal government, and he himself has 
admitted that this partnership no longer exists, Mr. Speaker, that 
the federal government has dropped out of this program, that 
they aren't going to fund any of the construction that would take 
place in this province under this particular Crown. The 
government has dedicated $50 million over the next five years 
for this particular venture. How is that money now going to be 
spent? If it's simply going to be building highways in 
Saskatchewan by the provincial government, why can't that be 
done through the Department of Highways as has been done in 
the past and is currently being done? 
 
The government, the minister, has talked about cost 
competitiveness. Well, Mr. Minister, if you want to make 
transportation cost competitive in this province, you drop the 
road tax. That's how you make transportation cost competitive. 
You don't do it by forming another Crown corporation to 
siphon even more money out of the taxpayers' pockets. 
 
The minister has talked about perhaps, since the federal 
government is no longer part of this venture, that now the 
private sector would participate. That would be fine, but, Mr. 
Speaker, when the private sector participates, they're going to 
want something back for it. They're simply not going to give the 
minister their money and say, go ahead and do what you want 
with it. They're all ready doing that with their taxes, and they're 
not real happy about that. So they're not apt to give him a whole 
lot of money, Mr. Speaker, to carry on with his new Crown 
corporation. 
 
One of the reasons perhaps, Mr. Speaker, though, that the 
minister would like to see this new Crown corporation take 
place is because it's going to have a six-person board. I don't 
know what this board is going to do, Mr. Speaker, because they 
no longer have any partners to work with, but there's going to 
be a six-member board in place. So the minister is going to have 
the opportunity to appoint some partisan politicians to it.  



February 27, 1995 

 
476 

It's another patronage ring, Mr. Speaker, that's all it is — 
another little niche to put his buddies into high paying 
positions. 
 
Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the reason that this Crown corporation 
is being put into place is that it's going to operate in a similar 
manner to the one that's in our sister province to the west, in 
British Columbia under the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government there. Perhaps it's being put in place, Mr. Speaker, 
so that the government can circumvent the Department of 
Highways' own rules, its own rules about tendering out 
contracts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the Crown corporation, they don't have to follow the 
same rules as the Department of Highways does. They can give 
the contract to whomever they want and, Mr. Speaker, they 
could follow the same procedures as being carried out by the 
Minister of Health and the Department of Health in awarding it 
to union preference only. Mr. Speaker, that's another way that 
the members opposite and their friends can benefit. 
 
Now if the minister wants to tie the new Crown corporation into 
the same tendering rules as the Department of Highways, we 
would support that tendering policy, that the tenders go to the 
lowest qualified bidder, Mr. Speaker, and no one else. No 
preferential treatment — lowest qualified tender gets the job. 
And that's how it should be done, Mr. Speaker, but I would 
suspect very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that isn't going to be part of 
the legislation. 
 
What happened in British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, when they 
brought in a Crown corporation that was quite similar to this 
one . . . I'm not sure if I have the name of it here. But they have 
one that deals with their construction of highways also. And 
according to The Vancouver Board of Trade, Mr. Speaker, this 
led to an increase in labour cost of $73 million or 37.6 per cent 
on one project alone — over a one-third increase simply 
because they went with the union-only contracting. 
 
And if that happens in this province, Mr. Speaker, it's going to 
devastate the whole workforce in this province. You're either 
going to have to belong to a union, or you can leave the 
province if you want to look for work. 
 
We continue to maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the contracts 
awarded through the Highways department, and indeed 
throughout all of the government structure, must be done to the 
lowest qualified bidder. We've seen quite a growth in the 
Crown corporations in this province, Mr. Speaker, and this is 
just the latest one. We've seen a growth of the tourism Crown. 
We've seen a multiple growth of health Crowns throughout this 
province, a brand-spanking-new Gaming Commission, and 
energy conversation and development Crown, the new 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Crown, and this one. 
 
And here we have just witnessed the proud new papa displaying 
his new family member, Mr. Speaker, his new family member, 
the newest child of the NDP government's family of Crown 
corporations. This newest Crown, the transportation Crown,  

which was allocated $50 million to spend over the next five 
years, and they haven't got any projects; their partners have all 
dropped out. Originally this money was to go for the four-
laning of the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead highways. 
 
Well we would certainly encourage the minister to continue on 
with those projects, take his $50 million and build those 
highways. I'm sure my colleague from Maple Creek would 
certainly endorse that. But we're not sure what's going to 
happen now, Mr. Speaker, because the federal government has 
dropped out of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we intend to say a lot more about this and to ask a 
lot more questions. So at this time I would adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
The Chair: — I will ask the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation to introduce his officials to the members of the 
committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Chairman, next to me on my left is 
Clare Kirkland, deputy minister of Highways; to his left is 
Wanda Laliberte, manager of accounting; to my right is Bernie 
Churko, ADM (assistant deputy minister) of programs; and 
behind me is Don Metz, ADM of operations. 
 
Item 1 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's a good thing 
somebody recognized me, so that I could ask the minister some 
questions about his portfolio which is going to become ever 
increasingly more important in our province, especially with the 
federal budget announcements today, which all of you are 
aware of, has changed the Crow's Nest freight rate agreement 
and will very seriously challenge the Minister of Highways to 
be able to continue to provide a road network for our province. 
 
The implications of course are well known to the minister. And 
I'm sure, Minister, that you are now preparing in your 
department to offset the impact of this budgetary move, which 
of course will mean that we will see a big movement towards 
inland terminals being built, which is already of course under 
way in some sectors, but it will absolutely mean that that will 
happen. 
 
We are now going to see a shift in the production patterns of 
Saskatchewan's agriculture. The types of crops that will be 
grown will be greatly affected. And our transportation needs, as 
a result of the abandonment of rail lines and the freeing up of 
the costs of shipping from different sectors of our province, all  



February 27, 1995 

 
477 

will play a very important and intricate part in the need for a 
development of a highway system in order to get our goods to 
market. 
 
Having said that, Minister, we are I think agreed that in 
Saskatchewan we will see more trucking. We will see a heavier 
use of our roads. And as a result your department will become 
more and more important. Not to say that it wasn't important 
already and not to say that there wasn't enough concern before 
today with the way your department has operated and the way 
that you have and your government has allowed the highway 
system in Saskatchewan to deteriorate to the point where it's 
almost impossible to drive any place in Saskatchewan without 
taking your life in your hands because of the hazards on our 
roads which simply is the fact that there aren't any roads 
available to safely be driven on. 
 
We used to call Regina the pothole capital of Saskatchewan 
because they had heavy clay and had a hard time maintaining 
their streets. But of course now the highways of Saskatchewan 
have become the pothole capital of the world and we are here to 
challenge you to see if there's something that you might not 
consider doing to improve your image and the image of our 
province. 
 
Wherein we find people from Ontario considering that we are 
the backwoods of the world, where you wouldn't go on a 
vacation with a car because you couldn't use the roads to 
navigate your trip. That's the kind of impression that people 
outside of our province have. And there's a reason for that, 
because where there is smoke there certainly is fire, Minister. 
 
So we are interested in the Bill that you have just addressed to 
the Assembly and which my colleague from Souris-Cannington 
replied to. The reality is that we don't see a need for another 
Crown corporation. However the thing isn't all bad in my 
opinion, and I want to give some credit where credit is due. The 
attitude of trying to get people together to improve our roads is 
a good one. 
 
The idea that business might join with you and contribute is 
certainly not a new idea. We have used that idea and that 
concept in our municipality and in many municipalities in 
Saskatchewan for a number of years, especially as it relates to 
the petroleum industry. We have in fact entered into road-user 
agreements with the petroleum industry, different companies in 
the industry over the years, to improve roads out in our 
municipalities  roads that the petroleum industry would need 
in order to get to a specific area where the roads were not 
particularly well-used or particularly in good shape. 
 
And as a result of not being a high-use road or anything like 
that, they would not particularly be in good shape, so we would 
enter into an agreement to, for example, pay half and half, and 
to construct a new transportation roadway for the industry to be 
able to negotiate into that area so that they could carry out their 
exploration needs and to get their product out, of course, when 
they had struck oil or gas or whatever. 
 

So while the idea is not completely new, it is innovative for you 
to tackle it at the provincial level, and we congratulate you for 
that initiative and wish you success at it. And in fact would 
offer some suggestions of people who are already willing and 
have expressed a willingness to cooperate in such a plan. 
 
For example, out home, from Maple Creek, McCu Enterprises, 
out of Maple Creek who . . . The company is represented by one 
Doug Lloyd, who contacted me a short while ago. He indicated 
to me that he thought this was a reasonably good approach. And 
as a businessman, he said, because he's a small-business man, 
he wouldn't be able to contribute a lot, but he'd certainly like to 
offer to contribute something. And so I bring that message to 
you, Minister, that already people are willing to assist you with 
your new initiative. And so that will help you to get your costs 
down a little bit in your department and it will also help to get 
the roads built and to get this program off the ground. 
 
Now of course as I've mentioned, he's just a small-business 
man, but he's willing to start and he's willing to show the way, 
and I'm sure that you will find a lot of other willing people, 
especially in the south-west where the need for better highways 
and better road systems has become evermore apparent, 
especially with all of the deaths that we have on No. 1 Highway 
and all of the tragic accidents on those stretches of road. 
 
And of course now that we have had a boom in the land lease 
sales in that area over the past year, we are now seeing the 
results of those booming sales where all that extra money came 
into the government for your budget. And I have to throw in 
here, Minister, that I'm very disappointed that a big chunk of 
that money didn't land up in your department because that's 
where it should have been. You shouldn't have been cut back in 
the amount of money that you have to spend. You should have 
actually been increased in the money you have because the road 
system is the very key to how those land sales will end up being 
generated into money for the government because obviously 
those people have to be able to get to the job site which is the 
lease out in the country wherever they happened to have been 
bought. 
 
And that happens to be a fact that a large percentage of that 
happened in south-west Saskatchewan, and the people there are 
feeling used and abused because there is no sign anywhere that 
you, as a Minister of Highways, or your government will in fact 
use some of those monies to build those road structures into 
that area in order to develop those needed locations for the 
industry to expand and to provide the job base that this province 
so desperately needs. 
 
So, Minister, we are encouraging you to take a very real look at 
going back to your cabinet and telling them the facts of life 
here. The money that was spent by the petroleum industry that 
got your budget over target last year and will help you to 
balance your budget this coming year . . . is absolutely essential 
that you spend some of that money to provide that those people 
in those industries can in fact get to their sites where they have 
bought these leases, so that in fact the business cycle can  



February 27, 1995 

 
478 

continue and be provided for the people of Saskatchewan. If 
you don't do that, there simply won't be any development. The 
people will pack up their bags and go away. Now they won't 
leave their initial investment very easily but it does happen. 
And I can show you precedents in the area and you of course 
can go down to Energy and Mines office and check that out. 
 
Oftentimes petroleum companies simply let their leases lapse 
when they can't get cooperation out of the rest of the 
community, and the rest of the community that is so very 
important at this point and in this adventure is your department, 
Minister, because we are going to have to have some decent 
roads for those people to be able to continue with their 
businesses. 
 
Minister, we are going to ask you to answer quite a lot of 
questions tonight. Many of these questions, as you know, are 
coming from our constituents. And I think you are well aware 
of the fact that we have initiated a program which we call the 
“Mr. Premier, I want to know” questions. We have had replies, 
several hundreds and hundreds of replies. And the reality of life 
is that many of these questions returned to us are questions 
about the Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
And so while the premiss was that it's addressed to Mr. Premier, 
we obviously realize that you as the Minister of Highways 
would be the one that would get up to answer these type of 
questions. And realizing of course, that question period, we'll 
never have enough time to be able to answer all of the questions 
that we're getting in, we're going to approach the estimate 
portion of this sitting of the Assembly in such a way as to ask 
many of these questions in this format in order so that these 
people can get a direct answer from the government, albeit not 
directly from the Premier but at least from you the minister in 
charge of the department that they are interested in. 
 
So having said that, Minister, you will know then that these 
questions are coming directly from the people of the province. 
These are not questions that I've made up as a member elected. 
These are not . . . (inaudible) . . . research staff have made up. 
These are questions that have come directly from the general 
public — individual people who have concerns. 
 
And some of them may not be the classiest piece of literature 
ever written or anything like that, but the intent will certainly be 
clear to you and we would hope that you will answer these 
questions with a marked degree of seriousness, because no one 
has asked these questions in a frivolous manner. And we hope 
that you will give them very serious consideration and very, 
very honest answers so that there can be some comfort out in 
the province as to what is going on in your department and what 
people can expect from your department. 
 
The first question that I will ask of you tonight, Minister, and I 
know that you will want to preamble a bit about the things that 
I've mentioned with regards to the federal budget — the loss of 
the Crow, and all of those good things — but the first direct 
question that I would like to ask you tonight, Minister, is on 
behalf of the thousands of people who have now sent in  

petitions regarding the Highway No. 1, the thousands of people. 
And those petitions continue to come in on a daily basis, 
Minister. I want to assure you that they're by no means over 
with. 
 
But the question then will be, when will you finish twinning 
Highway No. 1 from Gull Lake to Alberta? The question is 
asked by the thousands of people who continue to send in 
petitions and ask you to finish this project. And of course we 
have several “Mr. Premier, I want to know” direct questions 
from individuals that have asked this question. And we will 
send copies, sir, of the transcript to each and every one of those 
people with regards to your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. There's quite a few questions, I believe, in his 
statements. I will try to begin with the first one which was the 
federal budget, and of course I caught most of it on television 
and I, like you, are very, very concerned for the farmers in our 
province, and for the municipalities, and indeed for the 
province's roads. There didn't seem to be much of a vision there 
for transportation. 
 
There didn't seem to be a lot of fairness to western Canadians 
and I think we got the brunt of the reductions, that's for sure. 
 
We were always asking that the Crow benefit, if in fact it had to 
be reduced, should be tied to a lower cost to producers, but this 
is not what happened. In fact, it was the Crow . . . the WGTA 
(Western Grain Transportation Act) was cut off completely for 
a one-time pay-out which equates to approximately two and a 
half to three years of the coverage of the existing freight bills 
for the farmers in our province. 
 
There's no talk about road costs and how that's going to be 
handled. There is something mentioned about a $300 million 
transition fund, but we're not sure of what that means, and so 
over the next few days we'll want to look at that to see what in 
fact it means. 
 
So we are very, very concerned. It's going to, we believe, be 
very, very devastating not only to the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan but to municipal governments. And it's going to 
be costly, we believe, to the Department of Highways as well. 
 
You did mention also Transportation Partnerships Corporation 
and I want to thank you very much for the vote of confidence. It 
is certainly a unique, innovative idea. It was of course set up to 
partnership with the federal government on a national highways 
program which would twin No. 1 and 16. We thought that for 
our $50 million committed over five years that with the federal 
government's $50 million over five years, we in fact could 
complete a lot of the twinning — in fact all of No. 1 and the 
remaining portion of 16 from North Battleford to Marshall. 
 
But of course as you know on December 15 that was turned 
down by the federal minister. On a subsequent visit to him on 
February 8, the weather in Ottawa was cold, and the answer was 
again cold. And the answer of course was no. We thought  



February 27, 1995 

 
479 

perhaps we could talk to him on a bilateral deal where in fact 
we were quite realistic with what we put forward, and we 
thought perhaps he would take one more look at that. But of 
course the answer was no. So we're not going to get any federal 
help in the twinning of No. 1 and 16. 
 
(1930) 
 
Industry — and I'm glad that you brought some names forward 
to — some people in industry that are willing to participate with 
us . . . if you could give us their names and address and phone 
numbers, we'd certainly be happy to contact them. If we're 
going to complete the twinning of No. 1 we're going to have to 
do it the Saskatchewan way, and certainly Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation will be a part of that. We will be 
seeking partnerships with the private sector, and in fact we've 
had a lot of interest shown by trucking companies. And so 
hopefully as we move forward . . . It's certainly going to slow 
the process down. But we believe that there's some possibilities 
there, and we will continue to work on those. 
 
You mentioned also the oil activity in the Maple Creek area, 
and in fact the whole province, the west side and south side, is 
booming and certainly adding to our economic recovery. I 
believe it's partly because of the good relationship this 
government has with the oil industry. We estimated or budgeted 
for $20 million worth of land sales this year, and in fact I 
believe the final count is about $202 million. So it certainly 
shows that the oil companies are comfortable working in a 
province with this kind of government, and that's very good to 
see. 
 
In fact the oil industry may very well want to be part of the 
partnerships, and that's why this idea of Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation is so important. Industries like the oil 
industry might be very interested in partnershipping with 
government in improving some of the road infrastructure. 
 
I guess that answers your number one concern, the Highway 
No. 1, in that we will work at it. We'll continue to work at it; it's 
a priority with this government. And we will use the 
partnerships corporation and hopefully some action will come 
from that soon. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister, and thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. As always we are happy that you have a commitment 
to these roads being fixed and put into better shape and double-
laned. However the comment that you made that the process is 
slowed down is one that we need to challenge here and now, 
right away. 
 
The process should in fact be escalated, speeding up. Simply by 
taking your own figures which you have just delivered to us you 
expected to get $20 million from the petroleum industry for the 
sale of leases in our province, and you got 202 million sales 
which is $182 million dollars more than you what expected to 
get. A large part of that money should be spent on the 
infrastructure of our roads in this province because it is roads 
that are the most important for this industry in order to be able  

to conduct and carry out the process of their exploration and 
development. 
 
So you've got $182 million extra and you say that the federal 
program reduced you by 50 million that you had expected that 
you won't get. Well you're not getting 50 million from the feds 
but you are already in possession of 182 million in your 
pockets, cash in the bank, that you got from the petroleum 
industry that you didn't expect to get. 
 
So there's an offsetting factor, Minister, that is obvious to 
anybody without a calculator, that you have availability to you 
of choices to be made of where money is to be spent. And 
certainly that money is available to you to do the right thing and 
to save a lot of people's lives in this province. 
 
We're not just talking about industry and business alone here, 
it's not segregated like that. The mere fact of the matter is that 
on Highway No. 1 coming out of Alberta we have got just tons 
of trucks out there that are bringing in heavy equipment and 
people to do the work in the oil patch as a result of all these 
land lease sales. That means we've got extra traffic on the roads; 
it means that it's not as safe out there. 
 
The law of averages will catch up to you if you're out on that 
road enough times. Sooner or later you're going to get hit by 
somebody, somehow, sometime, because the traffic loads have 
simply increased and escalated and a lot of that is industrial 
types of equipment which has to be there. 
 
So those people are saying to you clearly, right now, we've 
already paid the bill. You don't need to come back to us and talk 
about a joint project. They are claiming, and rightfully, they've 
already coughed up their share. They bought the leases and put 
the money in your pocket. They've made you a successful 
government in spite of yourselves and you won't even share the 
wealth with them by building them the decent roads that they 
need in order to carry out their businesses. 
 
Well, Minister, I think you have to reconsider your priorities 
here and get them straight, because these people will, after a 
while, get tired of being here if we don't treat them right. Now 
I'm not saying that they won't go along with a further extension 
of helping out to build the roads because I'm convinced that 
they will. That's the kind of people these folks are. They're 
always prepared to go the extra mile with you to get things 
done. They always did that when I was back in the municipality 
and was the reeve of the RM (rural municipality) and a 
councillor. We went to those folks and we said, we need a little 
help to keep these roads in shape because your outfits are 
wrecking them faster than what they ordinarily would have 
been. And they said, let's sit down and talk — every time, never 
an exception to that. They always said, sure, let's sit down and 
talk it over. You need a couple of thousand for this road or a 
few hundred for a culvert there, we'll help you out. Never ever 
did they volunteer to pay the 100 per cent of the bill, obviously, 
but they were always willing to pay a percentage of it and a 
share of it. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
480 

So I'm absolutely convinced that the petroleum industry, along 
with all of the other businessmen and business people in 
Saskatchewan, will willingly and gladly help you. But they 
don't want to pay more than what is a fair share, and somebody 
will have to sit down and figure out what's fair. But 
realistically, you can't expect them to bail you out 100 per cent. 
And while there will be a percentage of cooperation there, they 
have to bring to your attention the fact that you've already taken 
$182 million out of them that you have a choice to use, a lot of 
which could go to highway development and building. And 
realistically, even a small part of that would double-lane all of 
No. 1 Highway. 
 
Minister, having said that, I know that you will want to 
reconsider your answer and speed up and escalate the process 
and direct some of these choice dollars that you have. Now of 
course we're not too sure if they're going to be called dollars or 
loonies because today we heard that we're going to have the $2 
bill destroyed and we're going to have a $2 coin. So maybe they 
won't be loonies any more; it might be they will be call the $2 
coin a tune and then we'll have looney tune money or maybe we 
will even have doubloons again. I'm not sure just how they're 
going to do that. But it doesn't really matter what kind of looney 
tunes or the doubloons you use; what we want is to get these 
roads built. 
 
So, Minister, I'm going to carry on with my next question out of 
the “Mr. Premier” selection and list that we have, so that you 
can answer the questions that I've related back to you here along 
with one of the ones from one of our constituents out in the 
country. 
 
And this question, Mr. Minister, comes from Bill MacPherson 
from Wapella, because we want to switch over to the other side 
of the province for a minute. Now it goes, and I quote: I want to 
know when the Government of Saskatchewan is going to 
double-lane the No. 1 Highway from Indian Head to the 
Manitoba border. If you cannot afford to do this, then you 
should put in 5-kilometre passing lanes between every town or 
village. 
 
We have travelled to other provinces and the United States and 
drive on their highways. In comparison, our No. 1 is an 
embarrassment. End of quote. 
 
And that, Minister, is the question from Mr. Bill MacPherson. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you very much, to the 
member from Maple Creek. I guess in a perfect world we could 
certainly use some of that oil revenue to help us with our 
highways. But of course we have to pay something called 
interest on our debt. And I think you're quite well aware that 
when you left government, or your party left government, there 
was about a $15 billion debt, and the interest on that debt is 
about $850 million. That of course would twin Gull Lake to the 
Alberta border 25 times every year, from now till when the debt 
was paid off. 
 
Now I hope that when these people write to you that you  

explain that to them because it's very unfair that, you know, you 
tell them well yes, they should be twinning that highway. But 
do you tell them some of the reasons why we can't? I don't think 
you're doing that, and I think perhaps you should be. What you 
might want to do is give me those names of those people that 
write to you, and we could maybe send them an answer and tell 
them the whole story. And I wish you would do that. 
 
Speaking of passing lanes, I'm sure . . . a passing lane is about 
the same cost as to put in a new section of highway. So if there 
is no hope for twinning the highway, then certainly we could 
look at passing lanes. But we still have hope, and we still want 
to do it the Saskatchewan way, and we're hoping through the 
Transportation Partnerships Corporation that there will be some 
opportunity to do that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
I'm not just too sure what a Saskatchewan way is anymore. I 
don't really honestly think we have what the old-timers in this 
province have come to mind as a Saskatchewan way, where 
choices were made and cooperation was the bottom line on 
getting the job done. I'm not too sure that many of the old-
timers in our province would be very happy with the comments 
that you make about the cost of doing business in the real 
world. I don't know very many people that don't have some kind 
of a mortgage or a debt in their lifetime that they have to pay 
off. 
 
And the fact that you allude to having to pay some interest on 
some debt as a part of doing business and say that that is the 
reason that you have to make bad choices and not build roads is 
pure bunk. People won't swallow that anymore. They're just not 
going to accept it because everybody's got a loan some place 
sometime; they learn to work that out. 
 
It's just a plain, bad business manager that can't manage his debt 
and also get the job done. The only alternative to that is 
bankruptcy. Are you saying that you're going to declare 
bankruptcy because you're such bad business managers, you 
don't know how to manage the fundamental finances of our 
province? My friend, people are not going to allow you to get 
off with that kind of an excuse because that's all it is, is an 
excuse. You've got a piece of money that you're having to spend 
as a cost of doing business, and it's only a fraction of the money 
that you have, choices to spend. 
 
You took in $202 million last year out of oil leases, over and 
above $182 million of what you had budgeted — $182 million 
over what you had budgeted. That was already with the debt 
payments already in. And then you tell us that you're such hot 
businessmen here that you've got $850 million worth of interest 
to pay out. 
 
And you came up with those figures three years ago at twelve 
and a half to 14 per cent interest and you run off to New York 
and make a hot deal to pay people 11 per cent interest. And you 
offered the Saskatchewan people 8 per cent if they will borrow 
their money to you. And that's the kind of double standards,  



February 27, 1995 

 
481 

and that's the kind of shoddy business practices that this 
government shows to the people of Saskatchewan. And then 
they sit here and whine about the fact that they have to pay 
interest and don't have money left to do the things that have to 
be done in the province. And it just doesn't add up, Minister, 
and it just doesn't wash. 
 
Now I think we'd better get back to the basic, fundamental 
truths that you do have 500-and-some millions of dollars in 
order to spend and keep this province running. And I think 
you'd better use some of it to build some of these highways. 
And I don't think that the constituent from Wapella who asked 
the question is going to be very happy with your answer, but 
you did answer it and he did ask it, and we are going to carry 
on. 
 
I want to do more of these because I also want to get back to 
talking to you about the Crow loss to our farmers and to our 
rural communities, and the kinds of monies and things that are 
going to have to be spent on short lines — and whether or not 
you're going to expropriate some land, and that sort of thing, 
from the railroad companies in order to keep these short lines 
going. But I want to get these other questions finished before 
we get into all of that, Minister. 
 
So I have another question, and this question, Mr. Chairman, 
comes from Tanya Doerksen, I will pronounce it. But I will 
spell it so that people in Hansard will know how it's spelled. 
And it's D-o-e-r-k-s-e-n, from Caronport. Doerksen. Okay. I 
want to know, it says, and I quote, Mr. Chairman: I want to 
know if there is any way for the roads in Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba could be improved. I know Saskatchewan has much 
better roads than Manitoba but maybe some extra pavement on 
the shoulders might help. I have many friends and even I myself 
have been in accidents involving gravel. This concern also 
includes country gravel roads. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member for Maple 
Creek again. I guess I want to let you know that, even though 
we're paying that $850 million of interest each and every year 
on the debt that you created, we did balance the budget. In fact, 
we balanced the budget in three years, not in the planned four 
years. I think that's good management, and so I want you to 
consider that when you really believe that we aren't good 
managers. I think you're maybe misleading the people. 
 
We've done that and yet tonight we had a Liberal government 
lowering the boom on Saskatchewan farmers without a plan and 
without a vision and without even a balanced budget 
somewhere in the future. 
 
Perhaps you could tell Tanya that one of the reasons our roads . 
. . .and I think she's right, I think our roads are reasonable here. 
Certainly there has to be improvements in certain areas, but she 
does note that they are better than Manitoba, and I think you 
should note that and I appreciate that comment. 
 
But one of the reasons we, you know, just haven't got that much 
money to spend on roads or health care or education or  

whatever is . . . here is maybe an example. The Saskatchewan 
Liquor Board reported that it paid expenses totalling 16,162 for 
ministers to attend Big Valley Jamboree. The expenses included 
passes to the grounds, food, trailer rental, alcohol, and 
miscellaneous expenses. Now that's one of the reasons we have 
that debt; one of the reasons we have the big interest bill. And 
so I hope when these people ask you these questions, that you 
tell them the truth. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have absolutely, 
absolutely no comprehension whatsoever what the whole truth 
would mean to you. Obviously a couple of things come to 
mind. 
 
You want to allude to the interest that you'd have to pay on the 
debt some more. Well the reality, Minister, is that anybody 
could have balanced a budget in a windfall financial era that we 
have come into, with $202 million coming in from the 
petroleum industry alone that you didn't expect, and knocking 
$188 million out of the farmers' pockets that you owed to them 
and you took it away from them. You broke their contracts. You 
had a choice to spend that money where it should have been 
spent so that it could have circulated through our economy; you 
chose not to do that. I'll tell you quite honestly, my friend, I 
believe any kid in grade 10 could have balanced the budget of 
this province this year given the conditions that you have to 
work under. 
 
As for what you're talking about in the past — and how the 
Craven valley got mixed up into this debate I have absolutely no 
idea. I've never been to Craven in my life to any kind of a 
function, and I certainly don't know who you take there or what 
kind of fun and parties you dwell with or get involved in. But I 
hope you had a fun time. I'm sure it's a great thing to be 
involved with. 
 
But the reality is that we're talking about estimates and choices 
that you have to make, choices that you're making that are bad, 
and choices that you are making that are wrong. You make the 
choice to borrow money in this province at high interest rates 
outside of the province without offering competitive and even 
maybe more attractive rates to our own people. We are well-
known to be the best savers in the world. We have billions of 
dollars in the banks in this province that people have put away 
for their old age, and many of those dollars should have been 
invested in Saskatchewan savings bonds. But no, rather than to 
offer eight and a half or 9 per cent to keep some more of that 
money coming in, and offering another issue in, say, January 
instead of only doing it in July — rather than do that, you run 
off to Germany or to New York or to some place else, and you 
borrow money with the exchange rates on the dollars and all the 
other things, and the banking fees and everything adding up and 
piling up. And all you end up with is higher interest rates paid 
to some bunch of foreigners, rather than to offer that 
opportunity to your own people at home. 
 
That I don't call good business, Minister, and the fact that you  



February 27, 1995 

 
482 

have got to pay that kind of money in interest is only because 
you're not good business managers and you don't know how to 
manage your debt properly. And you probably will break the 
province and we likely will end up declaring bankruptcy. 
 
However, now having said that, I want to get you focused on 
the reality of what we're doing here, which is to ask the 
individual questions that individual constituents out in the 
province, taxpayers, are asking. They want direct answers to 
their question, and I think that they would appreciate some 
straight answers with all of the political rhetoric sort of cut out 
of it, and maybe get down to the real brass tacks of what's going 
on with their highways. 
 
Minister, I have another question, and this question comes from 
Ron Schmidt. He's also from Wapella. Now his question, and I 
will quote him, Minister, is: from the Manitoba border west 
there have been numerous head-on collisions and other fatal 
accidents. How much longer do we wait before this portion of 
the Trans-Canada is twinned or double-laned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. I appreciate the question. I guess you could tell Mr. 
Schmidt that one fatality in Saskatchewan is too many, as far as 
we're concerned. And we urge that until the highways can be 
fixed, that people drive with extreme caution. And that highway 
certainly is a priority for us, No. 1 and No. 16. We believe that 
they should be twinned as soon as the province can afford them. 
And perhaps with the partnerships corporation in place we will 
move ahead. 
 
It would have been nice to be able to be partners with the 
federal government in that twinning project, but we were not 
able to do that. The federal budget apparently is going to be 
giving some money to eastern Canada for their highways there, 
but I don't think we were that fortunate in the West, so we'll 
have to do it the Saskatchewan way. We will have to be very 
concerned with safety features of Highways No. 1 and 16. We 
will have to work through the Transportation Partnerships 
Council . . . Partnerships Corporation, to seek partnerships with 
the private sector and continue our way forward on those 
twinning projects. 
 
You did mention that we were lucky to balance our budget, and 
I notice that's come from your side many times, that we were 
lucky. I know the Liberal leader said that we were lucky and I 
guess if that's what you believe, that's what you believe. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you for your answer, Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, I want the minister to understand that we are very 
sympathetic to the fact that you have a bigger problem as a 
result of the federal government backing out on the deal. And 
we don't condone what they did and we don't say that it's good 
or that we're happy about it at all. In fact we are very 
sympathetic to the fact that it will be more difficult for you and 
for the people of Saskatchewan. However it is a reality and we 
have to deal with it. 
 
I wish it weren't so. I wish we could change it. I wish we could  

reverse time and history and have the federal government 
rethink their position. And maybe in some magical way that 
might still happen and we could encourage it. But I quite 
honestly don't think it's going to happen; I think the partnership 
is dead. I think it's had the funeral, and it's over with, so we 
have to get on with life and figure out a way to get these roads 
fixed, as you say, by ourselves. So let's do it and let's get 
together on some ideas. 
 
Now the reality also is of course that you're going to face some 
more problems as a result of this federal government and the 
things that they're doing. The kind of downloading that they are 
doing in the future is somehow very reminiscent of some other 
things we've heard of lately. But you will have noted, as I did, 
that in the federal budget, that next year and the year after, 
they're already predicting what they're going to do to us in terms 
of downloading and in terms of cancelling out our balances of 
payments and . . . transfer payments is the word I'm looking for. 
 
The transfer payments are going to be reduced by millions and 
millions and millions of dollars and not going to be just 
chicken-feed, and it's going to be some serious problems. And 
we don't condone that and we don't applaud that. In fact we 
sympathize with you again, and we certainly would encourage 
the federal government to change their mind in those ideas. 
 
Unfortunately though, they got that idea from you people and 
the way that you downloaded on the local municipalities and 
the urban municipalities in our province. For the last three years 
all you've done is increase taxes, increase utility rates, and 
download the costs of doing business onto every sector in our 
local communities so that we've ended up with higher taxation 
for all of the local business people. 
 
Minister, that is one of the reasons why we can't get cooperation 
to rebuild our highways and our roads from the local 
communities, because you've taxed them to death in order to 
keep on with just the day-to-day business of living. So there's 
not much money left out there. Because you talk about a 
partnership; we could have maybe included our urban 
municipalities and rural municipalities in that partnership if you 
had left them one thin dime left to work with. 
 
But you have downloaded on them so heavily that they are 
stretched to the limit and have to increase taxes at the local 
level to the point where now they are being looked at as being 
the bad guys, and we are seeing the repercussions of that in 
local elections where people are regularly losing their seats on 
local councils because they have to make these very difficult 
decisions that you have forced upon them. 
 
Minister, I want to ask you a question. It comes from Howard 
— and I'm going to spell this one as well — Eyjen from Swift 
Current. Now he says, and I quote: I want to know why the 
government are not twinning the No. 1 Highway. We pay plenty 
of taxes on our gas to update our roads if the gas tax is used for 
that purpose. Also I want to know why the speed limit has not 
been raised to 110 kilometres per hour on twinned  



February 27, 1995 

 
483 

highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek for his question. I guess he explains us at fault in regards 
to downloading. I want to tell him a little story about the 
WGTA. I know we're criticizing the Liberal government today 
for disbanding it, but I want you to tell me who started the cuts 
to the WGTA. If I'm not mistaken, it was the Progressive 
Conservative government in Ottawa. So maybe that's where the 
Liberal government got this idea from; I'm not sure. They 
haven't got many ideas of their own, so perhaps they picked that 
up from you. 
 
Again I want to say that No. 1 is a priority; we believe that it 
needs to be twinned, and we will continue to work at that. To 
increase the speed limit now, I don't think would be fair. I think 
you have pointed out to me concerns, and by raising the speed 
limit we believe that there would be possibly more concerns. So 
I don't believe that raising the speed limit at this time would be 
the answer. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 
where the roads are still in half-decent shape, I think Mr. 
Eyjen's idea that speed limits would be a good idea to be 
increased could still be done. Obviously you do have to repair 
the roads and keep them into good shape if you're going to 
allow people to travel a little faster. 
 
But the reality is that when you come out of Alberta, you have 
110 on all of the double-laned roads there. And people are 
travelling those kinds of speeds, and they get kind of used to it, 
especially when they're coming back to Saskatchewan to go to 
Manitoba or wherever, and it's awfully hard for them to realize 
that they have to slow down. And often many of them are 
finding themselves getting into trouble with our police force. 
 
So I think he makes a good point that we ought to upgrade our 
roads, fix them up, and make them good enough so that people 
can have the same expectation from one province to the other. 
And if they have that same expectation and the roads are in 
good shape, there's no reason why we can't have a speed limit 
that compares to what is happening and being used in Alberta. 
 
I want to ask you another question, Mr. Minister. This questions 
comes from Troy Duncan, from Spy Hill, and I quote. I want to 
know if there will be any more money put into the infrastructure 
program. My father and two brothers have a small family road 
construction business and we are wondering if we will be able 
to keep small-town firms alive in Saskatchewan. The coming 
year does not sound bad, but what about the future? It doesn't 
look good. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. As you are aware, the infrastructure program was a 
federal-provincial program which involved a sharing between 
three levels of government — municipal, provincial, and 
federal. 
 
The infrastructure money was used on other projects rather than  

roads, of course anticipating a national highways program. The 
national highways program was cancelled and it's not going to 
move ahead, so we will continue to work with our new 
Transportation Partnerships Corporation to attempt to create 
partnerships with the private sector, other levels of government, 
and in fact improve our infrastructure in that manner. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, you had 
an infrastructure program with the federal government, you've 
just said. How much money was in that program? And what 
gave you the idea that you could spend all of that on other 
projects and not spend any of it on highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member for his 
question. As I stated earlier, the program was set in a system 
that would have been one-third, one-third, one-third — federal, 
provincial, municipal. And of course when you have highways, 
you do not have the municipal portion or that partnership to 
contribute, so you have just a 50/50 sharing. And more work 
could be done under a one-third, one-third, one-third type of 
arrangement, and so that's what was selected. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Okay. Thank you, Minister. I'm sure that Troy 
will be more happy to have had that more complete answer in 
order to understand why the original program wasn't applied to 
the construction of highways which would have greatly 
improved his family's business outlook. 
 
I have the next question here, Minister, which is a question that 
comes from Frank E. Brown, from Dalmeny. I quote. I would 
like to see the twinning of Highway No. 16 to The Battlefords 
finished. Of course you can't work in the winter, but this project 
has already taken two years. When can we expect this project 
completed? End of quote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. We were very pleased to be able to start the twinning 
project in Saskatchewan. A few years ago we signed a deal with 
the federal government, the strategic highway improvement 
program. It involved $70 million; $35 million went to the 
twinning of No. 16 between Saskatoon and North Battleford, 
and that's scheduled for completion in 1998. 
 
Because of our budget restraints, because of interest on our 
debt, we can only go so much, little by little. And that's our plan 
on No 16. Saskatoon to North Battleford will be twinned over a 
five-year period and in fact this year I believe, with our 
contributions and the federal contribution, we will be spending 
approximately $12 million. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Minister, I'm sure that the question that 
Frank asks would have liked to have heard an answer that 
things would be speeded up a little quicker than that. In fact the 
thought crossed my mind, I hope that you get some of these 
projects done in my lifetime so that I can at least drive on the 
roads and see that they happen. 
 
But at the same time I also think that well, at least you've given 
a commitment. You've got money there and you're starting to  



February 27, 1995 

 
484 

build the roads and you're getting something set up in stages 
and increments where you actually have set some dates of 
starting and some dates of hopeful completion. Whereas in 
southern Saskatchewan we've heard no commitment whatsoever 
from you to start anything at any time ever. 
 
So how about if you tell us tonight that you're going to plan a 
date to start twinning the No. 1 Highway in Saskatchewan. And 
I don't care which piece you pick. Try the Manitoba border or 
the Alberta border or anything in between. Just give us 
something to hope for. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well certainly to the member from 
Maple Creek I would like to say we're going to start tomorrow. 
But of course he knows I cannot do that. We're paying interest 
on our debt yet, and we will continue to do that for a while till 
we get the debt down. 
 
We did commit $20 million under the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation in hope that we could get some 
funding from the federal government. But as you are aware, that 
was refused and there is no money coming from the federal 
government. 
 
So we will work with the Transportation Partnerships 
Corporation, private sector companies, to attempt to get some 
partnership in order to begin the twinning of No. 1. When that's 
accomplished, certainly we will be starting on that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Now, Minister, it's a good thing that we've 
got so many other roads in this province to talk about because if 
that was the only one we were going to talk about, we might 
just as well adjourn and go home because we're not gaining 
anything anyway. 
 
But obviously we do have a lot of other things that need to be 
talked about. So we'll leave that for a few minutes while you 
think it over and get through your head the reality that this road 
is more important than just quickly sloughing it off with some 
glib comment about how you're going to pay off some interest 
first, and not make choices of the $5.2 billion that you have to 
spend along with the extra revenue that you took out of the oil 
industry in the past year — not to mention the money that you 
kept away from the farmers that you owed to them and still do 
owe. 
 
And of course the government may still be found guilty in court 
of having to pay that. And we actually hope that that happens; 
$188 million is owed to the Saskatchewan farmers from this 
government, and I sincerely hope that the courts find in favour 
of those farmers and that you are found wanting next year of 
not being able to balance your budget because you have to pay 
what you owe to those people. 
 
I have a question, Mr. Chairman, that comes from Tracey 
Fekete from Martensville. I want to know why — and I'm 
quoting now — I want to know why we seem to have the worst  

roads in all of Canada. Both the highways and the city roads 
need to be either rebuilt or repaved. In the interest of safety I 
would first like to see the twinning projects finished, especially 
the death trap No. 16 Yellowhead Highway. I believe it would 
increase tourism in Saskatchewan as well because I for one love 
to drive to Alberta, and maybe we could make a two-way street 
for Alberta residents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek for this question, and I would ask that you pass on to 
Tracey that in fact the road between Martensville and Saskatoon 
is on the five-year plan under the strategic highway 
improvement program where it's a 50/50 cost sharing between 
the province and the federal government. That piece of highway 
is scheduled for twinning in 1996-97. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — And we certainly understand the concern 
of Tracey, and that's a very busy piece of highway, especially 
with the economy of the province picking up as it has in the last 
few years. A lot of people living just outside of Saskatoon, 
working in Saskatoon, have to drive that piece of highway, and 
certainly it needs to be twinned, and we are working on that. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, it 
was good to see that you perked up when we started talking 
about the roads up North. It seems like this government has a 
lot more interest in what goes on up North than any place else 
in this province, especially in terms of spending this new-found 
prosperity that we hear now in the last couple of sentences. 
 
Now just a few minutes ago we were flat bust and had debts 
and deficits to pay and interest so high that we couldn't afford 
anything. But now all of a sudden we find that there is some 
new-found prosperity starting to show up and we're happy that 
the minister, even this quickly tonight, is starting to recognize 
that we have some money to spend and that it's a matter of 
choices, not a matter of not having money to spend. 
 
And these choices of course are the important thing for you to 
understand, Minister. And as the Minister of Highways very 
important that you take it to your cabinet that your department 
is as important as any other department and that you can't suffer 
any more cuts in your department at the expense of 
Saskatchewan people losing their lives on roads that aren't 
properly repaired or rebuilt. 
 
So, Minister, you take that message fully and squarely back 
from the people of Saskatchewan and you can be assured that 
99 per cent of them are going to support you when you go to 
your cabinet and demand to have your share of the money to 
spend in order to keep the infrastructure of our roads in a safe 
condition. 
 
I have another question for you, Minister. This question comes 
from Michael R. Zich from Churchbridge. I quote: what do you 
intend to do about the secondary road between No. 15, between  



February 27, 1995 

 
485 

No. 16 to No. 10, and No. 80 north of Cambridge to Kamsack 
in particular. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member from 
Maple Creek for acknowledging good management. A little 
while ago he was on poor management but he's now back on to 
good management. 
 
I want to tell him too that, you know, now that we have a 
balanced budget we'll be able to reassess some of the projects 
we haven't been able to go ahead with in the past and maybe 
we'll be able to move forward in the future. If you could get me 
that information on Michael's note, certainly I would be pleased 
to either give you that information and/or send it direct to 
Michael. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, perhaps 
you didn't understand the question, so I'll just repeat it so you 
get the right highway numbers and your officials will then be 
able to assist you with the answer. 
 
The question goes: what do you intend to do about the 
secondary roadways between No. 15, between No. 16 to No. 
10, and No. 80 north of Churchbridge to Kamsack, in 
particular. 
 
Now if you'll just get your map out there and take a look, I'm 
sure that you will find No. 15; No. 16 to No. 10; and No. 80 
north of Churchbridge. And on the way to Kamsack there you 
will probably find the stretch of road that this individual would 
like you to talk about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I would like some clarification, Mr. 
Chairman. Would that be Highway No. 80? Is that the one 
you're talking about? Pardon? Okay, thank you. 
 
The Chair: — If the minister wishes to respond to that, then 
we'll go to the minister, and then back to the member from 
Maple Creek. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is not 
clear. We will have to get some clarification from Michael. 
Would you like to do that or would you like us to do that? All 
right, thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the light 
does work. Certainly, Minister, you go right ahead and contact 
these folks and find out exactly what their problem is. I think 
that's exactly what you should do in your department, is check 
out specifically what folks want, and make sure you know and 
understand what their problem is so that you can take care of it. 
 
We of course in the official opposition will do a follow-up and 
contact the folks to make sure that you have done your job, and 
that you understand exactly what it is that they want. And as we 
go into these estimates in the days to come, we will revisit this 
question to make sure that it has been properly addressed and 
that the answer has been come up with; and that you have made 
it known to these people exactly that you do understand their  

problem and what you intend on doing about it. 
 
So we'll go on, Mr. Chairman, to the next question in this batch 
here. This question now comes from Gordon Magowan from 
Central Butte, and I quote. When we expect . . . I'll correct that, 
Mr. Chairman. When can we expect to see the Highway 42 
highway rebuilt? It is one of the worst roads in Saskatchewan, 
and, I might add, one of the busiest. Our elevators have been 
shut down and this road is used by many semi’s. Unfortunately 
there will be some severe accidents due to this road needing 
updating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member for his 
question. Highway No. 42, as you know, we had a very wet year 
last year and a very, very cold winter the year before this winter. 
And the highway I guess had the fortune or misfortune, I don't 
know how you want to say that, but because of grain 
movements . . . the slowness of grain movements that year, 
there was a trucking program put in by the Canadian Wheat 
Board on movements to grain to AgPro, and this resulted in a 
great deal of damage to Highway No. 42. 
 
We did spend some $80,000 on maintenance in the last year, 
and we will continue to maintain that highway as best we can 
until in fact we can afford to redo it. There is some . . . There 
perhaps is some opportunity through the Transportation 
Partnerships Corporation in regards to some improvement to 
this roadway. 
 
But I think the example here of Highway 42 may illustrate what 
might happen with the federal announcement today, the Liberal 
government announcement of the elimination of the WGTA. 
Certainly it probably will also mean rail line abandonment, 
certainly longer truck hauls, and this is one example of what the 
province I guess has to look forward to as far as road damage 
and longer hauls. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, we're glad to hear that you're aware 
of the problems. And, Mr. Chairman, we want the minister to 
know that this individual seems to think that those problems are 
not totally cured. And so we would hope that you will revisit 
this highway and do some extended examination of the road 
and plan to do whatever work is necessary in order to make it 
safe for the people that have to use it. And certainly your 
comments about the fact that this can be used as an example of 
what we're looking forward to in the future are dead-on 
accurate. We are, without doubt, heading into an era of more 
trucking and more highway use with the announcements made 
in the federal budget today. Saskatchewan people can get 
prepared to have to have more roads built and repaired. 
 
Most certainly there is some option there though, Minister, and 
that would be in the area of your provincial government looking 
at expropriating the roadbeds that are abandoned — and I'm 
talking about railroad beds. The railroad branch lines that are 
abandoned, if you expropriate them and sell them to private 
operators to run these new, short-line railroad vehicles on, can 
certainly be an option that might help our roads. And I'm 
challenging you to take a real, strong, hard look at that today  



February 27, 1995 

 
486 

and to get right to work at convincing your cabinet to 
expropriate those railroad lines so that in fact that alternative 
can be made available to Saskatchewan people. 
 
It is estimated by one person earlier today that I talked to that 
the cost of moving grain on rail on the short lines, even though 
they are with an innovated approach, would be one-tenth of 
what it would cost you to maintain the roads to keep semi-
trailers and trucks moving that same amount and volume of 
grains and goods on our highways. So take that into 
consideration and do what needs to be done there, Minister. 
 
My question now is a question that comes from Mr. I. 
Szedbauski from Porcupine Plain. The question is: when will 
we ever get improvements on Highway No. 23? This road has 
not been worked on for 30 years. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. I hope he realizes No. 23 is in the North and it's actually 
in my constituency. And certainly it needs improvements as 
well, but it has held up very well. Our Highways crews have 
done an exceptional job on this piece of road; 23 was built in 
the mid-1960s, and it carries a lot of truck traffic especially 
grain and wood products. There's a lot of lumbering and 
logging that goes on in that particular area. So I would certainly 
advise the — and I didn't get the name clear — the fellow from 
Porcupine Plain, that indeed 23 is also a priority. And as monies 
become available we'll certainly consider that highway as well. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Szedbauski probably would advise you that — seeing as how 
this road does in fact go through your constituency — it might 
be a wise thing to take a little extra look at that one if you plan 
on coming back here after the next election. I'm not sure that I 
drove on that particular stretch of road or not when I was up 
North last, but I believe we probably did, because I was up 
through quite a few of those roads over the past year. 
 
And realistically, although you have spent a lot of money in the 
area of building highways north of Saskatoon, that particular 
area that we're talking about with Highway 23, isn't one of those 
lucky recipients. And the people up North do need to have 
decent and safe roads to drive on as well. So I would encourage 
you take a look at this, Minister. And in spite of the fact that it 
may seem that you are using your preferential treatment as the 
minister to get your home town road built, realistically you'd 
better take a look at that as well as any other one, because 
people in your area do want and need a safe road to drive on. 
 
The next question we have, Minister, is a question that comes 
from Jackie Rosenau, from Saskatoon. And I'll quote the 
question: I want to know why every time an issue needs some 
action, the first thing the government does is have a meeting to 
discuss how much tax they should surcharge the people to 
handle it. Where are the tax monies to maintain and build new  

roads in this province going? Because it isn't going towards 
improving the roads and highways. This is in spite of the fact 
that we pay maybe 10 cents a litre more than Alberta for gas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you very much to the member 
from Maple Creek. I guess maybe you don't understand, but 
what we do in Saskatchewan is the tax monies come in and it 
goes into general revenue, and then it gets paid out of general 
revenue. And I guess it's a good thing to do it that way 
 
We spend about $1.5 million in health care, and we spend about 
another billion dollars in education, so that's about $2.5 billion. 
And certainly our E&H (education and health) tax collects only 
about $800 million. So you can see that if you had dedicated 
taxes like them, and would have to get all E&H tax to pay for 
health and education, it would be almost impossible. 
 
But I want to say that Saskatchewan spends 50 per cent of what 
it takes in in fuel tax on its roads. If you compare that to the 
federal government, who spends approximately 10 per cent of 
what it takes in in fuel tax on roads. And now with another 1.5 
cents a litre based on today's budget, you can see where the 
fairness is. 
 
We certainly spend as much as we can, as much as our finances 
will allow us, on roads in the province. And we certainly have 
to do more with less. But I believe that we're doing a very 
capable job. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, I 
guess we could argue all night about your last statement 
because many people don't believe that you are doing a good 
enough job of making a choice of where you spend the dollars 
that you have available. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the concept of a general revenue is 
very deceiving to the people of Saskatchewan. For example, 
you've used the E&H tax, which stands for education and 
health. Why do you call it the education and health tax if you 
don't use it for education and health? 
 
Why do you put a tax on gasoline and call it a road tax if you 
don't use it on roads? The whole concept of putting all of the 
money into a general fund and not putting those dollars that are 
targeted for projects into those projects is a deceit that is 
unacceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. It means that you 
can make choices to deliver political necessity ahead of the 
realities of what money was collected for. And that is unfair, 
and it's dishonest to the people that pay the taxes of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm happy that you spend 50 per cent of your gas tax on roads. I 
don't know why you wouldn't spend it all on the roads because 
without roads you don't need to sell very much gasoline to cars. 
 
But the reality is that the federal government, as you have 
pointed out, have been very negligent in their responsibility to 
western Canada. Those of us who have been around for a while 
know very well that we've always taken the short end in  



February 27, 1995 

 
487 

western Canada as compared to eastern Canada when it comes 
to our Confederation. And there are many people that talk to me 
on the phone and wonder aloud when you make this kind of 
comparison, Minister, they wonder aloud why it is that Quebec 
talks about separating when it's the West that takes the short 
end of the stick all the time. But that's another issue totally, and 
of course we're not going to get into that tonight. 
 
But we could talk about that for the rest of the day for sure. And 
of course we could talk about what contingency plans we have 
if Quebec in fact does separate. And we haven't done that in 
this House yet, and certainly we'd better approach that because 
that reality may face us very soon as well. And I think we'll get 
on to that as the days ahead come around. And I hope that you 
and your government are prepared to tackle that problem in a 
very real way because it could be a very big reality facing us in 
a short time. 
 
But we do have to talk, Minister, about these highways and 
what you plan on doing about spending the money that you 
have available and where you're planning to make your 
priorities. 
 
So I have a question here that comes from Mrs. Magdalena 
Leaker — I guess it is — from Moose Jaw: I want to know why 
the roads, streets, and highways are kept in such poor condition, 
as compared to those of neighbouring provinces. Also why was 
the snow not cleared from roads immediately? The Prairies 
should be prepared. In Vancouver, B.C. (British Columbia), 
where it rarely snows, crews are cleaning within three to four 
hours — not a month. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you for the question to the 
member from Maple Creek. I want to go back I guess to one 
question earlier where you mentioned Highway 23 and that 
certainly I should give it priority because of my re-election. 
Well we don't do it that way on this side of the House. We have 
a . . . you know we do it by priority; we don't do it by politics. 
And I want to stress that. So certainly 23 will get, you know, 
attention when we can afford it, but it will not move up in front 
of another highway that has more priority, and I want to tell you 
that. 
 
In regards to putting the fuel tax into general revenue, the Gass 
Commission suggested that all monies go into the General 
Revenue Fund. Don Gass is a very well-respected accountant. 
And I'm not sure where you would put the income tax under 
your scenario. But I think it's not a great wonder to me why 
your government had so much trouble in managing the finances 
of the province with that statement. 
 
But I want to tell you to tell Mrs. Leaker that we have a great 
snow removal program in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
spend $15 million a year. Some of our workers get up at 5 
o'clock in the morning. When there's a storm, they work all 
weekend. In fact this week there was a snow storm in the north-
east. The highway crews were out taking the snow off the 
highways, and I think they do a real good job. 
 

And so I would . . . you know, if she has a specific area of 
concern, certainly she should write to us and we can take a look 
at it. But generally I think our snow removal program is top 
notch. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to talk a 
little bit, Mr. Minister, about the method of payment and the 
Crow. First of all, it doesn't surprise me at all that the federal 
Department of Transport have initiated this kind of action. I 
guess one of the things that we have to talk about is how the 
Department of Highways and Transportation is going to 
respond to that. And I don't mean verbally, but how are you 
going to respond in a couple of ways. And I'd like to have you 
respond to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan in 
some respect on rail line abandonment. And we'll start with 
that. 
 
How are you going to respond to the impact of transportation 
subsidies from Canada being cut off for payment of freight on 
the grain that moves to port? I would like to have you give us, 
the people of the province, some idea of what you're expecting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member from 
Morse. Certainly, as you mentioned, the federal budget has 
given us some concern. As I mentioned earlier, our feeling was 
that any cuts to the Crow benefit should follow some 
efficiencies that would actually lower the cost to producers. 
 
In regards to rail line abandonment, we are not clear as to what 
the federal government is going to do at this point in time. The 
method of payment was one piece of the puzzle, and it is sort of 
there now, but the rest of the puzzle is still open. And it would 
have been nice, I think, if they would have had the courtesy of 
giving us everything at once so we could have taken a look at 
all the implications. 
 
Some of the concerns now, I guess, is that rail line 
abandonment and the effect on the roadways, it could be very 
severe. We would hope that the federal government would face 
the responsibility, if in fact they're going on this deregulated 
route, that there is in fact competition; should there be short 
lines. If there are short lines, in that case, what protection do 
short lines need to enable them to survive? 
 
So all of these things we're very concerned about. We're hoping 
that the federal government will take a responsible look at, in 
regards to not just the transfer of costs as an efficiency, the 
transfer of costs from the railway to the producer to the 
municipality or to the Department of Highways, but real 
efficiencies, which is actually lower cost to the producer. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, you mentioned short 
lines; that's one of the areas that probably has to be addressed. 
And because we have quite a bit of information about them 
already, is this a feasible alternative in your mind to the 
abandonment of rail lines that would be south of the main line 
CP (Canadian Pacific) in the southern part of the province, and 
then between the main line of CP and the main line of CN 
(Canadian National) as it traditionally would go out to Prince  



February 27, 1995 

 
488 

Rupert and to Churchill. 
 
Have you got any ideas about what the impact would be if some 
of those railroads would be turned into short lines? Have you 
got any idea of what that would do or whether it's even 
feasible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
. . . from Morse, pardon me. Certainly in some instances we 
believe that there is some possibilities for short lines; that short 
lines could very well be feasible. But we need the proper 
structure there to make them feasible. And we are hoping that 
the federal government will recognize the need. 
 
It's not only a need, I think, for lower cost to the producer, but 
there is also a need for municipalities; I mean the cost of roads. 
There's perhaps some cost savings to the Department of 
Highways if in fact the branch line can stay open with a short 
line. But there has to be proper regulations and proper 
protection for short lines. If in fact that were there, there could 
be some millions of dollars in savings to the producer. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Martens: — The method of payment was miles times 
tonnage . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the member from 
Humboldt wants to get into a major discussion here. We can do 
that at some other point in time, but the minister and I would 
like to have a discussion about this and you can tell him your 
opinion later on. 
 
The transportation costs of grain through the method of 
payment have traditionally been the volume times the distance. 
And what has caused a major concern and a conflict between 
the livestock industry and the grain industry is that that was 
higher. And normal transportation costs, the higher the volume 
of grain, or the higher the volume of whatever you're 
transporting, generally the lower the rate. But in the method of 
payment, it was all the same rate, so then they got this high cost 
that certain lines had versus another. 
 
This whole process has taken a long time to develop. But I 
recall being reeve of a municipality in the middle '70s; that one 
of the first rail lines that was abandoned was in my 
municipality, or in our municipality; and there were people who 
could testify — and they did this to the Hall Commission — 
they testified to the fact that the cost of moving 40 or 50 rail 
cars on a 20-mile stretch would cost less than 90 gallons of 
fuel. And to deliver that volume of grain the same distance with 
a truck would be a horrendous amount of fuel in comparison. 
 
And so what we have today is we have a cost that comes . . . 
And we're going to start costing this out from the farm gate to 
the delivery point on a main line somewhere in Saskatchewan. 
And that cost is going to be different than the cost that there 
was before as it relates to the method of payment. 
 
And so what we have to deal with today, Mr. Minister, is how 
you're going to explain this to the federal government. We've  

just had a lot of discussion as it related to infrastructure and the 
cost it is to the people of Saskatchewan when infrastructure in 
this area is not included as a part of the total infrastructure, 
when we build sewer and things like that, rather than building 
highways. 
 
So my question to you is: how many of these rail lines are going 
to be abandoned, and will you have an opportunity . . . surely 
you've discussed this with the Minister of Transport; surely you 
will have an opportunity to define or design this new 
Saskatchewan. It's going to be done the Saskatchewan way, as 
you've talked about earlier. But what in your mind is that 
Saskatchewan way of getting it done? Because we are going to 
be doing things different. In this fall already, we're going to be 
doing things different. 
 
And that is also involving a whole lot of other dynamics. One 
is, are variable rates going to be in across Saskatchewan? Are 
variable rates in transportation costs going to be in? And if they 
aren't in, are you going to be one of the people that tells the 
Minister of Transport in how to set up a regulatory body that is 
going to give us some maximum benefit for the cost offset with 
losing the method of payment. 
 
Are you going to do that or have you already done it? And if 
you haven't done it, why haven't you done it, and if you have 
done it, will you give us that information here in this House 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 
How many rail lines are going to be abandoned? That's a good 
question. I guess it depends what the federal government does. 
Some of the indication we get, not from the minister but just 
through papers, discussion papers, is that, you know, there's 
some talk of allowing, for instance, all the light steel lines to be 
abandoned immediately, of taking away the protection to the 
year 2000 on all the rest of the branch lines. So it could be 
massive. It may not be that massive but there is about 600 
miles, if my memory is correct, of light steel lines, and probably 
3,000 miles of branch lines in total. 
 
I guess we have to work with the communities. We have to 
work with the producers to look at alternatives in their 
particular areas to find out if in fact there are some options and 
some alternatives. But what the federal government has to do is 
allow the producers, allow the communities, allow the 
municipalities, the tools to look at efficiencies. If they do not 
give us those tools, the devastation of today's announcement 
will be that much worse. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well give me a definition of what you think 
those tools need to be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I want to thank the member from Morse 
for his question. There are several things that of course would 
have to be discussed. But I would hope that the federal 
government would put out a proposal, and that's exactly what I 
said earlier about a puzzle. You know we continually ask that 
efficiencies be provided to the producer prior to any cuts to the  



February 27, 1995 

 
489 

WGTA. But of course that didn't happen. Now we have the cut 
to the WGTA; in fact it's gone altogether. 
 
And now a $300 million transition fund toward efficiency. We 
do not know what that means. Certainly I believe the producers, 
the communities, whether it be looking at a short-line 
alternative or whether it be looking at some kind of a trucking 
program, those things will be decided I think through 
consultation. We as a department can help facilitate that 
discussion and take that discussion from the producer to the 
federal level. But I wouldn't want to tell you what a producer 
might tell me tonight. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, this isn't the first time this 
has been discussed. As a matter of fact, I've had your officials 
in my communities visiting about these same kinds of issues for 
the last 13 or 14 years. So it isn't a new subject that we need to 
have a new invention here about what the dynamics were. 
 
I didn't want to have a detail for one specific community. 
Overall, you should have some of the things put together that 
are your proposals or that you think should be things that are 
dealt with on a very forthright manner in order to benefit these 
communities. 
 
Give us a strategy that you're going to use in implementing this 
program. Because if you don't — which is typical of what this 
whole thing is — we have had for the last 25 to 30 years a 
discussion on the method of payment and how it should be 
paid. And how it should be paid, it was absolutely not supposed 
to go to the producer; it was always supposed to go to the 
railways. 
 
And I had a producer tell me on Saturday — he said — 
probably the Sask Wheat Pool is the biggest culprit in this; we 
always talked about how it should be paid, and we should have 
been talking about what should be paid. And now we have 
nothing left. 
 
And that's the biggest reason why we're here today, is we need 
to start to talk about how it's going to be done, so that what is 
being paid is going to be equitable across the province. 
 
Do you have any idea of what you're going to be suggesting to 
the Minister of Transport in relation to how this is going to be 
done in a community like Riverhurst, or in a community like 
Kelvington, or communities like Vanguard, or any of these 
communities in the South, or whether it's in the North? 
 
Do you have any idea how these are going to be done? And if 
not, what proposals are you giving to the federal government 
that gives them some options that will lead in a way that is 
going to be benefit for you and for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 
As you know, decisions with the airport policy, this policy, 
everything has been unilateral. I think we have to know the 
rules. In fact short lines might not be an alternative. It depends 
on what the rules are that the federal government sets out for us.  

And certainly, you know, it would be very disturbing if that 
wasn't an option, but that could in fact be what happens. 
 
We will continue to consult with producers, with communities, 
with municipalities, in fact with SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), and attempt to have the 
federal government come out with their suggestions, come out 
with their rules. They've got to come out with some kind of a 
proposal before we know where we sit, and that's the strategy 
that we're taking. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well that's what happened when the two 
spinsters were talking to each other too. We'll wait and see what 
happens, and they never went out and initiated any kind of 
discussion in order to increase the benefit of their options. And 
now we're standing here as a spinster, 75 years of age and older, 
in the Crow business and we have a problem, Mr. Minister, 
because you haven't defined to the federal minister what it is 
you expect out of him. 
 
And I want to know, so the people of Saskatchewan can know, 
what do you expect that the Minister of Transport is going to 
deliver for you and for the people of this province? That's what 
I want to know, and I think we have a right to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 
And I think we've made it very clear to the federal government 
time after time after time that we want a system that is the 
lowest possible cost to the producer. I mean not a transfer of 
cost from railways to producers. We want what's best for the 
producer. How can he get his grain from farm gate to ship 
efficiently and at the least cost to him. We've said that time and 
time and time again and we will continue to do that. 
 
You asked me a while ago on who should receive the $1.6 
billion. Well I can't answer that. Maybe the Minister of 
Agriculture would be better to answer. I have no comment on 
that. But I want to say that it's important for us in transportation 
that we try and protect and facilitate our producers to survive in 
what has happened today. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well when we go to the Minister of 
Agriculture and ask these same questions, then he says that's the 
responsibility of the Department of Transport. Why don't you 
ask him the question. We've been through this once or twice 
already and we don't get any answers. And that's what the 
problem is. 
 
What are you going to do to those people in those 
communities? Give me about half of dozen different kinds of 
options that you're going to give to the federal government in 
this discussion. We're past the stage of wait and see. Because by 
August 1, we're into some serious changes in this whole 
business — very, very serious changes. And if the federal 
government are going to take the control of abandonment off, 
then what are we going to do? Are all of those railways 
immediately abandoned, and then what are you going to do with 
the short lines? 



February 27, 1995 

 
490 

We have to have some idea in this province what our options 
are. You're not giving us any. And the people of the province, I 
think you owe that to them to give them an opportunity to even 
talk to the Minister of Transport for Canada. 
 
You need to have something out there so that the people can get 
a benefit for. What good does it do just saying, you have no 
idea what the Minister of Transport's eventually going to do, 
when it's your responsibility to regulate the highways and the 
grid roads and even the short lines. That's your responsibility. 
And you're coming here to this House and saying, well we'll 
just wait and see. 
 
You have less than six months to get this done, Mr. Minister. 
And communities are going to be asking you the question 
exactly the same way I'm asking, and they're going to be there 
by the hundreds asking you those questions. What are you 
going to give to them as options on making available the way 
that they can cost out the least cost in transportation that is 
available to them. How are you going to do that through the 
department of transport of Saskatchewan. How are you going to 
do that? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. 
You know one of the problems, I guess, with transportation in 
Canada is that in the 1800s there was a vision for a 
transportation policy or a transportation direction in Canada. 
Now what we've seen, especially in western Canada today, is 
the cutting of a program that was there to support our producers 
because of our distance to port. 
 
But we don't see the vision. We don't see what is there next. 
And that's our problem. The federal government should be 
giving us their vision of how they see the future in 
transportation. That's what we're waiting for. Then we can see 
whether our producers can fit into this, or what adjustments we 
need to that. 
 
To come up with my suggestion, Alberta to come up with 
theirs, Manitoba to come up with theirs, B.C. to come with 
theirs, no. The federal government has to come up with what 
they see as a vision and let us at that point in time decide if 
that's a fair vision for the province of Saskatchewan and 
whether we can live with that and/or does it need some 
adjustments. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well I think that the payment, as I understood 
what the federal Minister of Transport said, the payment is 
going not to be made to the transportation of grain; the payment 
is going to be made to the land and the landowner. A lump sum 
payment is going to be made to him. Now from then on he 
decides what he's going to sell, where he's going to sell it, and 
all the things involved with that. 
 
There are lots of elevators . . . I'll go back one step again. If 
variable rates come in, the transportation to the main lines is 
going to be very, very significant, because people are going to  

. . . if they've got it on the truck already, they're going to haul it 
to a main line station, and then it's going to be delivered along 
the main line at the least cost. 
 
Are you telling me that you don't even have an opinion about 
how this should be done or how this could be done, so you 
could tell the Minister of Transport for Canada how you think it 
should be done? 
 
Saskatchewan transports the majority of grain in western 
Canada, and you don't have the insight and the vision to tell the 
federal Minister of Transport, who doesn't come from western 
Canada, you don't have the ability to tell him what to do, or 
what he should do, in your opinion. And we in the province 
need to have an understanding of what you would do. I don't 
believe that you have no opinion, so give us one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. Certainly the department has opinions and works with 
the producer — or Maple Creek . . . Morse again, pardon me. 
 
One of our opinions is that short lines should get the same 
treatment as a cement elevator should get. We're very concerned 
with communities. I mean communities now with an elevator 
service, with a rail service, if that elevator disappears, what is 
going to happen to that community? If in fact the rail line 
disappears, what access to economic development does that 
community have? So all of these things are very important to 
us. 
 
We see that short lines may play a role, but it depends on the 
rules that the federal government sets down for us. And we 
hope that the rules are appropriate so that short lines will 
actually have some opportunity in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, the payment isn't going to 
be made by the government, as I understand it; the payment is 
going to be made by the farmer from now on. He's going to pay 
the $30-plus that it's going to cost. He's going to decide where 
that position is going to be for his grain to go to port. And if 
that's Saskatoon, if that's Humboldt, if it's Melfort, if it's along 
the main line in the South, then the decision is going to be made 
by the individual producer who has that grain for sale. He's 
going to move it to that main line. 
 
Now the elevator companies will go from a million bushels of 
business to zero in one year. Can you see that happening, Mr. 
Minister? Out in your part of the country where you have main 
lines and branch lines, those branch lines could go down to zero 
in 1995-96. And then what are you going to do with that 
community? It's already decided that the farmer is going to pay 
for the freight. 
 
Now the decision has to be made. Are regulations going to be 
put into place that the rates are going to be varying from 
position to position, because then the farmer is going to say, I'm 
going to haul it to the place that gives me the greatest benefit. 
And that, Mr. Minister . . . you should have some idea about  



February 27, 1995 

 
491 

where those places are in the province and how many you 
expect are going to be negatively impacted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well I guess, to the member for Morse, 
we will continue to work with producers. We'll continue to 
work with the rural municipalities and the urban municipalities 
so that the federal government — because they are responsible 
for rail legislation; certainly perhaps some days I wish it was us, 
but we're not there — that the federal government in fact gives 
the producers some options. 
 
The producers — you're right — are very progressive; they will 
look for alternatives because they have to, and they do a very 
good job of that. But the farmer needs to know or the producer 
needs to know what the rules are, what the options are. And we 
would hope that soon the federal government will give us some 
indication of what those rules might be. I mean if you look at 
rail line abandonment, for instance, I have a list of several 
communities on lines that may be abandoned. You know you 
look at Arborfield and Zenon Park and Bjorkdale and Gray and 
Esterhazy and Fulda. These are some of the places that may 
have no line at all. 
 
These communities should have some say. The producers 
should have some say as to what's going to happen. And we 
keep pushing the federal government that it should not be a 
unilateral decision, that decisions like that should be made with 
producers, with communities, with rural municipalities, so that 
they can have input, so that whatever decision is made is 
understood by all. And in fact there can be some input by 
communities, by rural municipalities, and by producers. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Mr. Minister, the decision's been made. 
The farmer is going to pay for the transportation, and he's going 
to pay it out of his pocket. Those communities you mentioned 
may not have time in the next six months to even tell anybody 
about what's going on, not even ask anybody what's going on 
because in 1995 and '96, in that crop year, there is going to be 
chaos out there. And we want to know from you if there's any 
contingency plans that you have available or that you can 
implement in these communities that would give some dynamic 
of a sense of well-being to these communities. Is there anything 
like that that you are prepared to do? 
 
I'll just use as an example. Anything south of the CPR 
(Canadian Pacific Railway) line that runs along the No. 1 
Highway, anything south of that except probably one line, is 
just about to the place where they'll be abandoned in one year. 
And then moving north of that, there is an area from the Alberta 
border at least till Regina that is going to be abandoned in the 
first year after this happens. Why, Mr. Minister? It isn't going to 
be anything that happens because you say no, we're not 
abandoning this. But there is going to be zero, zero tonnage on 
those lines because they will move that to the main line. And 
that has happened in spades last year. They moved grain from 
the AgPro terminal in Moose Jaw all the way down south over 
the border into Montana; lots of grain moved from AgPro. Lots 
of grain moved from UGG (United Grain Growers Limited) 
elevators and lots of grain moved from Pioneer elevators as  

well, into United States. That, Mr. Minister, is what's going to 
happen exactly the opposite way because it'll go to terminals 
along the main lines and then we'll have abandonment in one 
year, of those railroads. That's what's going to happen. 
 
And I'm not talking about whether the communities will 
survive, because that's a discussion all on itself. But will you 
have some way that you regulate and ask the federal minister to 
regulate that transition period so that the businesses in those 
communities don't get wiped out just like the railroad is going 
to be wiped out. What kind of information are you providing to 
the Minister of Transport about the economic impact that that 
will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse. I 
want to say again that they told us the Crow was likely to 
change, the method of payment was likely to change. When did 
we find out about it? Today. We did not know how. We did not 
know how much. We didn't know anything about it. They say 
that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'm not even in the meetings and I knew 
about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — You knew the $1.6 billion? You should 
have told us that. We certainly would have appreciated that 
information. But I would say, they say that the NTA (National 
Transportation Agency) is going to change as well, that the rail 
policy is going to change. But they don't say how, they don't say 
when. We think it's going to be by August '95, but we don't 
know that. 
 
And I guess, how do you fight your shadow? Like there's no 
vision here. They say things are going to change. They will not 
talk to the producers. They will not talk to the municipalities. 
They will not talk to the communities. They will not talk to the 
province. So certainly we have to know the rules before we 
know where we're going, and that's what we're waiting for. And 
hopefully the federal government will have the courage and tell 
us how they plan to change the NTA, and then maybe we can 
have our input at that time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I've got one question: is your government 
initiating any discussion about who will own the CN after it's 
sold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Morse 
for that question. As far as I know, the federal minister is very 
involved with the privatization, or the commercialization as he 
calls it, of the CN. I think we can have an efficient CN without 
privatization, but I think he is on that, sort of on that game track 
or on that direction. And I think he is perhaps preoccupied with 
that, so that in fact we are not dealing with the efficiencies, and 
not dealing with the changes to the NTA that we're so interested 
in. Certainly I don't know who will own it. I have no idea. And 
in fact I likely, if I was the minister, would consider other 
things rather than the privatization of the CN. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a few  



February 27, 1995 

 
492 

questions. I think that we'll start off easy on you, Mr. Minister. 
But I want to bring you back a few years to when one of the 
former ministers of the Department of Highways wanted to 
gravel the highways in Saskatchewan. Because this has actually 
come up at some RM council meetings in the last few months. 
 
In fact I have a letter here from one of the RMs in the south-
west part of the province asking if there's any plans or ongoing 
plans to continue the program that was announced back, I think 
it was 1992, to gravel the highways of the province. And just 
give me some sort of an answer as to where this is at today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well I want to thank the member from 
Shaunavon for that question. I suppose if the federal Liberal 
government decides to abandon all the rail lines in the province 
of Saskatchewan and puts the burden on municipal 
governments and on the province, who knows. But it's certainly 
not our intention at this time to turn any roads into gravel. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Back when that program was first 
announced, though, Mr. Minister, the minister of the day made 
statements that there actually is an ongoing program to revert 
certain sections of highway back to gravel and it's an ongoing 
program. Is that not the case today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — No. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well then it leads to some questions, Mr. 
Minister, that are coming up at these meetings. One of the 
questions has to do with the Highway 18 from the community 
of Robsart to Frontier. Now this stretch of highway has 
deteriorated to the point where the people in that area that live 
in and use that stretch of highway actually believe that your 
plans really never have changed, because there seems to be no 
maintenance on the highway. It's in such poor condition I've had 
three or four invites from people that live along the highway to 
come down and view it, and perhaps ask yourself to come down 
and have a look at it. 
 
What other reason then, other than perhaps letting these 
highways deteriorate to the point where you can justify 
gravelling them, what other reason can you give us why you're 
letting the highways go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well I had hoped that you were listening 
when I gave the response to the people next to you. And I'm not 
sure if you're aware, but I think when you sat on this side of the 
House you were quite aware of the interest that we have to pay 
on our debt, which is $850 million every year. Certainly it 
would be nice. We could in fact twin the Gull Lake to the 
Alberta border, we could twin that highway 25 times every year, 
every single year until the debt is paid off. And I'm not sure 
you're aware of that. 
 
But we do more with less, and we try and maintain our 
highways as best we can. Certainly we've moved in the 
direction of preservation. We have an $8 billion highway  

infrastructure in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact we have 25 per cent of all the roads in Canada; 3 per 
cent of the population to pay for them. So it's certainly . . . 
We're tested. But certainly, you know, some of it is fix and 
patch, and fix and patch, and fix and patch. But the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan understand that. They know the 
amount of roads we have. They know that we have a financial 
problem, and certainly now they understand that we're pulling 
out of that, and we're finally turning the corner, and we're in 
fact balancing the budget this year. 
 
But we'll continue to do that and maintain the roads as best we 
can, and move forward on reconstruction and that sort of thing 
as we go along. But it's slow and it's going to take time. But the 
people of Saskatchewan do understand. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well then to be more pointed, Mr. 
Minister, are there any sections of highways in the province that 
you're letting revert back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — As I mentioned earlier to the member 
from Shaunavon, that, you know, we only have so much money 
and we have a lot of highways and a lot of roads in 
Saskatchewan. And like in spring sometimes we'll have 
problems with a certain highway. It may be that that highway 
will, as we patch it and fix it, will become gravel for a time 
until we can get at it to pave it. But certainly there is no plan to 
turn highways back to gravel. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So then what you're telling me is that there 
are some highways in the province that you're letting deteriorate 
to the point where you're having to gravel them. 
 
I don't want to play a game of words here with you, Mr. 
Minister. Either you are letting the highways go back, or you 
aren't. Because if you aren't, then I would have to ask you why 
it is from the community of Cabri  I think it's Highway 37 
south to Gull Lake  you've got large sections of that highway 
that you've actually gravelled. So maybe you would want to be a 
little more clear in your answers, or you're going to spend a 
long time in the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — That's interesting. Thank you to the 
member from Shaunavon. Maybe you misunderstood, and 
maybe I didn't clarify myself enough. That's likely what it was. 
But like, if the highway in the spring deteriorates, the pavement 
will be worked up, and it will be gravel for a while, but by that 
fall normally we have it back to pavement unless there's some 
unusual circumstance of that particular piece of highway being 
too wet or some other problem like that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right. So then to be pointed, on that 
one section of highway on Highway 37 south of Cabri, you will 
be paving that section of highway when? In this upcoming 
spring or summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you for the question to the 
member from Shaunavon. That particular section, I believe, is a  



February 27, 1995 

 
493 

heavy oil haul. The department informs me that there needs to 
be a longer period of time for drying out until it stabilizes, and 
then certainly it will be capped again. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, what time frame can we 
expect that section of highway to be improved? Given the fact 
that there's so much more oil activity out in that area and if that 
in fact is harming the highway, how far do you let this thing 
deteriorate until you go in and fix it properly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon. The department informs me that they will be 
looking at it in spring and hopefully will be able to do it this 
summer. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right. So what about the highway that I 
asked earlier on from Robsart to Frontier? Now that you've let 
this section of highway deteriorate to the point where the people 
out there feel that you're actually doing your gravel program on 
their highway, can you tell me some specifics about that 
section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I would ask the member from 
Shaunavon, is there any gravel sections on that road? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I don't know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Oh, okay. So what is your . . . I would 
ask the member from Shaunavon what his question is? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well the question is quite clear because I 
think I asked it twice now. The people out in that area, the 
people that are part of that RM council, have asked if in fact 
that section of highway from Robsart to Frontier is part of the 
reversion to gravel . . . in the reversion to gravel program 
because you have let that section of highway deteriorate to the 
point where they feel it is. 
 
And I just want that answered by you. Clear it up for them. 
What do you intend to do about the highway? Are you going to 
let it deteriorate further? Are you going to fix it up? Is it getting 
beyond with just small amounts of repair — even though it 
hasn't had repair — is it getting beyond what can be handled by 
a small repair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon for the question. Because of our budgets we 
certainly have in the last while concerned ourselves I guess 
more with the high traffic areas, the areas that have had more 
accidents and more fatalities. 
 
And I note on that particular highway that the average daily 
traffic count is 50 vehicles. And if I compare that to No. 16 — 
and maybe that's a poor comparison — but the average daily 
traffic count on Highway 16, where we're doing some work in 
twinning, is 3,500 vehicles a day. 
 
So I guess I just want to let you know that we can't do all the 
highways at once. So we have a priority. And we look at traffic  

counts as one of the criteria that we look at. So when we 
compare 50 vehicles per day with other highways in the 
province — in fact I would say that would be one of the lowest 
travelled highways — maybe you'll come back to me and say 
well that's because of the condition and maybe you're right; but 
nevertheless it is 50 vehicles per day at this point in time, 50 to 
60 vehicles per day. 
 
And so, you know, we have a priority list and we only can do so 
many each year. So of course it would be, you know, it would 
be certainly lower on the list. Also condition is taken into 
account, but certainly so is traffic accidents and fatalities. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, essentially what your 
argument is is the same that the Minister of Health has given to 
rural Saskatchewan, that in fact they can't have health care 
because we don't have as many people in rural Saskatchewan as 
they have in Regina or Saskatoon. People aren't buying those 
arguments any more, Mr. Minister. 
 
In fact with the changes that are coming about in grain 
transportation, you're going to have to at some point do 
something with these rural highways. You cannot let them 
continuously deteriorate. Now do you have a plan or don't you, 
for some of these highways? We'll ask some specific ones. 
 
From Highway No. 13, from Shaunavon to Hazenmore. Now 
that's been in dire need of repair for many years. What are your 
plans for that specific section of highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon. I guess, you know, it all comes down to maybe 
economics in a sense. I mean do you spend $350,000 a 
kilometre — that's a million dollars for every 3 kilometres  
where you have very little traffic, or do you try and maintain 
what you have? 
 
And our feeling is that in an area like this, is that we continue to 
maintain and preserve that section of highway. And I think 
that's only reasonable. I think if you sat on this side of the 
House you would agree with me. And I know because you sit 
on that side of the House, you have to disagree with me. But I 
mean, if you use common sense, you have to know that you 
have to spend where the higher traffic is, the more accidents, 
and the higher fatality rates. 
 
I would love to be able to pave every highway in the province 
of Saskatchewan. I would love to go down there and pave that 
section of highway and redo it. But I can't do it right now. So I 
guess you have to understand and explain to the people that we 
will work and preserve it and keep it to the best of our ability. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But when I 
sit down, hopefully you'll answer the question that I had asked 
previously. What are you going to do with the section of 
highway from Shaunavon to Hazenmore, Highway 13? I'll give 
you a few others so these people can know what to expect from 
you and your department. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
494 

I believe it's Highway 19 from Mankota to Kincaid, is another 
one that's . . . In fact, you know, you're letting these highways 
get to the point where it's not just that people want to abide by 
the law and wear seatbelts, they must. They would get thrown 
right out of the vehicle on some of these highways. 
 
Highway No. 37, south of Shaunavon to Climax — in fact that's 
another section of highway where they've put in a new border 
station at Climax. I don't think . . . it's not a 24-hour station at 
this point, but I think perhaps the governments have some idea 
of making that the case in some point in the future. 
 
Another one would be Highway No. 4 from Cadillac to 
Monchy. Mr. Minister, you were at a meeting in Val Marie not 
all that long ago, some months ago I guess, in regards to when 
you and your department tried to close down highway depots. 
And in fact this section of highway, you were lobbied 
extensively that night and I didn't hear you say no, we won't be 
building that highway. And I think the people, you sort of left it 
up in the air. Maybe you weren't as brave that evening as you 
will be tonight. Maybe you'd like to tell the people of these 
sections of highways exactly what you intend to do. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon. I want to say that I really enjoyed being out in Val 
Marie. I didn't get political with the people there; I was just very 
honest with them and I think they appreciated that very much. 
 
But I want to say that some of the highways I drove on in your 
constituency were quite good in comparison to some other 
highways in some other areas. And I know that they would like 
a better highway and I can understand that. So would I. And a 
lot of members here would like better roads in their particular 
area. 
 
But you have to understand that we've got 25 per cent of all the 
roads in Canada, 3 per cent of the population to pay for them. 
It's a little more difficult. 
 
But I want to say to No. 37 and No. 4, now you’re talking of 
border crossings and I can understand that. And we have to also 
consider what the United States government is looking at 
border crossings, because we wouldn't want to do a section of 
road to the border and all of a sudden find out that our 
American counterparts are doing the highway just next to it and 
they don't quite meet. 
 
So I think those kinds of things have to be coordinated. And I 
believe the federal government is working with the U.S. 
government on some of those issues and we will continue to try 
and stay in tune with the governments of Montana and the 
governments of North Dakota in regards to those crossings. 
 
But I want to say to the member from Shaunavon, you know it 
would be good to build all your highways in your constituency, 
but you have to understand that there are other roads in the  

province of Saskatchewan. You know like, I know where 
Shaunavon is and it's a fairly large constituency, but there are 
65 other constituencies in the province. So when you ask these 
questions, try and think of other people in the province. You 
know everybody has needs and so you have to share the amount 
of money that you have province wide. And you take a look at 
the traffic counts, you look at the fatalities, you look at the 
accident rates, you look at economic development, at tourism. 
You take all those kinds of things into account. We have moved 
into not adding to that $8 billion infrastructure, but more to 
preserving that infrastructure, and we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
lengthy answer. I noted that you made mention of keeping in 
constant contact with some of the bordering states, and in fact 
what they're doing with their highways approaching the borders. 
So could you give me an update as to what you have found out 
recently, as far as what the state of Montana is doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon. We're awaiting the state of Montana's planning. 
They have a situation in the United States that's a little different 
than Canada. Their federal government contributes 33 per cent 
to their national highways; our federal government here 
contributes 6 per cent. So their situation is a little different; they 
can afford a little more interstate type of highways. 
 
And so we will await the state of Montana and in fact the state 
of North Dakota too, to see what are their plans so that we 
don't, like I mentioned before, build a new highway to the 
border and then all of a sudden find out that they're intending to 
build one over here. So I think these things have to be 
coordinated. I mean I know the government . . . or the previous 
administration were used to wasting some money. Maybe you 
would like to do that, I don't know. But we're not, we don't like 
to do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, you said in the House 
that you were in constant contact with the Highway departments 
in the States. And I'm asking you in one in particular, from the 
Port of Monchy south into Montana. Now if you were correct in 
the House in saying you're fully aware of what they're doing, 
then just tell me right now, what are they doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member opposite. I 
can't tell you right offhand, but it's my understanding that they 
have not decided. They would like to, but they have not 
decided. 
 
And certainly I remember being at Val Marie and asking you to 
help me lobby the federal government for the national highways 
program, and I would like to know what you did in that regard. 
Because if we would have had more money for the national 
highways program, we could have spent more on the other 
roads. So I would like to know what you did in fact to talk to 
Mr. Young, as a Liberal, in regards to participating in the 
national highways program. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
495 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, it's no wonder the people of 
the province are so upset with your government, because you're 
not even in touch with your own department. 
 
I have a letter here — and I'll sent this over to you in a moment, 
Mr. Minister — from the rural municipality of Val Marie, No. 
17, January 25, 1995. And I'll just read you the first paragraph: 
 
 As reeve of the RM of Val Marie No. 17, I would like to 

draw to your attention several items which should be 
dealt with in the upcoming legislative sitting. 

 
 As you are aware, No. 4 Highway is a major highway 

link on the north-south route from Billings, Montana to 
Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. Phillips County has 
already committed itself to improvements to the final 
section of the Montana highway which connects with 
No. 4 at the Port of Monchy border crossing. This 
leaves the portion of highway from Monchy to Cadillac, 
Saskatchewan in dire need of upgrading. 

 
How is it that the rural municipality of Val Marie No. 17, 
knows all about what Phillips County is going to do — 
they've already committed themselves — and you and your 
department have no idea what they're going to do? 
 
Well no wonder you wouldn't go and build a road up to the 
Port of Monchy when you have no idea, because I don't 
think you've ever consulted with anyone outside the 
province as to what they intend to do with their highway 
systems. 
 
I'll send this letter over to you, Mr. Minister. But don't you 
agree that . . . or don't you now see the concern the people of 
the province have with you and your department and your 
government? You're completely out of touch. How would the 
RM of Val Marie know all about this, this highway program in 
the States, and in fact the section that they're waiting to get built 
is from Cadillac to Monchy. And then they've got good highway 
all the way from way down into the States up to Prince Albert. 
Why aren't you in touch? It makes everyone wonder why you're 
so out of touch, Mr. Minister. 
 
So what do you intend to do as Highway minister with that 
small chunk of Highway No. 4, if in fact on both ends of this 
trading route it's being upgraded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon. Now certainly what we will do is check it out with 
the state government. But as you are aware, I'm sure, a county is 
like a rural municipality. And I guess you can commit itself to a 
certain road, but it's my understanding that they need federal 
funding for this road. But we will certainly check it out. 
 
So I know they would like it, like you would like roads in your 
constituency, but I think there's another catch here. And I think 
the catch is that they are awaiting federal money or to see if it 
would indeed be considered by the federal government into 
their national highways network. 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, are all of the highway plans 
for grading and paving and what not, are they in place for this 
upcoming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Generally they are. There is a few that 
under the Transportation Partnerships Corporation that are not 
finalized at this point in time. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Can you provide us with the list of all 
those that are finalized since, as you've just said, they're almost 
all finalized. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Yes we will do that. It will take us about 
10 days, and you will receive that information. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. And with 
that same list of projects, will it also show what's going to be 
done and for how many kilometres and at what cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Yes it will. In fact it will be broken 
down into cost per kilometre and the whole bit. And, you know, 
that of course depends on the weather. I mean last year we got 
more roads done than we did the year before because we had 
better weather. But you will receive our plan. It will list the 
highways. It lists the length. Yes, you will get that information. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well I appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, not so long ago of course you and your 
department had a policy and a plan to close a lot of the highway 
depots throughout the province. I knew of some five or six in 
the south-west, and of course that's what drew you down to Val 
Marie; it was your plans to close some highway depots. 
 
Could you tell us exactly where that's at today, Mr. Speaker, 
because I had so many letters from communities and rural 
municipalities all throughout the south-west part of the 
province that had concerns with your thoughts that perhaps 
rural Saskatchewan didn't need these services. And please 
enlighten us now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I'm not sure if you were at that meeting 
in Val Marie; I think you were. In fact I think I sat right beside 
you. And I think I wrote you letters several times before that 
with the same answer — no. And I don't know how many times 
I have to tell you, or if you don't understand the word no, I'll get 
a dictionary and I'll send a copy of it over. There is no plans to 
shut down any maintenance depots. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I thought you learned 
your lesson that night at Val Marie with the good people there 
when they called you on that and in fact proved that there were 
plans in place; that there were letters sent out to some of the 
staff, Highways staff. And you backed down from the people 
that night, Mr. Minister. I'm surprised that you now have the 
nerve to stand up and say there was no plan in place, when I 
could provide documentation to the House which is right from 
your department, saying there was. 
 



February 27, 1995 

 
496 

Now I'm asking you, what plans do you have from this day on, 
not so much whether there was a plan in place or not, because 
we all know there was, Mr. Minister. 
 
And it wasn't just from the town of Val Marie or the RM of Val 
Marie; there were communities going a few hundred kilometres 
away from Val Marie that have no contact with that community, 
but in fact they were also writing letters. Their staff and field 
men were also getting the same letters saying they would be 
transferred and such. So I'm asking you, don't try and give us 
those kind of answers and buffalo the people here; tell us what 
you're going to do from this day on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you for that question to the 
member for Shaunavon. You know we're going to get better and 
better as the Department of Highways and we will continue to 
do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — And our roads are going to get better 
and better. And I hope you support us. And I think as we move 
along and get better and better, we look at efficiencies; we look 
how we can service the customers better. And we will continue 
to do that. And I told you before that we were not intending to 
close any maintenance depots, and that is still true today as it 
was then, and will likely be tomorrow. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, if the people in that 
community were wrong, one has to question why they 
petitioned you to leave their depot open. You at least paid them 
the respect to sit for a few hours, take your beating, and agree to 
change it that night. So I mean it's confusing that you would 
now come in here and try and deny it when you're on record in 
the community of Val Marie for changing your plans. 
 
Mr. Minister, you had mentioned some figures a little while ago 
about the infrastructure program. And I notice in the budget 
document there's no line in here for any matching monies with 
the infrastructure program so I take it then that the new Crown 
corporation that you're forming is handling all the infrastructure 
works. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Chairman, could I ask to have the 
question repeated. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — You're forming a new Crown corporation, 
transportation corporation, and I'm asking you if that 
corporation is handling all of the work that the infrastructure 
program that the federal government came out with . . . Is that 
what the Crown corporation is for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon. No, it will not be. The infrastructure program is 
separate from any national highways program or anything like 
that. The infrastructure program . . . the only monies used by 
Highways in the infrastructure program, to this point, was the 
Cumberland bridge. There were $2 million from the province, 
$2 million from the local community, and $2 million from the  

federal government. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right. So you're saying the Department 
of Highways has no contact in the infrastructure program, 
basically. So why then . . . explain why then you need this 
Crown corporation. What's the purpose of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well I'm glad you asked that because I 
think if you went to the road builders, or if you went to industry 
like the mining companies — in fact Cameco and COGEMA 
are two examples that have used a partnership with the 
department already — what they have been telling us is they 
would like to see a vehicle so that they can see that the monies 
being spent on a particular road would match their contributions 
to that road. So this will give a clear vehicle for doing that. And 
so they are more likely to participate with us in a partnership so 
we're trying to make it easier for industry and more acceptable 
for industry to partnership with government. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — And will there be any staff for that Crown 
corporation, for just that Crown corporation? Is this going to 
require more administration? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I don't know if you listened to the 
second reading speech, but there is going to be no employees. 
There is going to be a board of four people which includes the 
minister, the deputy minister, the assistant deputy minister of 
operations, and the assistant deputy minister of programs. 
 
So like it's not going to cost the government any money. It's just 
a vehicle so that industry is more comfortable with 
partnershipping with government. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I notice that on 
page 77 on the budget document you're going to have full-time 
equivalent staff. You're operating with 70 less staff; is this 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — That's right, to the member from 
Shaunavon. And that was handled through a process of 
voluntary early retirements. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well is it all handled through voluntary 
early retirements or is it perhaps handled . . . Because if I look 
at subvote 3, we have in preservation and maintenance, salaries 
are decreasing almost two and a half million dollars and capital 
operating is $4.2 million decrease. So that tells me for the 
highway crews or the people that are actually out there doing 
the work, riding in the trucks and the tractors, doing the work of 
the highways, that we're cutting their salaries back, we're 
reducing that staff, and in fact we're spending a great deal less 
money — four-million-and-some dollars. 
 
And yet I look over in subvote 6 in policy and programs, 
salaries are going up just about $300,000. And in fact while 
they're going up, while those salaries are going up, your 
operating even in policy is taking quite a drop. 



February 27, 1995 

 
497 

So obviously, looking at the budget document, it's showing that 
you're prepared to spend more on administration and the setting 
of policy, but the ones that are taking the hit are the people that 
are actually providing the service to the people in Saskatchewan 
and in fact rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — To the member from Shaunavon. This is 
to do with reorganization, and I would like to send you over 
that information because it's fairly complicated, if that would be 
okay with you. Okay. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well in this reorganization, will this 
document you're going to send . . . does it show all the staffing 
changes that have occurred in the last year? And in fact I'm not 
sure if you sent to our caucus office a list of the responses from 
written questions that the other opposition party provided. Have 
you done that, or could I ask you to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — . . . ask the member of Shaunavon, can 
you clarify that request, the last part of it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — The official opposition had sent a series of 
questions out to all the departments. Did you get a set of those? 
Oh, you did? It was your responses that I'm interested in, Mr. 
Minister, to see if . . . I'm unsure if you sent those responses to 
our caucus or not or to myself. And could I ask you to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Okay. Those responses are being 
prepared right now, so you will receive them, but you will also 
receive this separately. Okay? 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, does the . . . obviously with 
some of the changes that are coming about from today's federal 
budget, you and your department were aware that they were 
coming. I think everyone in the province, everyone in Canada, 
knew that some of these changes were coming about and 
getting themselves prepared and getting themselves ready to 
handle the changes coming about. So I can only assume that 
with a province with over half the farmers in Canada within our 
provincial boundaries that you and your department have done a 
great deal of work in this area as far as what's coming down and 
how best the province would react to whatever is coming down 
in the WGTA cuts. 
 
And in fact I can only assume that you've got some long-term 
plans that you've prepared, and I'm wondering if you can give 
us some explanation of where your long-term plans are going 
and if you've done any costing to these plans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well that's a very interesting question 
coming from the member from Shaunavon. You know I sat in 
this House last year, and I remember being quizzed about the 
changes to GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). And he 
was certainly a supporter of the old GRIP program, and the very 
costly program. And now he says we should be ready for the 
changes in the WGTA that the federal government just did. I 
have a real hard time to understand the change of mind that the 
member from Shaunavon has all of a sudden found himself 
taking. I guess I mean when you become a Liberal, I guess you  

become a Liberal, and it's quite interesting though. 
 
But I guess I would like you, sir, if you could request from Mr. 
Young some idea where he's going with the NTA, the National 
Transport Agency, so that we would know, I guess then, how to 
help facilitate producers and communities and municipalities to 
deal with this change to the WGTA, with this loss of this 
money. And what are the efficiencies that they are talking 
about? How are they going to change the NTA? If you could do 
that, I think it would certainly help us. 
 
Meanwhile we will continue to talk to the producers, to talk to 
the communities, to talk to the rural municipalities to get their 
feelings. But to say we should have known about the change, 
when the federal government doesn't tell us anything, is not 
right. Now if you knew prior to today, you certainly should 
have let us know so that we could have perhaps been more 
ready for what happened today. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Mr. Minister, nobody's going to buy 
that answer from you. You know very well that international 
trade rules set out that WGTA was going to go through some 
dramatic changes. Now you and your large staff . . . and I say it 
is large. I look at the budget here; you've got a lot of staff, 
people in the policy and planning department. You've got a 
$300,000 increase in pay. Now you can't tell me that you and 
your staff haven't sat down and thought, well obviously here are 
the changes that are going to come about because of 
international trade rules. You knew that, Mr. Minister. You 
knew that was coming. 
 
So I'm asking you, because you are in charge of the Highways 
department and Transportation, what have you sat down and 
thought of as a long-term plan? Where do you see the province 
going? 
 
You didn't even have to talk to the federal government to know 
that these changes were coming about. They were obvious 
unless of course you or no one in your department reads the 
newspaper or follows the news because everyone else in 
Canada knew this was coming about. 
 
So I'm asking you: do you or do you not — I guess is the first 
question — have any plans, or do you just sit back and accept 
your pay, and do a little bit of maintenance? Most highways 
don't even get that. Just give us some idea what you do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I wonder if the member from Shaunavon 
has asked a producer in his area what he's going to do. I think 
he would say the same as what I'm going to say, is that you 
know it's pretty hard to respond when you don't know what's 
happening. I think you have to understand that any changes to 
railway reform has nothing to do with GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). I don't know if you 
understand that, but certainly that's a fact. And transportation, 
that's our area of concern, is railway reform. We have no 
indication at all as to where the federal government's going to 
go with it. They will not give us the rules that we have to look 
at or the options that they're going to allow producers to look at,  



February 27, 1995 

 
498 

or even some word from the minister that, we're going to go in 
this direction; what do you think? 
 
I would think it would be the federal minister's responsibility to 
ask the producers, to ask the provincial governments, to ask the 
rural municipalities, and to ask the communities: what do you 
think of this? This is the changes we're going to make; what do 
you think of them? Are they good? Are they bad? Should we 
adjust them? 
 
But oh, no. You want us to come out and sort of have, I guess, 
some kind of a policy, when we don't run the railways. Do you 
want Manitoba to do the same? Do you want Alberta to do the 
same? And B.C. to do the same and Ontario to do the same? 
Come on, get behind us. Ask the federal government to give us 
an indication of where he expects or what changes he expects to 
the National Transportation Act so that we know where we're 
going. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — All right, Mr. Minister. As you were 
saying, you had hoped that the federal government would have 
asked you your opinion of where this is going. And that's what 
I'm asking you. What are your plans? You must have some type 
of a plan in the bag in the event that you are asked for your 
opinion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well do you not have a plan? This isn't 
health care; you have to have a plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — We had a plan of health care and I'm 
glad you brought that up. And certainly we had a plan, and we 
consulted with the people and we moved the plan forward. And 
that's what should be done. I mean we're responsible for health 
care; that's our job. The federal government is responsible for 
transportation. Tell us their plan and then we can react to it. 
 
I told the members to your right that you can't fight . . . do you 
fight with a shadow? You have to know what you're fighting or 
what you're agreeing with or what . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, the federal government has a responsibility to tell us 
how they're going to change the rail transportation system in 
this province. They have to tell us what their vision is, then we 
can discuss it with them. Each province telling the federal 
minister what a rail policy for Canada should be? Get off it. It's 
the federal government's responsibility and we're awaiting that. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So then, Mr. Minister, what have you 
asked of the federal government or what have you put forward 
to the federal government in any meetings that you've had to 
date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — I guess what . . . in my last meeting on 
February 8 with Minister Young, the discussion was when and 
what, and I continued to ask him that question. Our concern is 
that efficiencies be related to producers' cost. What is the cost 
to the producer to get his commodity from farm gate to the 
ship? I mean there has to be a benefit and efficiencies to the 
producer, that it's just not good enough to transfer costs from 
the railways to the producer or to the province or to the  

municipal government. That's what I'm telling him. Now we're 
awaiting his reply. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, now you're making 
statements that you're raising with the federal minister of your 
concerns of a least-cost system from the farm gate to port. So 
what I'm trying to find out from you, Mr. Minister, exactly what 
does this least-cost system that you're referring to, what does it 
look like in your eyes. What are you prepared to do say for the 
branch lines and for the short lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well thank you for the question to the 
member for Shaunavon. I'm sure the producers are smart 
enough to figure out what they can do but they've got to know 
the rules. They've got to know what the federal government is 
going to make as regulations and legislation. They have to 
know where their limits are, what the rules are, so that they can 
in fact seek and we can maybe help facilitate them. Or maybe 
we can act as a mediary between the producer and the federal 
government to get their ideas to the federal government. But we 
have to know the rules and this is what we're asking Mr. Young 
for. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, just a few minutes ago you 
had made mention that you've been out consulting the people. 
Can you tell us in what form and fashion and who you 
consulted with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from 
Shaunavon. Certainly the department continues to consult with 
producers. I wish the federal government would do that. We've 
had several meetings with producer groups. We have 
continuous meetings and continuing meetings with SARM and 
SUMA. But until today nobody knew exactly what was going to 
happen to the WGTA. We knew it was going to change. We 
knew something was in the wind. We didn't know how much, 
we didn't know how, and we're still not exactly clear but we 
have a better idea today. 
 
But I mean, you can consult and you can talk and you can talk 
of efficiencies and all those kinds of things, but you still have to 
know the rules. And the producer wants to know that. I mean 
they're asking the federal government, as we are asking the 
federal government, to tell us what are the rules, what is the 
direction, what is the vision for the transportation policy for the 
country of Canada. We're waiting, and in great anticipation. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Mr. Minister, a while ago you spoke 
of how Saskatchewan has, I don't know, how many times more 
highways than any of the other provinces, and obviously we 
have half the farmers here. We move a great deal of the 
product, raw product, from Saskatchewan. So it's of such great 
importance to the province, surely you've sat down and thought 
of how this is going to impact the province and what you're 
prepared to do. So now can you state clearly what it is you're 
prepared to do because it is of such great importance to the 
province? 



February 27, 1995 

 
499 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you very much. Again I want to 
tell the member from Shaunavon, you know, do we build a road 
when we don't know if a particular line is going to be 
abandoned? Or do we ask producers to support a short-line 
railway when we don't know if the line is going to be 
abandoned? I mean this is what I'm trying to tell you. We've got 
to get the rules, we've got to get the direction, so we know 
what's happening. And until the federal government, who are 
responsible for the railways — maybe it would be good if we 
were, but we're not; the federal government's responsible — 
they've got to tell us what their plans are so that we can react to 
those plans, so that we can help facilitate producers look at the 
most efficient way of getting their product from the farm gate to 
the ship. And we will do that, but we have to know the rules 
that we're playing by. And we will continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, I 
think maybe it would be good just to continue this line of 
questioning a little bit further. So, Minister, don't you think it 
would be a good idea if you had a contingency plan, just in case 
some of these branch lines for sure are abandoned? Because 
there is a map, I'm told, that has been around for many, many 
years, showing which branch lines are targeted to be abandoned 
at certain dates. In all probability, the conventional wisdom 
seems to be that that plan will be followed. 
 
So certainly we could get a hold of this map, take a look at it, 
and have a contingency plan perhaps of what you're going to do 
in those areas where those branch lines are targeted to be 
abandoned at certain years. So have you done anything along 
that line, Minister, of providing a contingency plan in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well first of all — I don't know how 
many times I have to say it — but the federal government is 
responsible for railways. They're responsible for the legislation. 
They're responsible for the decisions in regards to abandoning 
rail lines and that sort of thing. 
 
And I guess what we are trying to do is work with producers 
and try and help them, I guess, to tell the federal government 
what they would like to see or how they can get their grain from 
farm gate to ship at the least cost to them and in the most 
efficient way. But they have to know those rules. And we 
continue to ask the federal government for their position, their 
vision, their rules. The producers continue to do the same. I 
know Mr. Sinc Harrison has done that several times on behalf 
of SARM. And we have to know those kinds of things before 
we can proceed. 
 
Like I mentioned earlier, do we build a new road in a particular 
area because we think that that particular line is going to be 
abandoned? Or do we ask a community to study the 
possibilities of a short-line railway in that particular situation, 
when we don't know if that particular rail line's going to be 
abandoned? I mean you know, I know, maybe your government 
spent money without thinking of the consequences, but we 
would certainly like to know first before we spend the money, 
and we'll continue to do that. 

And I notice that the member of Shaunavon asked a few 
questions just a little earlier. But I wonder where he was. Was 
he asking the federal government for the $1.6 billion pay-out in 
the WGTA, or was he behind the producer groups in asking for 
the $7.2 billion from the federal government like the farmers 
were and like this government was and what the Alberta 
government was asking for? I wonder where he was? 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Minister. Well, I don't know 
where he was and much less I care where he was. And I can't 
answer for the member from Shaunavon, and I don't want to 
answer for him either. 
 
But I'll tell you right now where we stand. We're fully 
supportive of $7 billion for the producers from the Crow, and if 
you can get it, you can count on our support to try and help you 
any way possible. And if it means crawling to Ottawa on our 
hands and knees, we'll go with you. That's how committed we 
would be to giving you a hand. 
 
Now, but I take a little exception to the fact that you say that we 
in the past administration, which I wasn't a part of, but you keep 
alluding to the fact that I'm somehow responsible, so I'd like 
you to tell me which one of the projects that was built in 
Saskatchewan would you say that we should get rid of: the pulp 
mill at Meadow Lake; the lumbering operation over in Prince 
Albert; maybe we should get rid of Saskferco; and we could sell 
those and build highways. Or maybe there wasn't enough jobs 
created by some of the other projects done. 
 
Now realistically, let's be fair about this, Minister. It cost a lot 
of money to put a job base into Saskatchewan but you wouldn't 
have the intestinal fortitude to pull out any one of those projects 
today because you'd get railroaded out of Saskatchewan and out 
of Canada. 
 
The reality is it was expensive to do but it was the right thing to 
do and it's proving to be a benefit to you as a government. The 
same as the oil patches there and running on the same royalty 
programs that were basically in effect in the 1980s and if you'd 
have tinkered with them and moved them around like you 
suggested at one time, they'd have taken off like a bunch of 
geese heading south for the winter. 
 
So let's be a little bit fair about the realities of life. Some of the 
things that were done seemed to be a very rash at the time. But 
they have proven to be good, backbone, solid, job-creating 
projects for the province of Saskatchewan. And they've done a 
lot of good. Maybe more good than people have realized or 
given credit for, but as time goes by they will realize that it is 
the kind of thing that is necessary in a society if we are to 
survive. 
 
Now let's get back to some highways, Mr. Minister. What about 
criteria. What about criteria, what about criteria when you 
decide which highway should be fixed or which highway 
shouldn't be. What criteria do you use? 
 
I just came off of the bus tour around this entire province with  



February 27, 1995 

 
500 

the safe driving committee. And we bounced our way over this 
whole province. I think we missed maybe one or two highways 
in the whole province but we did hit a bunch of them. And we 
bounced over a lot of them. And the guys kid me that the ride 
was so rough that's why the only number I could write was a 
one because everything else was too scribbly. While Highway 
No. 1 is important, but there are a lot of other roads, and I 
would seriously like to know what criteria you use to decide 
which roads should be built. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you to the member from Maple 
Creek. We actually use the quality of the road or of the asset; 
we use the benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. Certainly 
safety is a concern; I mentioned that earlier, fatalities and 
accidents; and of course the cost and what we have in our 
budget in comparison to the need. We created a transportation 
council, policies council, involving SARM and SUMA and the 
Department of Highways; this will be enlarged and it will be a 
permanent structure in the next little while, and certainly they 
will advise us on policy issues. And this is one of the areas that 
we will be asking their input. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister, but I need to 
pursue this a little more because I didn't get an answer that I 
really understood and I doubt if the people of Saskatchewan 
would understand this either. 
 
Now you have a weighted formula; I'm presuming that this is a 
formula. Okay, suppose you got potholes in the pavement from 
the weight of the vehicles pushing the road down, and when it 
rains those fill up with water and a car hits it and they start to 
plane off the road and they have accidents. How much weight 
would you give to those factors of dipping in the road that 
would actually hold water like a reservoir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Those highways would certainly be looked at, you know, in 
regard to, do they need to be reconstructed, or in fact can 
maintenance look after that particular situation. But what I offer 
to you is that the department is more than willing to give you a 
demonstration of our asset management plan, and we're just 
moving into that direction as of last year. And certainly they 
would be willing to give your caucus or yourself personally a 
demonstration as to how it works. And that might be very, very 
interesting. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, it 
certainly would be very, very interesting and we'll take you up 
on your offer right now, no questions asked any further about 
that part. 
 
But now just to understand what we need to get ourselves ready 
for, how long will it take you to explain this plan to us and what 
do we have to prepare to contribute. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Well you could actually call Ralph Klein 
in Alberta, because they're looking at our asset management 
plan now and in fact adopting it. So you know, I don't think it 
takes that long. It's very interesting. It's a very  

good concept. And in fact if you want more information you 
could maybe give Mr. Klein a call and he can sort of give you 
some more information on it. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thanks, Minister. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 
 


