






















































April 13, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 13, 1995 

 

 
1565 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions 
to present today from the Indian Head-Sintaluta area of the 
province. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from the Hazlet and 
Gull Lake areas of south-west Saskatchewan. I'll read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding to the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the Assembly, two visitors to our gallery today 
who are visiting from out of province, from their home in 
Ottawa. They're visiting in Saskatchewan today to be with their 
family and to celebrate the Passover together. 
 
Sydney and Rhoda Abbey are here, and Mr. Abbey is a former 
civil servant, retired civil servant with the Government of 
Canada. They're seated in the gallery today with their son, 
Dave. 
 
I ask all members to join in welcoming them to Saskatchewan 
and to wish them a very meaningful celebration of the Passover. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Moose Jaw Palliser in welcoming 
the Abbeys to the Assembly. We've had the pleasure of touring 
the province with their son, Dave, who is known in 
Saskatchewan as the number one safety zealot. 
 
I'd ask everyone to again welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure today to introduce to you and to members of the 
Assembly, two people seated in the Speaker's gallery — Mr. 
Steven Turnbull and his wife, Paula. They are here to enjoy the 
proceedings this morning. 
 
Mr. Turnbull will be the candidate for the Progressive 
Conservatives in the Lloydminster constituency in the next 
election. And, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to be able to tell 
you today that he will be the next member for that constituency. 
We're waiting with . . . looking forward to the next election 
with great anticipation. 
 
So I'd ask all members to please welcome them to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
some guests from northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, on the 
west gallery is people representing the Garry Tinker 
Foundation. Of course with them is Garry Tinker himself. And 
we also have Clinton Carriere and Peter Ross, as well as Walter 
St. Cyr. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're doing excellent work on issues dealing 
with people with disabilities. I would ask all members to give 
them a very warm welcome. 
 



April 13, 1995 

 
1566 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Celebration of the Easter Season 
 
Mr. Kluz: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Today begins the final 
weekend of the Easter season. This is Holy Thursday, the day of 
which the commandment to love our neighbour was given. 
Tomorrow is Good Friday, and of course Sunday is Easter. 
 
This is the major religious observance of the year for Christian 
people around the world. Of course this is not the place to 
discuss one's religious beliefs, but the significance of such a 
holiday as Easter goes beyond any particular creed. 
 
Although the beginning of this weekend is set aside to 
remember betrayal and death, in fact Easter is our most 
optimistic observance of the year. This is the time of the year in 
which we celebrate the victory of life over death, when we 
renew our hope that good does ultimately triumph over evil. 
 
And this is our holiday in which we recognize the end of winter 
and the coming of spring. And, Mr. Speaker, even though the 
weather people are promising snow this weekend, we know that 
it is only a short time now before our province once again 
changes from black and white to technicolor. 
 
Most importantly of course, regardless of our own beliefs, this 
is the season in which we pay homage to the ideal of personal 
sacrifice to the good of others, the principal example of which 
is at the heart of this holiday. This is the time of the year in 
which we ask for peace among all peoples, for reconciliation 
among the nations, and for help and respect for the less 
fortunate. 
 
So I take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to wish you and 
everyone a happy and peaceful Easter. Christos Voskres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passover Week 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. Sundown Friday marks the 
beginning of Passover Week, the week Jewish people the world 
over observe the preparation for and the flight from oppression 
in the land of Egypt, as told in the Book of Exodus. 
 
As the member from Kelvington-Wadena just said, Mr. 
Speaker, this is not the forum to comment on the religious 
significance of any event. However an event of such historical, 
ethical, and legal significance should not go unremarked. 
 
The actual first Passover occurred thousands of years ago; 
however its lesson is as contemporary as today's news. For 
those of us who make laws which affect other people, it seems 
to me Passover has particular significance. 
 
The exodus of the children of Israel from Pharaoh's Egypt,  

perhaps the most significant migration in the history of 
mankind, was the direct result of one group of people being 
suppressed by another. Pharaoh told the Jews, you can't have 
any straw for your bricks and you're going to work twice as hard 
for nothing. The result was 10 plagues, and finally Moses led 
the Jewish people out of exile. 
 
As we read in the fifth chapter of Exodus, the event that directly 
led to the establishment of what we call western civilization and 
to the creation of two of the world's great religions was initiated 
by racial and economic exploitation. 
 
And in essence, Mr. Speaker, this is what Passover represents: 
the belief in tolerance, in freedom, in the collective struggle for 
the rights of people. I say to everyone on this very important 
occasion, be well and shalom. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
The Co-operators' 50th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fifty years ago a group 
of farmers joined together to form an insurance company based 
on cooperative principles. Today that company is the largest 
wholly Canadian-owned multiline insurance company in 
Canada. The company I refer to of course is The Co-operators. 
 
From its small start 50 years ago, The Co-operators has grown 
into a company with annual earnings of $50 million and assets 
of $3 billion. It employs 4,500 people across the country — 600 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Regina is the site for the head offices of Co-operators Life 
Insurance and their affiliate, Co-operators Data Services 
Limited 
 
There are three important sectors in the economy: publicly run 
Crowns; private corporations; and the cooperative sector. 
 
Many of us in Saskatchewan know the simple truth — the 
cooperative sector has a proud history and is a fundamental part 
of our lives. No wonder so many credit unions and co-ops are 
having record years. I also believe that has a lot to do with the 
new faith we've instilled in the people of Saskatchewan, a faith 
that has led us to be more active consumers and investors. 
 
Thank you and congratulations to The Co-operators for 50 years 
of sound business practice, the application of cooperative 
principles, and for their great corporate citizenry. I trust the 
growth and success will continue into the future. As a user of 
cooperative services, I will continue to be a part of the great, 
proud tradition and a part of the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Farm and Leisure Show 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Another 
important event will be taking place next week in my riding.  



April 13, 1995 

 
1567 

The 15th annual Yorkton Farm and Leisure Show will be held 
from April 19 to the 22. It will be the biggest and most 
diversified show ever to be held in the 15 years of its running, 
with over 200 exhibitors covering 40,000 square feet of display 
space. 
 
This show, which will be run jointly by the Yorkton Exhibition 
Association, Yorkton Sunrise Lions Club, and the Yorkton 
Chamber of Commerce, attracted in excess of 18,000 people in 
1994. 
 
The Farm and Leisure Show will offer a wide range of 
products, services, information, seminars, and entertainment to 
everyone. 
 
There are over 140 animals entered in the 20 classes of the 4-H 
spring steer and heifer show. Seminars will be held on Friday, 
April 21, with judging all day on Saturday the 22nd. 
 
Other events include demonstrations by Shirley Johnson, a local 
outstanding music composer and singer, Don Lamont from the 
Complete Anglers Fishing Show, and performance by Melanie 
Gibbs, the 1994 GX star search winner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I extend my best wishes to the organizers of the 
1995 Yorkton Farm and Leisure Show. And I am sure that 
attendance for this event will exceed, in its history, the 15 years 
that they have been in operation. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 
leave, to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 
your gallery today are 16 students from the Chief Napew 
Memorial School from the Joseph Bighead First Nation. With 
them are their teachers Wayne Weinkauf and Vince Hill; and 
chaperons Doris Singer and Linda Kahpoonapit. 
 
I would like to welcome all of them here today. And a special 
welcome to Lance Singer — and I hope you don't rule me out of 
order on this, but he's a wonderful artist and he's brought this 
little, beautiful picture down. So anyway, I will be meeting with 
them afterwards and we will have a visit at 11:15 later on 
downstairs, and also photographs. 
 
And I will also be asking the member from Cumberland House 
to welcome them also in Cree. So welcome here today and 
please join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I would like as well to  

join the member to welcome and say right off the bat. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Death of Jack Wolfe 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in the spirit of Easter, I have actually sent across a 
copy of my question to the minister, the Justice minister. And I 
just want to reiterate a fact, that I'm sure that we've all read the 
account on the front page of today's paper regarding Gail Wolfe 
and her request to clear her husband's name. 
 
And I can only imagine the amount of courage and conviction it 
took for her to come forward at this time. While it's difficult for 
all involved, we believe that it is incumbent upon us to follow 
up on her request, and we have a question for the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you employ the powers entrusted to you in 
your office to inquire into the circumstances surrounding Jack 
Wolfe's death with a view toward clearing his name? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the member for having sent the question across to give 
me a few moments to consider the question. This is a . . . all 
members of the House were deeply saddened by Mr. Wolfe's 
death and among the most eloquent eulogies that I've heard in 
this House were given in respect of that very sad occasion. 
 
We heard Mrs. Wolfe on the radio this morning as well as the 
report in the press and I know we're all touched by it. I'm not 
certain how to respond to the member's question. I will say to 
the member though that I will take the request under 
advisement and treat it very seriously and attempt to respond in 
whatever way is appropriate. But as I stand in the House today, 
I do not know what is appropriate and therefore I do not know 
how to respond to the member's request. 
 

VLTs and Crime Rates 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
turn my attention to the minister of gambling. Madam Minister, 
do you believe that there is a link or correlation between VLTs 
(video lottery terminal) and increased crime? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What I would say to the member from 
Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, is that in 1993 the government 
established a committee on social impacts to look at the broad 
impacts, including crime. There was two reports; neither 
indicate increased crime rate would result from increased 
gaming. You heard the Regina police response to the Liberal 
leader yesterday when he said there was nothing to back up  



April 13, 1995 

 
1568 

such a claim and that she was out of line in involving them in 
this discussion. 
 
We pay considerable attention to gaming practices. In fact one 
of the reasons why gaming is regulated under the Criminal 
Code in Canada is to create a tight regulatory framework for 
conduct of gaming and to ensure that everything is done legally 
and to reduce the incidence of crime. 
 
Now I will mention that Manitoba, Quebec, Windsor in 
Ontario, have all experienced a drop in crime rates in the 
vicinities of their casinos, explained by increased security 
measures, cooperation of various security agencies, and other 
features such as lighting and patrolling of car parks and casino 
environs. 
 
So I would have to say at this point that we need to be 
concerned, but I'll also point out that Disney World has one of 
the highest crime rates around because wherever you have 
tourism activity, wherever there's large crowds, there's always 
some potential for crime, but certainly not directly relinked to 
the gaming activity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Quite frankly, 
Madam Minister, I'm shocked at your answer because I believe 
very firmly that there is a link between VLTs and increased 
crime. But we don't know, quite frankly also, how serious it is 
because you don't and have not done any real studies. But I 
guess what you figure is what you don't know won't hurt you. 
But, Madam Minister, it is hurting people in this province. 
 
Madam Minister, the former manager of the Stoughton Co-op 
has been charged with stealing $60,000 to feed his gambling 
habit — $60,000, Madam Minister; stolen money that went 
right into your slot machines and then into your government's 
pockets. 
 
Madam Minister, will you admit that your video slot machines 
are leading to an increase in crime? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I am happy to answer the question, Mr. 
Speaker. I have to remind you that when you expanded 
privatized bingo by 2,500 per cent, you seemed to have no 
concern for the repercussions of that. And contrary to your 
position on that, we do have concern. We have put in place 
mechanisms to educate people, for prevention, and certainly 
people have the ability to differentiate crime from their gaming 
activity. 
 
Now you could probably pick a story a day or 10 stories a day 
of people who have these kinds of problems related to 
alcoholism and other forms of addiction. The fact is there are a 
range of activities in a modern society that people have to make 
decisions about. 
 

And I draw to your attention the article that was in the 
Leader-Post — or on The Canadian Press, pardon me — on 
gambling on the Internet. You have to realize that gaming is 
here and it's here in ways that are very difficult to regulate. Our 
government has taken a position of emphasizing control and 
regulation within the context of the Criminal Code and we've 
also taken a very responsible approach to prevention, education, 
and to the community impacts. 
 
Now if you believe that you can make gaming go away, you 
couldn't do it when you were government and neither can we. 
We can control and regulate and mitigate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, it 
is clear fact that people are committing criminal acts in 
response to your government advocacy to expand gambling. 
And I want to make it clear right now that the opposition caucus 
does not condone that kind of behaviour. People have to be 
responsible for their actions; but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 
the government also has to take responsibility as well for 
creating the climate so that this addiction can be increasing. 
 
Madam Minister, we know of five separate cases of people 
stealing for their VLT addiction and that money by now totals 
over $128,000 — $128,000 stolen from churches, stolen from 
charities, stolen from employers to feed your slot machines and 
to feed your government pockets. 
 
Madam Minister, why are you refusing to do any research to 
measure the exact amount of this criminality. Could you do 
that, Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would have 
to say to the member from Rosthern that he had a choice to 
make when he was in government. Was his choice to keep 
bingo community-scale? No, his choice was to expand it, 
privatize it, increase the prize boards, increase the lucrative 
nature of the business, increase the private profit motive. That 
was his approach to gaming in government. 
 
And I would have to say that when you're dealing with a 
modern global society, a no-border society, the questions of 
ethics tend to be much less regulated, I'm afraid, by 
governments, and much more regulated by some choices that 
people have to make. 
 
And when people go to AA (Alcoholics Anonymous), they 
don't blame the Liquor Board for the fact that they have an 
alcoholism problem. And people are going to have to learn to 
make those same choices as they have since 1969 when gaming 
was legalized. They will have to make those same choices in 
regards of gaming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
while we were in government in the late '80s and early '90s, we  



April 13, 1995 

 
1569 

had a choice. Our choice was to keep VLTs out of this 
province. That was our choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP (New Democratic Party) gambling 
expansion is not about good public policy; it's not about 
creating jobs. It's all about the NDP sucking every last dime 
they can out of Saskatchewan people. And the Premier admitted 
it yesterday. The Premier admitted it yesterday. He says it's not 
realistic to expect the government to give up VLT revenues. 
And he said all you can ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I'll ask members 
on both sides to please calm down and let the member ask his 
question. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the members’ 
opposite nerves are so raw it is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I don't think that kind of 
inflammatory remarks is helping question period at all. The 
member has taken considerable time in stating his facts; I want 
him to put his question. I want the member to . . . Order. If the 
member doesn't wish to ask his question, I'll ask somebody else. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . Order. 
 
The Speaker: — I don't need any support from the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, your colleagues and yours 
and the Premier's sensitivity to this situation is obvious to 
anyone. Your Premier yesterday said it's not realistic to expect 
the government to give up VLT revenues. All you can ask is for 
the government to try to minimize the negative impact. That's 
what he said. 
 
In other words, the Premier knows VLTs hurt people, but 
money is more important. Now, money is more important to 
you, Madam Minister. Why shouldn't a government be driven 
by motives other than money? Shouldn't there be more concern 
for you as a government for people whose lives are being ruined 
than by that last dime that you can squeeze out of Saskatchewan 
people for your government's pockets, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's rather sad 
that in the absence of a platform or any other position that is 
credible in Saskatchewan, that you have to come back to this 
issue day after day. But I will say that you know as well as I do, 
because anybody who talks to anybody in the community 
knows, that people have left the province in busloads to 
gamble. 
 
Now we have a responsibility to make sure that dollars stay in  

Saskatchewan because what we were doing previously was 
people were leaving the province but the problems were coming 
home and none of the revenue was coming home. Now you 
know that there's competition from other jurisdictions and that 
certainly rural communities and hoteliers felt very strongly that 
they were not able to retain their customers in the face of this 
competition. 
 
I remind you again of gambling on the Internet. I mean you tell 
me how the government is going to deal with a casino licensed 
in the Caribbean island of St. Martin that can basically make 
book all over the world. 
 
And I would have to tell you that I appreciated you 
acknowledging that our government is sensitive on this issue 
because we are; we have spent considerable time thinking about 
it. We've limited the number of VLTs to 3,600 and we restrict 
access so nobody under the age of 19 legally has access to these 
machines. And at the age of 19 there are many important 
decisions that people make in our society. 
 
So I would have to say that I thank you for your recognition of 
our sensitivity on this issue, but suggest that you consider what 
you're saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Plan Coverage 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was recently contacted by a constituent who was shocked to 
learn he was no longer covered by the Saskatchewan health 
plan. 
 
In fact Dave Nelson of Shaunavon discovered that he had been 
dropped from the plan in the fall of 1993. Mr. Nelson was 
without health care coverage for almost a year and a half — a 
year and a half, Mr. Speaker — yet he received no letter, no 
phone call, nothing, to inform him that he did not have any 
more coverage. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health: Mr. Minister, what, if 
any, system is in place to inform people that they are no longer 
covered by Saskatchewan health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the course of this session 
that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I will ask the government 
members to please let their minister at least answer the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the course of this 
particular session of the legislature, that member from 
Shaunavon and his leader on a more or less regular basis has 
brought information into this House. Only moments later or 
hours later, we find that the information is not correct. 



April 13, 1995 

 
1570 

Now we had a raw example of that this week when his leader 
came into the House and made all sorts of claims about some 
documentation that she purported to get from the Regina city 
police. And then of course we know how the Regina city police 
said, well this is not our information, and so on. 
 
Now the member brings information in here this morning about 
a certain individual. Of course in the House I'm not going to 
comment on a certain individual case, nor do I know the detail 
of this individual case. 
 
And in regards to the processes by which people are contacted 
regarding their health cards and their health coverage, I will 
provide for the member the full range of documentation on how 
that all proceeds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm surprised that 
the minister would call into question the truthfulness of Mr. and 
Mrs. Nelson, constituents of mine. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is fortunate that Mr. Nelson required no 
medical care during that year and a half that he was without 
coverage. But what would have happened had he been in an 
accident or required medical attention for some reason? 
 
Mr. Minister, the buck stops with you. What action would you 
personally take to ensure Mr. Nelson and his family would not 
have been deprived of health care because of your department's 
blunder? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well two points here, Mr. Speaker. I 
have assured the member that I will acquaint him with all of the 
processes involved, but there are two other issues here and the 
first is integrity. I am certainly not questioning the concern of 
that individual. I am questioning the integrity of that caucus and 
its leader in this House, when on a daily basis almost, we've 
seen them come into this House with — well I can't use that 
kind of word, Mr. Speaker — but certainly a misrepresentation 
of fact. And indeed as one of my colleagues says, a pathological 
ability to stay away from the truth. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There's nothing wrong with that — not a 
thing. 
 
The Speaker: — It is not the Government House Leader that 
will decide that. I'll ask the Government House Leader to please 
come to order. I'll give the Government House Leader one more 
warning to please come to order. And I'll ask the Minister of 
Health to not use inflammatory language and to try and keep the 
question period under control. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we will have the discussion 
about this particular situation. He accuses the Department of 
Health of a blunder. He makes this kind of accusation in the 
House. We'll see what the evidence is on that score, as we've 
seen with his other accusations in this House. 
 

But then he goes on, Mr. Speaker, to talk about privatized 
medicine somehow. He gets on to the subject of privatized 
medicine. Now he may therefore want to speak with his federal 
counterparts on this subject about the level of funding and the 
involvement of his federal counterparts in health across Canada. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, if anything — if anything is of concern 
to Canadians right now it's the withdrawal of his federal 
government from health care funding in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
Dave Nelson works hard to provide for his wife and four 
children, all of whom live in Saskatchewan. He pays provincial 
taxes, he pays school tax, he pays income tax, he pays health tax 
in Saskatchewan, and he owns farm land in Saskatchewan 
which he's paying tax on. Yet he is deemed not to be a 
Saskatchewan resident because he works out of the province 
most of the year — not because of choice, it's because of 
necessity. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health. Would you agree that 
there should be some flexibility to provide health benefits for 
Mr. Nelson and others who are in this same situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, now this becomes very 
curious. Now I believe what I hear the member doing is already 
backtracking on the initial thrust of his question today. Now 
we're not clear of the residency of the individual which he 
brings into the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will get the detail on this — there is no doubt 
about that — as we have on other circumstances. But again I 
ask the member, if he wants to be constructive to health care in 
Saskatchewan, indeed health care for all Canadians, he may 
want to communicate some of the real issues that Canadians are 
feeling with his federal counterparts. 
 
Right here, right here in today's press, I read — from The Globe 
and Mail, I believe — a headline which says: How the Liberals 
are unravelling the social safety net. Here's the secondary 
headline, Mr. Speaker: Ottawa's block funding formula will 
spell the end to national standards. Without enforceable 
standards, cash-strapped provinces will be free to slash 
spending. 
 
Now that won't happen here, Mr. Speaker, that won't happen 
here under this government. But I rue the day that his party ever 
took government in this province. 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. Yesterday, a court in 
B.C. (British Columbia) ruled that the province's so-called fair 
wage policy was illegal. The court ruled that the NDP 
government's tendering policy contravened existing legislation  



April 13, 1995 

 
1571 

by violating the rights of employers and the workers. This 
illegal policy was in place for two years before it was struck 
down, meaning that dozens of contracts were tendered illegally. 
 
Mr. Minister, a legal challenge has been launched against your 
union preference policy with the Labour Relations Board and 
obviously you are stalling. 
 
Will you suspend your union preference policy until the Labour 
Relations Board . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I wish members wouldn't yell 
across the floor when another member . . . Members on both 
sides are doing it. Members on both sides are yelling across the 
floor. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give me a break. 
 
The Speaker: — Well the member from Estevan says, give me 
a break. I wish he would just go back in his memory just a few 
. . . this whole session, and I gave him how many breaks. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 
Minister of Labour, and I will start at the front part of the 
question: will you suspend, Minister, your union preference 
policy until the Labour Relations Board makes its ruling so you 
don't wind up in a similar situation as your counterparts in 
British Columbia have yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I'd like to thank the hon. member for his 
question, Mr. Speaker. I'd first like to point out that the B.C. 
situation is totally different. You can't compare the British 
Columbia situation to what you're describing here in 
Saskatchewan. So I want to get that straight first. 
 
The second issue that the member brings up is one of tampering 
with the Labour Relations Board, as the hon. member asked 
yesterday. And I again state it's inappropriate for the politicians, 
cabinet ministers or others, to interfere with the workings of a 
quasi-judicial body, being the Labour Relations Board. 
 
And finally, in terms of suspending what you're talking about 
. . . I believe you're talking about the Crown construction 
tendering policy. And this government has no intention of 
suspending that policy. It's an agreement that was signed 
between the parties who are involved in it. 
 
And I would ask the member to just sit back and don't judge 
this on speculation on your part, by political motivation; let's 
look and see how it works out. Just relax a little bit and let's see 
how it works out. You'll find that this policy will serve 
Saskatchewan people very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
principles are the same. And this hearing in Saskatchewan is  

being delayed because you, the Crown, are dragging your feet 
in appointing a lawyer. Obviously you don't want your policy to 
be ruled illegal just before an election, so you intend to delay 
the hearing until after the election. That's what it looks like to 
us. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the very legality of your union preference 
policy is being questioned. Why not simply suspend the policy 
until the Labour Relations Board can rule, and in the meantime, 
go back to awarding contracts to the lowest qualified bidders, 
union or non-union, with the union-hiring quotas eliminated or 
put to the side for now? Will you do that for the people of 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Contracts are now, Mr. Speaker, 
awarded on the basis of the lowest qualifying bidder, so I don't 
know what the member's trying to incite here. When the 
member says that there is interference with the Labour 
Relations Board, if you were to do that outside of this Chamber, 
making that allegation in a court of law, you'd be found in 
contempt of the court. 
 
And I think that the member wants to tread very carefully on 
what you're saying here. There's been no interference by this 
government with the Labour Relations Board; there's certainly 
been no interference on my part, and if that's what the member 
is suggesting should happen, the member is totally out of line. 
That's an inappropriate course of action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Minister, the 
operative words, of course, are qualified bidders, and they have 
to be unionized after the fact or they don't get the job in the end. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are receiving many calls and many letters from 
people across Saskatchewan who are very worried about this 
problem that you are creating. I have one letter that very 
succinctly draws together the concerns of rural people. And I'll 
quote just a little, brief bit of this letter from the Lloydminster 
Public School Division. 
 
 Our board is concerned that with the imposition of the 

Crown sector tendering agreement, non-union 
construction companies in small centres in 
Saskatchewan will become less competitive and, in fact, 
may well go out of business. When it comes time for 
school construction projects to be undertaken there is a 
real risk that those companies which traditionally have 
been able to submit the low tenders for projects will no 
longer be in existence. 

 
Now, that's the end of the quote. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is very simply this. Will you 
withdraw this policy now and allow the people of rural 
Saskatchewan to get on with their lives and to continue to be  



April 13, 1995 

 
1572 

able to exist in business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the member states a case that is 
more fiction than it is in fact. What the Crown construction 
tendering policy does is it allows a level playing field for all 
contractors, large or small, union or non-union, to compete for 
the work that is out there within the Crown corporation sector. 
 
Small companies in rural Saskatchewan will have their chances 
much improved on winning government contracts through the 
Crown corporation tendering policy than what they did previous 
to that. 
 
And I encourage the member once again: don't react on 
speculation as to what's happening. We ask the member to look 
at the facts, look at how this turns out. And if we're wrong, I'd 
be very, very surprised on that. 
 
I believe it's a good policy, it's a fair policy, and that policy will 
not be withdrawn. It's a policy that will serve Saskatchewan 
people well, and that will be borne out in the future by proof of 
how this has been of a benefit to those contracting in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce and 
welcome to you and through you to the Assembly, Chief Blaine 
Favel, chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations; 
Grand Chief Alphonse Bird of the Prince Albert Grand 
Council; and Vice-Chief John Dantouze, along with other 
chiefs and officials with whom we met this morning. 
 
I welcome them to the Assembly and Regina and thank them 
for a very good meeting. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
question no. 60, I here table the answer. And I would convert 
question 61 to motion for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Answer to 60 is tabled, and 61 motion for 
return debate. 
 

(1045) 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 9 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 9 — An Act to 
amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I'm pleased to rise again to make some comments on this 
particular Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with the collection and disposal, the 
recycling, of used oils in particular. But it also deals with . . . it 
potentially deals with a good many other items because it 
allows the minister the opportunity to prescribe the substances, 
the products, with which this piece of legislation will deal. And 
no one knows for sure, Mr. Speaker, other than perhaps the 
minister, exactly what he has in mind for these prescribed 
products. What will apply? 
 
Will it be simply used motor oils and he'll prescribe the various 
grades that are under this piece of legislation. Or will he include 
other substances, other oils such as used vegetable oil. Mr. 
Speaker, at the present time, if you use vegetable oil in a 
restaurant, there are very fixed rules on what you can do with 
that. And you have to dispose of it in a proper manner at 
present. One of the items that you cannot do with it is turn 
around and use it again later as a food substance for animals 
even though it would make a very good additive to the feeds of 
various animals to keep dust down on their feet. It's an organic 
material. It has no harmful effects. It's simply been used for say, 
cooking french fries or whatever it might have been. Is the 
minister going to include this type of substance as a prescribed 
product, Mr. Minister? 
 
That's one of the problems that we have with this and that the 
industry has with this particular piece of legislation. They're 
unclear, Mr. Speaker, exactly what the minister has in mind 
with these prescribed substances. I'd like to read a couple of 
paragraphs from the Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers who have responded to our request that they look 
over the Bill and give us their assessment  how it would 
impact on them, what they see with this particular piece of 
legislation and I quote: 
 
 CAPP is concerned that the proposed amendment 

provides no definition for "prescribed products". 
Without this definition, it is difficult to determine the 
intent and therefore the scope of application of the 
proposed amendment. CAPP recommends that a 
definition be developed for the amendment which 
clearly states what is meant by prescribed products. 



April 13, 1995 

 
1573 

 CAPP is also concerned that there is no definition for 
"product management program". However, a more basic 
concern is the apparent intent to legislate how industry 
manages environmental performance. It is CAPP's view 
that establishing a regulatory framework which sets 
standards or objectives is more efficient than detailing 
how to conduct business. Requiring in legislation the 
establishment of product management programs which 
must be approved by a regulator is unnecessarily 
prescriptive. CAPP therefore recommends that the 
clauses referencing the product management programs 
. . . be removed from the proposed amendment. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, from this letter you can tell that some of the 
industry has some qualms about the minister being able to 
prescribe which products fall under this jurisdiction and which 
do not. They also have some concerns about how these 
programs will be run, the product management program, telling 
them how they will do it rather than setting out the regulations 
and allowing the companies to meet those regulations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And one of the problems that arises with the prescribing of the 
products is that the sale of these products by business will be 
determined by their participation in these programs, this product 
management program, Mr. Speaker. And again, it tells business 
how to run their business rather than allowing them to say, this 
is the goal that we have to meet and here's how we're going to 
do it. 
 
You need to allow business to . . . you should regulate business 
and allow them to operate in an independent manner to meet 
those goals. This gives the government the opportunity to 
regulate and supervise the programs rather than pinpoint and 
define how the program will operate. 
 
The piece of legislation also requires that industry submit 
reports on the programs that the government has outlined for 
them. Now I'm sure that industry would be more than prepared 
to say, here's the goal that you have set for us and here's how we 
will meet that. 
 
The legislation does address some important concerns though 
that are important to farmers, to small service station owners, 
and so forth. A lot of people have been very conscientious, Mr. 
Speaker, in collecting, in saving and maintaining their used oil. 
If you go into any farmer's yard today you will find a number of 
barrels of used oil sitting there that they have collected up over 
a period of time, and depending on the size of your tractor, that 
may very well be half a barrel of oil every time you change oil. 
They have saved this oil because they know that it is a potential 
pollutant, that it is . . . has hazardous materials within it, and 
they don't wish to pollute their own land or anyone else's or the 
water supply, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they have saved their oil and now they're looking for an 
opportunity to dispose of that, and hopefully that will be 
through a recycling system. So they are anxiously awaiting for 
some solution to their problems, but the minister is not making  

it very clear exactly what is going to be involved in how this is 
going to happen. 
 
The government should be letting the industry develop their 
own program to meet the regulatory goals that are set out, rather 
than imposing the methods of achieving those goals on industry 
itself. 
 
The minister needs to be commended though, Mr. Speaker, for 
going out and consulting with industry prior to this legislation, 
but he needed to listen a little more closely to some of their 
concerns about the prescription of products and about the 
management programs that he is wishing to set up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is unclear in this particular 
piece of legislation is how the programs, the product 
management programs, are going to be funded. Are all the costs 
to be passed on to the consumer? What responsibilities will the 
government bear in regulating and maintaining these programs? 
Will all the cost be imposed on industry who will, in turn, turn 
around and pass it on to the consumer? That's not outlined in 
these Bills, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that needs to be done, that we see happen, is 
whenever the government imposes an additional cost on 
industry through regulation, there seems to be an escalating cost 
down the line. If the government adds a 10 cent cost to a gallon 
of gasoline, the net price at the end of the day does not rise by 
10 cents but rather rises by some number larger than that. So 
there needs to be some supervision though, Mr. Speaker, that 
that type of thing does not happen. 
 
One of the big questions though, Mr. Speaker, is how are these 
prescribed products going to be gathered? How are they going 
to be stored? How are we going to ensure that in the gathering 
system that pollution is not a result? 
 
Right now with these oils that are sitting out on the farms, in 
the service stations, they're relatively safe. But once you put 
them on the road you do run the risk of having a spill and 
therefore distributing that hazardous material throughout the 
environment. We need to be very careful, Mr. Speaker, on how 
we gather this oils. 
 
There are some companies throughout the province currently 
that are in place to handle the recycling of oil. There are a few 
companies available for the collection, for the trucking, of this 
oil. We need to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that there are more 
collection sites available, more trucks available to collect the 
product and that it be handled safely. 
 
One of the questions, Mr. Speaker, that arises from this, 
because obviously industry, if they wish to sell the products, are 
going to have to be a part and, at the end, collection and 
recycling of this program, but where does the responsibility lie? 
If a company manufactures a product that has been prescribed 
by the minister, where does their responsibility start; what 
happens to it halfway through the life cycle of that product; and 
whose responsibility is it at the end? 



April 13, 1995 

 
1574 

If an oil company manufactures a quart of oil that they turn 
around and pass through a distributor, it goes to the consumer, 
and it comes back into the recycling system. At any point within 
that cycle, Mr. Speaker, does the carrier of the product bear any 
responsibility for it? Does the wholesaler bear any 
responsibility for it? Does the retailer bear any responsibility for 
it? Does the consumer bear any responsibility for it? Or is it 
entirely on the shoulders of the company that manufactured the 
product initially? 
 
That has never been defined, Mr. Speaker. The minister hasn't 
set it out. He's just said that if you want to sell that product you 
have to be part of the management program. No place in there 
does it define who has any responsibility. 
 
When we look at any carbon product — gasolines, oils — the 
government is taking a very, very large share of the profit off of 
that. They take it off through the royalty structure initially; they 
take it off through taxes imposed on those products at the retail 
level. 
 
And yet what responsibility, Mr. Speaker, does the government 
bear in ensuring that these products, once used, are recycled in 
a proper and safe manner. Or is the government simply 
absolving itself of any of the financial responsibilities? 
Although in the case of gasolines they collect almost up to 50 
per cent of the revenues on the sales of gasoline, are they going 
to absolve themselves of any responsibility and simply dump 
that responsibility onto the original manufacturer, and absolving 
also the carriers and the consumers from any responsibility? 
 
I believe that everyone, Mr. Speaker, in the system needs and 
should be responsible, especially when the product is in their 
control. Whoever controls it has to bear some of the 
responsibility. 
 
The industry will have in place a trucking system, Mr. Speaker, 
but how much responsibility in the system does the trucking 
companies bear, and where does the retailer and the consumer 
fit in? 
 
At the end of the day, if it's being left solely on the shoulders of 
the manufacturer, the consumer will pay. The consumer will be 
the one who bears the financial responsibilities, even though the 
manufacturer may be the one who bears the legal 
responsibilities. 
 
Once these oils are collected, Mr. Speaker, one of the hazardous 
products that is found in used oil are the heavy metals that come 
out of the blocks of the engines in which this oil was used. That 
is, Mr. Speaker, the dangerous product. It's not the oil; the oil 
itself is an organic product and will break down. It's the heavy 
metals that are found in the used oils, Mr. Speaker, that are the 
hazardous substances that need to be carefully monitored, need 
to be carefully handled, and need to be carefully disposed of. 
 
And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, in no way, in no way does it deal  

with the handling of those heavy metals. Perhaps they're to be 
defined out in these management programs, but there's no 
solutions to the heavy metals that will be collected. Once the oil 
is recycled, that heavy metal will be extracted. Whether they'll 
be disposed of by burial in this province, whether they'll be 
disposed of by shipping them perhaps to Swan Hills for 
incineration, no one knows, Mr. Speaker. Nothing is in place to 
deal with it. 
 
There is already a recycling system in place in Saskatchewan, 
although it's not used very intensively at the present time. There 
are three or four companies around the province that are very, 
very interested in this. Some of them are already in the business 
and some of them are very interested in getting into the 
business, Mr. Speaker. And they need to be included into the 
system and they need to be brought in as part of that 
consultation stream. They need to be part of the solution. 
 
And the minister hasn't made it clear, either in his legislation or 
in his speech, how these businesses, this industry that's already 
in place, will be integrated into the program that the minister is 
proposing. 
 
The collection of the oil in the rural areas, as I've stated, is an 
important concept. It's already sitting out there, but the minister 
again, neither in his speech nor in the Bill, has outlined how he 
plans to implement a collection system throughout rural 
Saskatchewan, either with the farmers or with the rural service 
stations or large trucking businesses, Mr. Speaker. That's one of 
the things that he needs to clearly outline for us when we do get 
to Committee of the Whole. 
 
(1100) 
 
It would have been nice if the minister had have been a little 
more specific either in the legislation or in his second reading 
speech, so that people would have gained a better 
understanding of exactly what is involved in all of this, Mr. 
Speaker, to find out exactly what we will be dealing with. 
 
Since the Provincial Secretary, who hasn't been obviously 
paying attention because he doesn't know exactly which Bill 
we're on . . . we're on Bill No. 9, Mr. Provincial Secretary — 
environmental management . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well perhaps I need to explain to the minister why we have a 
problem with this particular piece of legislation so that he 
understands exactly what's involved in this. 
 
Your minister is proposing to collect used oil but he has not set 
out how the collection system will work. He's going to put the 
onus, it seems, on the manufacturer, the oil companies, whoever 
creates this product. And he will also give himself the power to 
say, this particular product is prescribed under the legislation 
and now you will have to meet these regulations. 
 
It doesn't say that the particular product has to be toxic, that it 
has to be environmentally harmful, it just says the minister has 
the power to prescribe this particular product, and if he 
prescribes it, you will then deal with it under this legislation in  



April 13, 1995 

 
1575 

the manner prescribed by the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, we find that that is a concern in the industry that 
may very well have to deal with these types of products. So, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Minister of the Environment, I believe you need to 
give some serious consideration to the concerns that have been 
brought forward by the industry; that certain amendments be 
withdrawn; that the industry be allowed to develop their own 
programs to meet regulatory goals. And that the items to be 
prescribed be identified in detail in the legislation rather than 
simply allowing them to be at the whim of the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time we're prepared to let this Bill go to 
committee where we can get some of the answers from the 
minister. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to enter into the debate on The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act, Bill 9. Mr. Speaker, this legislation 
has been and continues to be driven by a very urgent need. 
 
In Saskatchewan every single year we create more than 20 
million litres of used oil — 20 million litres a year of used oil. 
 
Environmental stewardship demands action. I don't think any 
proper thinking person would suggest  it's now 1995  that 
we should stick our heads in the sand and say, well there's a few 
people that are doing some things with used oil; and that's 
perfectly acceptable. We know that a significant amount of used 
oil winds up on driveways, on gravel roads, that sort of thing, 
ostensibly as dust control. And it may work a little bit for that. 
 
But we also know there's a great deal of water run-off from our 
roads and driveways and so on. And what a significant number 
of people couldn't put their finger on, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that 1 litre of used oil, or 1 litre of oil, can contaminate 20 
million litres of water. One litre of oil, 20 million litres of water 
contaminated, making it not potable. 
 
You can imagine the problem. Multiply that 1 litre of oil by 
more than 20 million litres of oil each and every year added into 
the environmental waste stream, and we've got a problem of 
absolutely mind-boggling proportions. 
 
I want to say that we know that there are some solutions. We 
know that used oil can be recycled, we know it can be 
re-refined, and we know that there can be other uses found for 
used oil. We know there's a problem. We know we can't 
continue to ignore it. 
 
I want to, at this point, give kudos and full marks to industry 
people who came together as they were putting together 
designing the used oil collection system and ultimate disposal 
system of this used oil. I had the great pleasure, at the request of 
the Minister of Environment, to sit in on several of those 
meetings, those very good, solution-oriented meetings. Those 
meetings where what the Minister of Environment did was said  

the challenge is to deal with this 20-million-plus litres of used 
oil. 
 
The oil industry, to their credit, picked up the ball and they ran 
with it, and they have designed a very good system to collect 
used oil throughout Saskatchewan. And I just can't say enough 
good about that. The industry recognized that there was a 
problem and they just picked up the challenge and they're 
running with it; they've designed the system from A to Z. 
 
The minister and his officials have been involved, along the 
way, in the process, but I don't want anyone to suffer from the 
delusion that somehow the implementation or the actual system 
of collecting and ultimately disposing of used oil is somehow 
driven solely by the minister. 
 
This is a collection and the industry felt very, very good about 
their involvement in it — as they should, as they should and as 
they properly deserve. We know that there's no escaping some 
upfront cost in a collection system when you're proposing to 
triple the amount of used oil that is collected in the province. 
 
And when you recognize that we've got one million people 
scattered over a huge land tract, we know there's going to be 
some upfront cost. We know there's probably going to be some 
new tanks required. We know that there's going to be some 
trucking required. And we know that there's going to be some 
storage and somebody's going to have to be looking at how do 
we sell the used oil either to a re-refiner or finding some other 
use for it. And I know that some of it can be used on pavement 
and many of us would welcome some additional pavement in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The point being, there are some opportunities. Yes, there are 
some costs. There are some short-term, upfront dollar costs in 
setting this thing up, but there is absolutely no way that we can 
escape the long-term costs of just ignoring the problem of waste 
oil. 
 
Just to sort of highlight that, Mr. Speaker, less than a hundred 
years ago you could drink water out of any river, stream, or 
creek that was moving, had moving water, anywhere in 
Saskatchewan; less than a hundred years ago, dip a cup in and 
drink it. No longer can you do that. Today I don't know anybody 
that would dip a cup into any river in southern Saskatchewan — 
any river, stream, or creek. Why? Simply put, they're all 
polluted to the extent that it's no longer potable water; has to be 
treated before we would dare to drink from it. 
 
Simply put, as we're letting this go to committee, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to commend and congratulate the Minister of 
Environment, the member for Rosetown, for his diligence in 
setting up the overall . . . the goals, for drawing together players 
from the oil industry from right across Saskatchewan. As I say, 
I sat in on several of those meetings. I want to again 
congratulate the oil industry officials for their diligence and 
their pursuit of finding a solution. 
 
And just before I close, I know that the member for  



April 13, 1995 

 
1576 

Souris-Cannington has stated . . . I heard in his speech some 
fear that we might somehow expand the used-oil collection 
system and maybe move into some other areas. And I just want 
to say how much I will welcome it, if in fact we can do that. 
 
If we could take a model of stewardship, of environmental 
stewardship, set it up with the industry support, the industries in 
fact running the thing, if we can make that work and then move 
on to other serious problems — I know there's tires, there's 
batteries, and no shortage of other things that you could work 
on down the list. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate everyone involved in 
this Bill. I very much look forward to its speedy passage and us 
getting on with the collection of a huge problem to our 
environment, the collection of 20 million litres per year of used 
oil. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 13 — An Act 
to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this 
particular Bill, as on the last one, we do not intend to hold it up 
unduly. We believe that there is some . . . that's it's mainly 
housekeeping. But there is some value in there, but there's also 
some points that need to be clarified, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have contacted the industry and we are getting responses 
back on what they believe is part of this legislation and how it 
will affect them. 
 
We do have some reservations though, Mr. Speaker, about the 
revenue collection provisions in this legislation. Because it 
deals with collecting, not from the people who actually owe the 
taxes on the royalties, but rather on someone who may owe 
money to the person who owes the taxes. We have some 
concerns as whether or not this type of legislation, this type of 
collection, is being used within perhaps other jurisdictions, or 
other pieces of legislation  that you go after, not the person 
who owes the money, but after some other third party who may 
have dealt with the party that owes the taxes and for some 
reason owes them some money. So you go after someone else. 
We have some concerns about that. 
 
The minister made a reference that these provisions can be 
found within The Revenue and Financial Services Act and The 
Income Tax Act. Our question is, how are these provisions 
triggered; what implements, what initiates the action of going 
after the third party? And in what kind of instances does that 
type of thing happen? 

If you owe some money on your income tax that you have failed 
to pay, do you go after — if you're a farmer — after the grain 
company that owes you some money? Or do you go after the 
neighbour who bought some hay off of you? How is that system 
triggered and in what kind of instances? 
 
We're also concerned as to how many companies within the oil 
and gas industry — which is what this Bill is dealing with — 
how many of those companies are in arrears on paying their 
royalty taxes? If it's only a very small number, is it really 
necessary that this type of legislation be brought forward, that 
threatens third parties? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look through the legislation on this, it 
states that no sooner than seven days after being served with a 
notice, a third party being served with a notice, the minister can 
immediately demand payment. Well, Mr. Speaker, this seems to 
be fairly swift and hard handed. I know within the oil patch, 
many times that payments aren't made for 90 days. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if the minister has the opportunity to serve his notice 
and seven days later to demand the payment, that seems to be 
very swift justice, if justice it is indeed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we do have some concerns in these particular 
areas that we'll be dealing with when it comes to committee. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we're prepared to allow this one to 
proceed to committee at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
 (1115) 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 14 — An Act 
to amend The Crown Minerals Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our caucus 
has had some time, and certainly my colleague the member 
from Estevan has taken some time, to review and examine Bill 
No. 14, and it appears that it is very similar to the freehold and 
gas legislation. 
 
We understand that there are provisions within Bill 14 allowing 
the minister to use a certificate process, which the minister says, 
and I quote: 
 
 . . . simplifies and speeds up the process to obtain the 

equivalent of a court judgement for the recovery of a 
debt . . . (this) certificate can then be used to recover 
unpaid amounts from a third party such as the purchaser 
of the Crown mineral. 

 
We do have a bit of trouble with the third party being 
responsible for the debts they do not rightfully own. I 
understand that such a system is in place with The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act and The Income Tax Act. 



April 13, 1995 

 
1577 

However, Mr. Speaker, I'm not aware of situations where third 
parties have been left paying someone else's taxes. And it is our 
intention to quiz the minister regarding this and find out 
whether any other provinces such as Alberta can serve a third 
party a tax bill such as the one that this piece of legislation 
imposes. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, we're still waiting to hear from some 
of the groups. We've been in contact with the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers, the Small Explorers and 
Producers Association of Canada, the Saskatchewan Mining 
Association, for their reactions for the provisions in Bill No. 14. 
 
We would like to know exactly what they think of the third 
party billing, just how much they were consulted on this 
legislation, and other questions that we have, and certainly 
those are questions we will be raising with the minister when 
we address this in committee. 
 
In the minister's second reading speech he said again, and I 
quote: 
 
 The Crown Minerals Act provides the legislative 

framework for the granting and acquiring of all rights to 
interests in Crown minerals. 

 
We'd like to know exactly what is meant by acquiring of all 
rights to interests in Crown minerals. 
 
This Bill, we believe, also provides for the use of an average 
price in the determination of natural gas royalties, to simplify 
natural gas royalty calculation and recording procedures. 
 
I hope the new policy initiative being added to the 
regulations-making section is similar to that which Alberta 
recently introduced. The minister stated earlier that his 
department has been working closely with the oil and gas 
industry to determine if administration could be simplified in 
Saskatchewan by using an average rather than actual prices 
received to determine natural gas royalties. 
 
He indicated that a decision on this matter, and again quote, 
"will be made within the next few months." 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, it would be appropriate that if that is the 
intent, that maybe it would be . . . one would wonder what the 
purpose of this Bill is and why we would pass it at this time 
previous to coming to a satisfactory conclusion with all parties 
involved regarding the structure of fees. 
 
After all, what happens if the final decision on an average price 
is that it's not best for Saskatchewan? Then is the minister's 
answer, too late; it's already law. Have we already passed 
something that . . . something into place that the industry would 
find offensive. 
 
We find there are many other questions that we have regarding 
this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and would like answers to those  

questions. We would certainly be seeking answers of the 
minister in committee. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we're 
prepared at this time to allow this Bill as well, Bill No. 14, An 
Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, 1995 to proceed to 
committee as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to repeal The Economic Development 
and Tourism Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
minister to please introduce the official who has joined us here 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
committee, Mr. Bob Perrin is joining us to help advise us on 
this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Perrin. 
 
I guess my first question has to deal with why are we doing this 
today. Why is this particular Bill coming forward now? Why 
wasn't it wound up last year when the changes were made to the 
other Economic Development areas with the changes to 
SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), 
etc.? Why is this being done now and why wasn't it proceeded 
with last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The reason that this was done 
separately is because of the extra consultation that went into the 
process in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Who were 
you consulting with and what were you consulting with them 
about on this particular piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — There's a lot of meetings with 
northern communities and northern groups on the replacement 
for the northern revolving fund — problems that had existed 
with that fund. And I don't want to belabour them and go into 
the long lists of loans that were given out and the problems 
associated with them. 
 
This is not dissimilar from the long list that you would read in 
the taxpayers' association newspaper of loans that came out 
through SEDCO during those dark days of the 1980s. And I 
could go into the list and get them all out for you, but I really, 
really don't want to get into that. 
 
But in order to get through that period and wind that revolving 
fund down, there was a lot of negotiation and consultation that 
went on. If you want me to go back and get the long list of 
problems associated with that fund, I could do that. 



April 13, 1995 

 
1578 

Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that there 
has been a long, long history of problems with SEDCO, going 
back ever since its inception, back into the '70s and perhaps 
beyond that, because I don't know just when that particular 
vehicle came into play on it. But even I can remember things 
back in the '70s where SEDCO was in trouble over various 
loans. I guess that was the very nature of the beast, that it was 
there as a vehicle of last resort for a lot of businesses. And 
when you're into a high-risk area, that means you're going to 
suffer some losses. 
 
But that still didn't really explain the necessity of why it was 
carried over for a year and not being done. I'm sure that if . . . 
the consultations, could they not have been done last year to 
have settled this issue? I still don't understand clearly why it 
was necessary to carry it over for the additional year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say again to the member 
opposite, the consultation process just took longer. And we 
could wish, I suppose, that it happened sooner, but the fact is it 
didn't and we have the Bill here now. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With this 
transfer being made, will the existing loans be carried over into 
some other vehicle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, their portion will be carried 
forward as part of the ongoing program and be included in the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Will these loans that continue past the March 31 reporting 
period . . . how will they be reported? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, they'll be reported as part of 
the ongoing public accounts process of the department. So there 
will be an accounting process where you could look up and 
check the ongoing performance of certain loan portfolios. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could tell us where this northern revolving fund originated, 
what piece of legislation it was under. Was it simply under The 
Economic Development and Tourism Act, or where did it 
originally come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I'll have to get . . . I can get the 
exact date and piece of legislation. But from what the memory 
is here, it comes out of the period during the 1970s when DNS 
(Department of Northern Saskatchewan) was the established 
agency or department for development of the economy and 
other things in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I can get you the exact piece of legislation. I don't have that 
here, but my understanding is the revolving fund actually 
originated from back in the days of DNS. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you would 
provide that, please. And also, could you provide what the  

initial goals for this fund were? What was it intended to deliver 
into northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, I'll get that for the member. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 
explain to me where the funds came for the northern 
development fund? Did they initially come out of the 
Consolidated Fund? What kind of input could there have been 
from say northern communities? Were they given an option to 
invest, along with the Consolidated Fund or wherever the 
money may have come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, I think you're absolutely right 
in your assumption. They were granted through the 
Consolidated Fund from the Department of Finance in each 
year's annual budget of the department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
What types of programs or projects was the fund to be involved 
with, and how was it intended to work? If you could explain the 
concept of the revolving fund and how that was supposed to 
work in relationship to the northern development fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The main areas were, I suppose, 
what one might expect  those clusters of economic 
development that are prevalent in northern Saskatchewan, some 
of them historic — fishing, trapping, hunting. And then of 
course the attempt over the period, both in the 1970s and the 
1980s when your government was in power, to try to diversify 
the northern economy into things like wild rice and other areas 
that might be appropriate. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don't know 
how financially successful wild rice was, but you certainly find 
it in every store and every restaurant now. So it would seem that 
the acceptance by the general public is there of wild rice, and 
hopefully it has been an economic advantage to the North. 
 
How would you assess that the fund has fulfilled its goals up 
until its repeal at the present time? Did it fulfil its mandate in 
aiding in the development in those areas that you've talked 
about — fishing, hunting, trapping, and in the diversification of 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think you'd get mixed reviews. I 
think it's not unlike . . . Here again, I don't want to make a direct 
comparison with SEDCO, but I think a lot of times government 
programs get bad raps because what goes wrong certainly gets 
much more attention that what goes right. 
 
And if you go back to that program, I think wild rice is one of 
the examples I think that was helped. I think last year, for 
example, our production of wild rice was around 2 million 
pounds. When I do trade into places like New York, you find 
that all of the four- or five-star restaurants use Saskatchewan  



April 13, 1995 

 
1579 

wild rice on their menu. Places like the Park Plaza in New 
York, the Waldorf Astoria, these places, Saskatchewan wild 
rice is in fact on the menu. 
 
And so this revolving fund has done some good in that area. On 
the other hand, a corporation like SEDCO  which has a very 
poor reputation with the public of Saskatchewan  on the other 
hand, there are many, many businesses that would come 
forward and have come forward and said look, without 
SEDCO, we wouldn't be here — and the jobs that go along with 
it. 
 
So the review is mixed. It's good and bad. On the other hand, 
you could, as I said earlier, I could bring a litany of horror 
stories too where money wasn't repaid and goods purchased 
with money from loans, found out in the bush; it had been 
laying there for five or ten years with no money repaid on the 
loan. 
 
So I think in this era of accountability and more openness in 
government the scrutiny that goes on in these kind of programs 
is much more clear and focused; and sort of what was 
acceptable in the 1970s and 1980s for programs simply isn't 
acceptable in the 1990s, and for that reason the wind-down, 
new criteria and very, very much tougher controls on lending of 
taxpayers' money. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you could give us some examples of some of the ongoing 
successful businesses that have been and still continue to be 
involved in the fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I could, what I would like to do 
here is sort of share, maybe confidentially, some of the list, 
because what I don't want to do here quite honestly is to start 
saying who is successful, who is sort of not successful or who 
. . . that would only be my interpretation. 
 
But if you wouldn't mind, what I would much prefer to do — if 
you push me on it I can get you a list — but what I'd rather do if 
we could, take some time and I can go through a list with you or 
get a staff person to go through and say look, here are the 
companies that are doing fairly well and these that are marginal 
and these that just didn't make it, they're gone. 
 
But in the areas where . . . if I could speak to the areas where 
we've had success, I think it has been in some of the new 
ventures like wild rice or new, innovative programs that the 
northern development has been involved in. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could outline for us how a revolving fund is supposed to 
work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The intent of the revolving fund, so 
to speak, is that the Finance department grants the money to the 
Department of Economic Development which sets up a fund, 
then that money is loaned out to individual companies or 
individuals to do economic development and the money then is  

repaid. The intent would be that over time the Department of 
Finance wouldn't have to grant any more money and you would 
just have a pool that was maintained at a certain level. And 
that's the intent and mandate that was originally established. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. To what 
degree was the revolving fund, the northern development 
revolving fund, influential on what you're developing now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well what we've done is taken the 
one loop out. There's no revolving fund, so to speak, set up in 
the department; it's general revenue, Department of Finance, to 
the operator and then directly back to the Department of 
Finance. So in that sense the revolving part of it has been 
removed to take out one layer of red tape, or one layer of 
administration, which will save us a good deal of money. 
 
Secondly, much tighter and rigorous scrutiny on the program. 
We expect it to be a smaller and tighter program. And the other 
main area is the fact that we will try to focus much more on 
those areas related to new economic development. 
 
And finally, those entrepreneurs who have had outstanding 
loans and not repaid to the original revolving fund will have to 
pay back any arrears before they come and get more money. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Those items 
that you've mentioned in the last part of your statement there 
that you view as improvements, are there any other 
improvements that will be in place, based on the history that 
you have learned through the northern development revolving 
fund that you'll be putting into place today, to ensure that some 
of the problems are eradicated while still allowing — because 
this is obviously a risk area that you're investing in . . . that will 
improve the percentage returns that you'll receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The two big changes would be — 
here again this is not dissimilar from some major changes when 
we wound SEDCO down and got rid of the lending money for 
Main Street for example, for a laundromat or for a restaurant  
the new fund will not lend to those kind of Main Street, 
competitive kind of businesses. At least that's the intent. 
 
The other thing is where the old revolving fund loans were 
going out in excess of a million dollars, this is capped at 
250,000, so no individual or company could get more than 
250,000. And we're looking much more at community-based 
industries which would be tied to trade and trade development, 
things that could be exported out of the area in a value added 
format. And so it will be much less, or limited, in what they will 
do at the retail end, in terms of storefront operations, and much 
more into value added and manufacturing, processing kind of 
areas. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
types of increases in due diligence will be involved in this? You 
say you're not going to be allowing retailers into this fund, to 
access it to develop within their communities, but based more 
on trade. Well I think trade . . . we need trade, we're a trading  



April 13, 1995 

 
1580 

province. Trade is also perhaps a higher risk, something you can 
get less of a grasp on than you can on the retail sector within a 
small community. What kind of further due diligence will you 
be carrying out in those economic areas that will be applying 
for funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The main difference will be in the 
fact that there will have to be a market analysis done to see that 
the product being produced will actually have a market. 
 
And I think overall in the 1980s — and I'm not saying this 
critically of Saskatchewan, but I think in a general way across 
Canada, maybe all across North America — there was this 
belief if you could just build factories or just build something, 
that that's all you had to do. 
 
And I remember people saying: well we can produce this and 
that and the other thing as well as anybody else. We can 
produce pasta for example as easily as Kraft can produce pasta. 
But what we now know is if you don't have a market for the 
product that you make, it doesn't matter whether you make the 
best telephones, for example, in the world, which Trinitel 
claimed to do, at a certain town in Saskatchewan. They built 
warehouses full of telephones, but nobody bought the 
telephones so therefore they went bankrupt. And you almost 
have to start the formula from the other end — find a market 
niche and then back up the system and produce for that market. 
 
And so we are very intent on looking at where the product will 
go if in fact you produce a certain commodity. And this is not 
only true of northern Saskatchewan, that will be true of 
economic development in the South as well. This is a major, 
major, but fundamentally important shift from the economic 
development that went under the old revolving fund. 
 
And when you say that the trade is a bigger risk, it's not 
accurate when you apply that determination of due diligence 
that the market has to be there in order for the loan to go into 
the company. In fact the risk is very much mitigated, and those 
export operations are actually very viable. 
 
The old northern revolving fund would clearly point out that the 
worst loans, where you were injecting money into areas where 
there is already overheated in terms of the number of storefronts 
in places like La Ronge or Ile-a-la-Crosse or other areas where 
you are putting government money in to artificially compete 
with people who had invested their life's earnings or had done a 
lot of work and didn't have the advantage of having government 
money at their disposal. 
 
So I think in all those areas we have improved the due diligence 
at the front end. And the higher the risk, also on the business 
plan, the more the individual or the local company has to put in 
in terms of equity at the front end. 
 
We're saying if the risk is very high, take your own money and 
put it in. We may be able to put a little bit in but you're going to 
have to take the majority of the risk. Because I think at the end 
of the day what the taxpayers want to know is if they're putting  

any money in, that the individual also is putting in a good 
chunk of their own money so that when the project goes 
forward, risk is being taken by the proponent as well as the 
taxpayer. 
 
Now it's not going to be a perfect system; there is no perfect 
system. But also the government has very, very much reduced 
the number of revolving funds overall and has very, very much 
reduced the amount of taxpayers’ money that we will put out 
for direct loans to companies for economic development 
because we think that where individuals and companies really 
should look, in the longer run, is to traditional lending 
institutions. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well 
indeed people should be looking to the financial institutions, to 
the banks and to the credit unions. I know when I was on the 
board of my local credit union that a number of people came 
forward to us looking for assistance in developing a business. 
And we believed at the time we made good choices and once in 
a while it turned out not to be the case. 
 
But when you're doing your due diligence in dealing with trade 
though, Mr. Minister, what kind of an end result is going to 
have to be in place prior to the approvals for those loans? Are 
the people who are going to develop a manufacture and trade 
system, are they going to have to have signed contracts that they 
are going to deliver X product to X wholesale or some place, so 
that they know that they have a more or less iron-bound 
contract — as tight as those can be — to accept the product that 
they manufacture? Are they going to have to have something 
like that, that they have an assured acceptance point for their 
trade goods? Or is it just some sort of a system that says that 
this item is desired in this particular market and we believe we 
can sell there? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, on the two points that you 
refer to, first of all what is needed in the market analysis is 
proof that there's actually room in the market for the commodity 
to fit; that they have the proper middle person, if one is needed, 
in order to take that product from where it's at into that market. 
 
And while there doesn't have to be absolute contract signed, we 
just aren't in a position to lend out money if we aren't highly 
satisfied that that flow will take place. And nor should we want 
to be, because we're not doing anybody a favour by giving them 
money if in six months or a year they're either going to be back 
at your door and you're going to have to say no to them or the 
company's gone bankrupt. So that in fact becomes an important 
element. 
 
The other thing is, in terms of why the northern fund is 
important even today, and I would say more important than in 
the South, is the fact that many lending institutions simply aren't 
present in some of these northern communities. So part of our 
work in the department too has been to urge the lending 
institutions, Royal Bank and all the banks, in a general way,  



April 13, 1995 

 
1581 

and the credit unions, to take a responsibility and to be present 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So we're working with them. And we have actually had very, 
very good cooperation from the lending institutions to say look, 
are there things that we should be doing in the North that we're 
not already doing at the present time? So that partnership 
between government, local community, and the banking 
institutions, I say again, while not perfect, is becoming more 
cohesive. 
 
And also . . . I just want to refer back to question period today 
because I think also, in the general economy in society at large, 
there is much more growth in the belief that there is personal 
responsibility. And if you take taxpayers' money to do economic 
development, you had better be sure that at the end of the day 
you're going to pay that money back. The day of taking a 100 
per cent taxpayers' dollars and then saying, well it's just 
taxpayers' dollars, it really doesn't matter whether we pay it 
back or not, doesn't exist any more. 
 
And the same is true of many other things. The issue of gaming, 
not to get into it, but there's this continual thing that if 
somebody goes out and steals a bunch of money from their 
church, that somehow they can be absolved because the 
government had something to do with regulating gaming. Or if 
somebody drinks too much liquor and goes home and abuses 
their kids, that somehow because they got the liquor at the 
liquor board store that they are absolved from their 
responsibility. 
 
That simply isn't the case any more in our society. You've got to 
repay loans that you take from the government. If the taxpayers 
are good enough to give you some money, you bloody better be 
ready to pay that money back. If you buy liquor at a government 
liquor board store, that doesn't mean you can go out and drive 
your car and have an accident and somehow say, the 
government made me do it. And when there are VLTs or 
bingos, you can't go and spend all your kids' money that you 
should be using for food, and say somehow the government 
made me do it. It doesn't work that way. 
 
And what this is very quickly boiling down into is that the 
public, the people, have obviously responsibility. Government 
has roles and ways and means of regulating, taxing, and 
administering programs, but you cannot take away from the 
personal responsibility that if you get something, a loan from 
government, you have to repay it. If you buy a 26 of liquor at 
the liquor board store, a government liquor board store, you 
have to treat it with respect. And if you're going to go into a 
VLT operation, you can't take the grocery money and spend it 
all and say that the government made me do it. Or you can't go 
to church on Sunday and go into the collection plate and take 
out $100 and say somehow the minister in charge of gambling 
made me go to church and take the money. There is such a thing 
as personal responsibility, and no more is that more true than 
right here in economic development. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I find  

your speech very surprising though, that it seems like it's a 
major change for someone who would be a proponent for the 
left wing of society to come forward with the idea that the 
individual is somehow responsible for their own actions. As I 
listen to political diatribes from the left, it always seems that 
they are promoting the idea that it's society who is responsible 
for the ills that have taken place within our society — that little 
Johnny is not responsible for being an axe murderer; it was 
society that created him in that manner. And, Mr. Minister, 
you're saying no, Johnny is responsible for his own actions. 
And I just happen to agree with you on that, Mr. Minister, that 
indeed the individual is responsible. 
 
On the other side of that though, Mr. Minister, governments or 
anyone else who promotes something that does encourage those 
kind of actions, has to also bear some responsibility. 
 
When VLTs were placed within our society to make it readily 
available to everyone, the person who benefits has to bear some 
responsibility for the things that happen as a result of that being 
available. In this particular case, it's the government who 
benefits, the government who made the VLTs available, and 
therefore the government has to bear some of the responsibility. 
 
The individual who did it will pay for his responsibility for his 
involvement in it. But the other parties involved, being the 
government, does not wish to be held accountable, because they 
are saying, our only involvement in this is we're collecting the 
taxes on it. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you're collecting a very, very large volume 
of taxes on there, and that's the only reason it's there, Mr. 
Minister. And while you may wish to deny any responsibility 
for Johnny's actions, by making those items available you have 
created that opportunity and that need within him, and therefore 
you have to also bear some of the responsibility. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, how will you determine . . . you said that 
you don't need to have a contract in place to determine whether 
or not the product that will be put into the market will be viable. 
So what measures, what measures and due diligence, will be in 
place to determine that product, this widget, is going to sell in 
this area, wherever it's being delivered to? 
 
You can certainly say that we need a better mousetrap, but we 
don't know if a better mousetrap will sell in Regina. If we don't 
happen to have any mice in Regina, it's going to be difficult to 
sell mousetraps here. If you have a distributor in Regina who's 
prepared to say, I will take a million mousetraps from you, then 
you have something in your hand. You have a signed contract 
to say yes, let's get producing mousetraps because in Regina we 
have a person who's prepared to buy them. He may distribute 
them some place else if there's no mice in Regina. 
 
But if you just say, well we believe that there is a need for 
mousetraps in Regina because we have seen mice running 
around on the streets, but you don't know if the people already 
have enough mousetraps and aren't prepared to use them, so 
how do you determine whether or not you actually have a  



April 13, 1995 

 
1582 

market there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member raises an important 
issue, and that is about marketing. And I couldn't agree with 
him more. Because at the end of the day, I say again, it doesn't 
matter whether you can make mousetraps or not, it's whether 
you can sell mousetraps that is really the important issue. And 
you have to start from that end. 
 
Let me use the example of wild rice. I compare wild rice to be 
not a high-risk endeavour because there's a greater demand for 
the product worldwide than there is production. And especially 
though, when it comes to Saskatchewan wild rice, it is just a 
high-value commodity. People will pay a premium for it. There 
is competition from the United States because they now grow 
what they call wild rice commercially on irrigated land, but still 
it doesn't compete with northern wild rice in terms of price or 
quality. 
 
And so when it would come to people being involved in the 
wild rice production, the point I'm making here is, we wouldn't 
be nearly as anxious if they had an actual contract any more 
than you would on canola in the South. The fact is there's a big 
demand for it. We know that people are going to be able to sell 
it. And they're going to be able to sell it for a good price. 
 
When it came to something more exotic, where there isn't an 
obvious market for it, we might actually at the end of the day 
demand or insist that they have a contract before we would lend 
money. So there's that variance in terms of the risk. 
 
But I just want to for a moment go back to this issue of personal 
responsibility on repaying the loans. One of the things that we 
talked to them a lot about, is the importance of personal 
responsibility. That this is not government money, this is your 
neighbour and friend's tax dollars that you're taking in order to 
help you get started. And you had better believe that when you 
look a person in the eye who's giving the loan, that you have 
every absolute intent of repaying your neighbours and friends 
their tax dollars that you are taking to help get your business 
going. 
 
And this is not an easy process. And it's not Roy Romanow's 
money or good old Chrétien's money. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I'll remind the member that he's 
not to use the proper names of members of the House. I know 
he knows that, and I just ask you to keep that in mind when he's 
speaking in the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman, 
and probably just speaking too fast here. I neglected to use the 
Premier as opposed to the individual name. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, no more is this true than on 
economic development and the millions of dollars over the past 
10 years that have been granted to people. And I think at times 
during the 1980s, there was a belief that this money — I don't 
know where they thought it came from — but that it just  

appeared in the till in the Department of Finance and it could be 
given out helter-skelter, and with little attempt to reclaim or to 
get it back. 
 
This is also true  and I want to comment on your words about 
gaming and liquor sales and the other areas of responsibility, 
cigarettes and tobacco  to say that we as a government 
believe in anything other than personal responsibility, is 
absolutely inaccurate. 
 
Do we promote VLTs? Do we promote 649s? Is that proper for 
a government to do? The fact is, is that liquor advertising 
started in the 1980s when you people were in government, and 
personal responsibility on repaying northern revolving fund 
loans, or whether you drink too much, or whether you make a 
conscious decision to smoke — even though written right on 
the package the disclaimer that it's bad for you health, 
particularly for women who are expecting — these are personal 
decisions. 
 
And I say again when somebody goes into a bar, obviously they 
see a sign on the bar that there's two things in there that you 
might be concerned about: there's liquor and there's now VLTs. 
And that is true in Alberta, it's true in Manitoba, it's true in 
North Dakota, it's true in Montana, and yes, it's true in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It should come as no surprise to any individual that if you go 
into a bar in Saskatchewan there's going to be liquor. You can 
probably buy cigarettes from behind the till and smoke them if 
you want. And yes, you'll be able to put your hand in your 
pocket and take money out and put it in the VLTs. 
 
But it is not logical to take the next step and say — and it's a 
defence to say — I can go to church and steal money out of the 
kitty, and then a week later or a day later go down and spend it 
on VLTs. That might be a great defence for lawyers to take to 
the courtroom, but I would be very surprised if it has much 
impact for very long; any more than it would be when you have 
over .08 to say: I bought this at a government liquor board 
store; therefore I'm not to blame, the government's to blame. It's 
a ludicrous, simplistic, I would say stupid, argument. 
 
It doesn't work that way. When somebody takes money out of 
their wallet and plugs it into a VLT or takes money out of their 
wallet to buy a 26 of rye or takes money out of their pocket to 
buy cigarettes, that's personal responsibility, nothing more. 
 
When they buy a ticket to go to Las Vegas, I'm not going to go 
out and tell them they should spend it on more clothing for their 
kids or new furniture. The simple fact is, that's personal 
responsibility. 
 
And if the members opposite continue to come to the House 
and say look, it's the government's fault that this guy went to the 
Catholic church and stole out of the collection plate, it's an 
interesting philosophy that that's who you would defend. But I 
can tell you quite clearly, in my household if somebody says to 
me: look, I had to steal money to go to the video arcade, and the  



April 13, 1995 

 
1583 

guy owning the video arcade is responsible for me going to 
your wallet and stealing the money, I can tell you what I'm 
going to be telling my kid; it isn't going down to the video store 
and holding up a sign saying, my kid steals money therefore I 
want you to close down your arcade. 
 
And you people opposite should know that you're absolutely on 
the wrong side of the issue defending people who steal money 
to plug them into VLTs. That is not how society works. And if 
that's how you're raising your kids, it is absolutely no wonder 
that we have the problems that we have. 
 
When people steal money to buy booze, to buy cigarettes, to 
plug into VLTs, to go to Las Vegas, they're guilty. That's all. 
They shouldn't do that. And for you to come here and say, 
condone that and say, look, it's the government's fault that you 
buy liquor or it's the government's fault that you play VLTs or 
the government's fault you go to bingos — where do you get off 
with that kind of logic? It doesn't work that way. 
 
And in this Bill, when people take money from the government 
to invest in their company they had better believe they have a 
personal responsibility to repay — not half of it, not 60 per cent 
of it, but every cent of it, plus interest. That's how it works. 
 
(1200) 
 
And I say this only, Mr. Chairman, because I get so tired of 
people coming to this House pandering to people who have 
stolen money, and saying the government made me do it. What 
in the world kind of logic . . . what has the Conservative Party 
come to? 
 
Where have you come from that you would take the approach 
of coming to the House and saying, if somebody drinks and 
drives but buys their booze at a government liquor board store 
that somehow they're innocent? It doesn't work that way. You 
know that. You can't go to church and steal money and go to a 
bingo and spend it and have a defence that says, bingos made 
me go to church and steal the money. That's not logical. 
 
And for the Conservative Party to continue to come here on that 
line, I think tells you why you are at 10 per cent. The public 
doesn't believe that line; they believe in personal responsibility. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has prompted 
several of us, Mr. Chairman, to address the question to the 
minister in terms of the responsibility of government. I think the 
minister would know that when government sets the rules, it 
has some implications on the general public. 
 
I believe its true, for example, Mr. Chairman, that the several 
jurisdictions in the United States . . . like you say, that 
Tennessee doesn't allow gambling. Period. And they've made 
that choice because they feel the general public believes that it 
can have a negative impact on children and on people who are 
tempted to do a lot of things associated with gambling. Now we 
have the Grande Ole Opry; we have the home of Elvis Presley; 
we have a lot of attention in the state of Tennessee. But that  

state and the people of that state, for moral reasons and political 
reasons, as it comes to pass, do not allow gambling. 
 
Now the point is being made that if in fact we thought that it 
didn't matter, then we could say to the minister, if you think that 
the state doesn't matter, you could legalize marijuana. And you 
could make a very valid argument, given your logic, that it 
wouldn't matter if you bought marijuana or not because that's a 
personal choice. You could legalize prostitution — wouldn't 
matter because that's a personal choice. You could have liquor 
sold in retail stores. The minister could open up a beer and 
liquor for sale in Safeway, Superstore, all retail stores across the 
province. And he'd say, well it wouldn't matter if people got it 
or if they're more tempted by it because it's here, because that's 
a personal choice. You could drop the drinking age to 16 years 
old rather than 19. It wouldn't really make a difference. 
 
Now clearly, Mr. Minister, those kinds of suggestions would 
have significant political, moral impact in society. And you're 
saying they're not. Well we're noticing is that your push to 
VLTs and slot machines is causing people to steal from co-ops 
and steal from churches and steal from organizations that we 
didn't notice before. 
 
And I can recall, Mr. Chairman, when the members opposite, 
the NDP, would sit on this side of the House and they would 
say this, they'd say: don't allow beer ads in Saskatchewan. Don't 
allow beer ads. Does anybody remember that? The NDP would 
say: if you allow beer ads, you're pushing liquor on the public. 
 
And it strikes me as rather hypocritical, Mr. Chairman, that the 
member opposite from Regina Elphinstone, who said don't have 
beer ads because you might entice people to abuse beer and it 
would impose it on young people, now stands in his place and 
says: slot machines, VLTs, don't matter at all. That's a personal 
decision. 
 
Well obviously he has taken many, many, many positions in his 
political life and he's flip-flopped more than the Liberal leader, 
if you really get down to it. He'll take one position on this side 
of the House and another position on that side of the House. 
 
The point that we're making, Mr. Chairman, with respect to all 
of economic development and with respect to the attitude of the 
administration, the NDP government, is the fact that 
government rules make a difference. 
 
Churches have said, churches have said that if you open up the 
temptation of gambling, people will be susceptible to that. And 
you're denying that. You say no, it doesn't matter. Well then you 
could say the argument to those churches, well if you follow the 
NDP logic — and you could say this to all the churches — we'll 
just open up to prostitution, we'll open up to marijuana, we'll 
open it up to more gambling. And obviously the public would 
say no, don't do that. Don't even think about doing it. But the 
minister doesn't seem to recognize it. 
 
And we know, as seasoned politicians in here, exactly what he's 
saying. He's trying to make a smokescreen and trying to bluff  



April 13, 1995 

 
1584 

his way through, but the consequences to the people of 
Stoughton are very real. And you make fun of it. And people 
weren't doing that to feed VLTs and gambling habits before you 
introduced this policy. And the churches weren't meeting 
together and saying, stop this. And people weren't asking for a 
plebiscite and saying, let the people decide. 
 
If you go into Stoughton today and you walk through the streets 
of Stoughton, you will not be popular introducing VLTs and 
slot machines into the community, because that man and that 
community and that family are suffering dearly as a result of 
your policy. And people know you're doing it for money, no 
other reasons. 
 
You have religious people on your side of the House who have 
been men of the cloth and people of the cloth, Mennonites, 
people who belong to the Alliance Church, the United Church, 
the Catholic Church, who feel very, very badly about your 
policies. And yet you're pushing them through for what? For 
money. No more, no less. So for you to stand in this House . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I've been listening for the last 
several minutes to the member's comments. And I'm looking at 
the Bill and seeing no connection between the comments and 
the Bill before us. I will ask that . . . Order. I will ask that the 
member tie his comments to the Bill in some way. And I remind 
the member that the Bill is An Act to repeal the Economic 
Development and Tourism Act. And I would ask that you tie 
your comments to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I think the record will speak for 
itself. The minister brought up VLTs and economic 
development, and particularly when he's talking about northern 
Saskatchewan — it's his claim to fame. And it's part of a 
so-called attraction to come into the province of Saskatchewan, 
and he wants to try to soften here over the noon hour the 
implications of his slot machine policy on economic 
development. 
 
And what we've raised here in the House, and we hear across 
Saskatchewan, we hear now in Alberta, we hear in Manitoba, 
and now in several states in the United States, people are having 
serious second thoughts about economic development tied to 
gambling that takes money, most of the money, from the poor. 
 
How can you feel good as a socialist or as a Christian or as an 
affiliated person associated with looking after the low income 
when you know 80 per cent of the money comes from the 
poorest of the poor? And that's economic development? You're 
taxing the very people that need help — the very, very . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, isn't it interesting that they can't even listen to 
the arguments now that they've raised them, coming back in 
front, because they say it's going to be good for economic 
development if we tax the poorest of the poor, we'll get them 
. . . Imagine what they're going to do. People in Stoughton will 
end up stealing $50,000 from the local co-op to fund their habit 
now that the VLTs are there, or the slot machines are there. 

Gambling takes money out of the hands of those that are on 
welfare. It takes money out of the people who are single 
parents. It takes money from seniors that don't have it. And you 
call this an economic development strategy. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this is not an economic development strategy. 
This is socialist greed and the height of hypocrisy. How can a 
socialist . . . how could a socialist who says that they believe in 
helping the poor take 80 per cent of all this hundreds of 
millions of dollars from the poor and say, oh well it doesn't 
matter; we could legalize marijuana, it wouldn't matter; we 
could legalize any other kind of activity, it wouldn't matter; it 
wouldn't have any impact. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, it obviously has a negative impact. If 
there's jurisdiction . . . if there are jurisdictions that say no 
gambling, like the state of Tennessee, because they're afraid of 
the consequences, the moral consequences on society of 
gambling, then at least the minister and the government on the 
other side could acknowledge, maybe it's worth looking at. 
 
If we've put so much temptation into the hands and into the 
faces of the general public in the province of Saskatchewan that 
people will steal from churches and steal from co-ops and steal 
from volunteer organizations to fund the economic project and 
philosophy of the NDP, then I say we don't want any part of it. 
 
The public doesn't want any part of it; it's shameful. And as the 
churches said, it's immoral, and they're upset and they want it 
stopped. They want a plebiscite; they want people to talk about 
it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to know, if the minister wants to talk 
about VLTs and his economic development strategy, why he 
and the Premier won't allow the public to speak on the 
consequences of carrying on more VLTs, more slot machines, 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yesterday I believe that the Premier said, he was quoted as 
saying in terms of economic development, he would not allow a 
vote or a plebiscite in the province of Saskatchewan even 
though he knew the public was interested. And there's serious, 
serious consequences to all this new gambling; the Premier 
said, I won't allow the vote. 
 
Now why won't an NDP Premier allow a vote on gambling in 
the province of Saskatchewan? What does that tell you? 
 
It tells you he is ashamed of the way he's picking up money 
from the poor. If you go in downtown Riversdale or downtown 
Elphinstone, you'll find lots of poor people. And if you look at 
the NDP record in terms of economic development inside those 
two ridings, it's pathetic. 
 
And now the key to success is we'll get them gambling, we'll 
get them out of their homes and out of their apartments and out 
of the low income places, and they can gamble and they can 
spend more and more and more money on the slot machines 
and VLTs because the NDP have figured out how to rob the  



April 13, 1995 

 
1585 

poor — how to rob the poor and make it look nice, cover it up, 
put it in a glassy, fan-filled, star-filled rooms, and say come on 
in and we'll get your money. And this is the classic economic 
development for the NDP. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I say that VLTs are directly linked to the 
economic development strategy of the NDP. And the slot 
machines are linked, and the gambling policy is linked. And I 
believe the people of Saskatchewan want some say in how this 
is going to be developed. And I believe that they honestly 
disagree with the Premier who said yesterday, I won't let you 
vote on it. 
 
If the economic strategy of this so-called new wave of people in 
the province of Saskatchewan, this new NDP government, is to 
say we will relax the laws and tempt people more; I don't care 
what the churches say . . . That's what the NDP . . . they just 
don't listen to them. I don't care what our back-benchers say, 
those for religious reasons and moral reasons don't like 
gambling, the NDP in the front row saying no, we're going to 
do it anyway. 
 
And the consequences to the people of Saskatchewan are a 
long, long run — the general public, the downtown public, 
people off reserves, people on reserves, people in the 
communities like La Ronge, people in cities like Regina and 
Saskatoon, and other places. 
 
Economic development, Mr. Chairman, should be much more 
imaginative than just introducing gambling to the people of 
Saskatchewan in a way that causes them, as we've found out 
this morning, to take money from the co-ops and money from 
their churches and say, I had to do it to fund my passion for 
gambling, this new-found passion. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, it is not valid for the minister to stand up 
and say, don't blame us; we're just the government. You 
introduced the VLTs and the slot machines. And if you 
introduce laws on marijuana that made it more liberal, you 
would suffer the consequences of it. And if you want to talk 
about doing that, fair enough. If you introduce laws to lower the 
drinking age and say it's no consequence, fair enough. But your 
arguments the government can't make a difference are not 
accurate and are not valid. 
 
So I think it's about time, Mr. Minister, that you came forward 
with a strategy for real economic development and quit picking 
on the poor in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I've heard it 
all now. Now the former premier is arguing to legalize 
marijuana. Now the Tory caucus has gone absolutely overboard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The argument to legalize marijuana, 
by the Tory caucus, does not make any sense. It makes no 
sense. 

Now I know you moved to start advertising beer and booze in 
the province of Saskatchewan when you were in government. 
But this idea to legalize prostitution and legalize marijuana is 
taking it one step too far. 
 
And I wish the member from Estevan would stick around for 
the argument because . . . Just because you're losing is no 
reason not to stay and listen. 
 
I say to the members opposite that . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. I know that the member is 
well aware that the rules of the House don't allow the comment 
on the presence or the absence of other members of the House, 
and I would ask that the member be aware of that and refrain 
from doing that. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — But I say again, Mr. Speaker, that 
this whole issue of the state intervening takes me right to the 
point of the gun control Bill and the $85 million that the federal 
government is demanding that people in northern 
Saskatchewan, from across the piece, spend. For what? So the 
government can register their guns because people don't have 
enough brains to keep them locked away, to take care of them. 
 
And here the former premier says, and that is true of people 
who steal from the Catholic church on Sunday, that there again 
the government should shut down bingos and everything that 
they might spend that money on — liquor board stores, 
cigarettes. 
 
There is no excuse for that. And I know that he would say that 
the federal government should spend $85 million on registering 
guns because the public can't take care of that themselves. But it 
shows you how far the Tory Party has gone towards government 
intervention in everybody's lives. That's what he wants, and I 
can't believe it because it's so out of line with the principles on 
which their party was built. John Diefenbaker would roll over 
in his grave if he could hear this former premier talk about 
government intervention, government intervention. 
 
They should . . . the people of Saskatchewan can't decide 
whether they want to buy cigarettes or not. The government 
should step in and get rid of them. And we should get rid of the 
beer in our community even though when he was in 
government, he advertised it for the first time in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the members opposite that you're on the wrong side of 
this issue of government being in control of everything in 
everybody's lives. Eighty-five million dollars for gun control is 
money that could be used by the federal government in a 
hundred different ways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It could be used to improve our highway system. It could be 
improved to use in our airports. It could be helping our farmers 
to diversify into other programs. But no, like the Conservative  



April 13, 1995 

 
1586 

Party here in Saskatchewan, they're big time into control of the 
public, assuming that the public, those that are reasonable, need 
that kind of government intervention. 
 
And everyone knows that controlling and registering guns isn't 
going to do one iota of good in terms of stopping the problems 
with crime and guns that we have for sure in our society. 
 
And the members opposite can go on and on how the public 
isn't responsible, and they can't decide whether or not to buy 
that 26 of liquor from the liquor board store. That's no defence 
for people to go out and drink and drive because they bought it 
at a government liquor board store. It's ludicrous. It's ludicrous. 
 
And for the member to say, well if you're going to have liquor 
sold out of liquor board stores, then you should legalize 
marijuana, that logic is absolutely . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Now I'm listening very carefully to the 
remarks of the minister and I'm equally finding the remarks — 
order — to be really quite in absence of reference to the Bill or 
its content as I was listening to the question being asked. 
 
And I would — order — and I would ask the minister to bring 
the remarks closer to the Bill, and I would ask the questioners, 
both the questioners and the minister, to be aware of the content 
of the Bill before us, An Act to repeal The Economic 
Development and Tourism Act. 
 
Order. If we can bring . . . Order. If the minister wants to 
continue his response he may, and I again caution him to tie his 
remarks to the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I say to the members opposite 
that when it comes to economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan, the northern revolving fund has been eliminated. 
This is the Bill that officially does that, and I'd be pleased to 
answer any other questions on that issue. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, with respect to economic 
development, would you care to elaborate how the public can 
feel confident about your strategy on economic development 
when in fact you have flip-flopped on your philosophy and 
belief with respect to economic development and gambling? Let 
me give you and the chairman an illustration. 
 
In the city of Moose Jaw, for economic development there was 
planned a casino some years back. In the city of Moose Jaw — 
and the chairman will know — there was support for a casino, a 
privately run casino along with the city of Moose Jaw, for 
tourism and economic development. 
 
And at that time, certain individuals including, Mr. Minister, 
NDP members, NDP supporters, including the Minister of 
Health — a preacher at the time — marched up and down Main 
Street against private gambling as a source of economic 
development. 
 
The Minister of Health, the preacher, NDP preacher, said, no  

gambling in Moose Jaw. I'm against it. Economic development 
should not be associated with gambling. I'm a man of the cloth 
and my parishioners won't stand for it. And he marched up and 
down Main Street. 
 
Now today, that man who marched up and down Main Street as 
an NDP preacher from Moose Jaw, since he's the Minister of 
Health and endorses the new economic development strategy 
for the NDP in the province of Saskatchewan . . . which is 
what? More gambling, more gambling, and more gambling, 
where people are now stealing from the churches for economic 
development. 
 
People in Kindersley admitted they had a problem in gambling 
and stole from the church to put money in the NDP coffers. 
This morning what did we hear? In Stoughton, a man admits 
that he took 50 or $60,000 from the local co-op to feed his 
gambling addiction. And yet the Minister of Health, the 
preacher who marched up and down Main Street against 
privatized gambling, is all for it today. 
 
Why is the public suspect about your gambling policies? 
Because of the hypocrisy and the turnaround of the NDP. On 
one side of the House they would say one thing, and on the 
other side of the House, completely different. 
 
No confidence in your economic strategy. This has got nothing 
to do with economic strategy. It's greed for money. You've got 
some fat pensions; you've got some big salaries; you've got 
friends in the civil service; and you want money. You've taken 
it from farmers; you've taken it from pensioners; you've taken it 
from seniors. And you call that economic development 
strategy? It's pathetic. Absolutely pathetic. And you should be 
ashamed of yourself. 
 
Gambling is serious business for a lot of people in the province 
of Saskatchewan in terms of a moral issue. And you've done an 
about-face and you're being called on. Because economic 
development on the backs of the poor, taking their money when 
you said you'd never do it, and your members paraded up and 
down the streets to make sure that they would never do it, 
shows that you're just after greed. 
 
This has nothing to do with an economic strategy. It's nothing to 
do with the right kind of things to do. It's your lack of 
imagination for real economic development. 
 
I haven't seen a proposal for strategic economic development 
come out of you yet. You've tried co-generation and it fell flat 
on its face. You've propped up some companies that would 
come in. You'd say, well come on in; we've changed our mind a 
little bit; we'll give you some cash, to multinationals. And that's 
what bothers people that sit in the gallery that used to be your 
supporters. They said, I thought you told us that multinationals 
were bad, and now you're giving them cash to come in here. 
 
Is that your economic development strategy? That's the big flip. 
More gambling, take from the poor, and take some of that 
money that you took out of the homes of the poor and you can  



April 13, 1995 

 
1587 

give it to a multinational that's got hundreds of millions if not 
billions of dollars. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now I'm listening carefully again 
to the remarks of the member from Estevan in Bill No. 34, 
which is An Act to repeal The Economic Development and 
Tourism Act. I'm looking at the content of the Bill and really 
having a very difficult time relating the remarks to the Bill, 
understanding that relationship. 
 
And I'll ask the member to make a direct relationship between 
his remarks and the Bill, please, to respect the rules of debate in 
the House. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's a question of 
due diligence in how the government will implement and carry 
out its economic development strategy given the history of their 
flip-flop back and forth on issues. 
 
And the confidence . . . As you know, Mr. Chairman, economic 
development is based on confidence. If you have investor 
confidence, people will come into the province of 
Saskatchewan to invest in whatever it might be they think that 
they can make money at. If you have a flip-flop in policies and 
significant changes, it has an impact on confidence. 
 
What the public is telling me is that when the minister says he 
has got a great strategy for northern Saskatchewan that's based 
on VLTs and slot machines, people are saying, is that the kind 
of policy that could sustain itself? 
 
We have Indian bands and Indian members who say, there is 
more to developing life on a reserve or off a reserve than 
gambling. It's serious. We have people who are now 
questioning the whole economic development strategy of the 
NDP administration because they've made so many flip-flops. 
Now as a result of that, we just question with sincere due 
diligence whether it can be sustained and whether it's been 
thought through. 
 
Now I mentioned the gambling issue because to me it's so 
indicative of the flip-flop. The minister mentioned it. He said 
VLTs and slot machines are a very important part of it. And I 
go back and I'm reminded . . . Well just a few short years ago 
when they were on this side of the House, he didn't believe it. 
So the question the public has: maybe they don't really believe 
it now; maybe it's just motivated by greed. 
 
And I think a Bill like this which can lead hopefully — or 
should — to more economic development strategies and new 
Bills coming forward, should be based on some real depth and 
not just a whim at any particular time. 
 
So I ask the minister, with respect, if he could outline the 
philosophy and the consistency in economic development 
associated with VLTs and slot machines. Secondly, I said with 
respect to economic development, because he thinks gambling 
is such a big part of it, why in fact the public might not have 
some input on that, which is associated with them participating  

in democracy . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Again I am continuing to listen and 
having a very difficult time. I remind the member that the Act, 
both its title and its purpose, is to repeal The Economic 
Development and Tourism Act, and I'm not hearing any 
reference to that at all made by the member from Estevan. 
 
II will ask the member from Estevan to tie his remarks directly 
to the subject, which is to repeal The Economic Development 
and Tourism Act. And if he does not do that, then I'll recognize 
another member. So if he'd please tie it directly to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to take a 
couple of moments to relate to the economic development 
strategy of our government, as it would relate to northern 
Saskatchewan but to the Bill as well. 
 
And seeing as the former premier has spent about 10 minutes 
going over certain lacks in our economic development strategy 
in a general way, I would be remiss if I didn't say at least that 
the Partnership for Renewal document, which is the basis of 
economic development in our province, has been worked out 
between government, business, and the communities, and I 
think it's working very well. 
 
And when I compare it to the reports on economic development 
and for what we're known across the country, Stevie Cameron's 
book, On the Take, and the section on gigamess . . . it's part of 
the Bill because it's part of our economic development strategy 
not to do what that member from Estevan did during the 1980s. 
 
And you had 15 or 20 minutes to go on about our economic 
development strategy in a general way, and I intend to comment 
on it. And I say that the mess that you left in northern 
Saskatchewan, the revolving fund only being a small part of it 
. . . and I told the member from Souris-Cannington that I 
wouldn't get up and list out all of the failures, and there are 
many in that list. 
 
But what's even worse is the $15 billion in debt, the pinnacle of 
that being GigaText and the $5 million given to Mr. Guy 
Montpetit. And we all remember that story, we remember it so 
well — the flights to San Francisco at taxpayers' expense. And 
Stevie Cameron goes through it in great detail in a whole 
section on it, in On the Take. 
 
I won't want to dwell on that, but I will not stand here and be 
chastised by the former premier on his economic development 
strategy and what a great success it was, while he's very critical 
of our government's approach through the Partnership for 
Renewal. 
 
This Bill is here because we are revamping northern economic 
development. And I would answer any other questions on it. Or 
if the Chair allows, I will answer any questions on economic 
development, gaming, marijuana. The member is wanting to 
promote marijuana and prostitution, any of those issues. If 
they're allowed, I'll try to answer them. 



April 13, 1995 

 
1588 

(1230) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In terms of 
economic development, is it not the case, Mr. Minister, that you 
and your colleagues like the Minister of Finance and indeed the 
Premier, list the successful projects in the province of 
Saskatchewan from the previous administration when you are in 
New York. 
 
Copies of your speeches show that, you know, Prince Albert is 
the forestry and paper capital of the Prairies, you have two 
upgraders, and you have fertilizer plants and you have insurance 
companies and you have an agriculture science centre, critical 
mass — all part of economic development strategy. And you 
acknowledge to the big finance people in New York, as we 
understand, all of these projects as the base and foundation, 
underpinnings for a lot of economic development. 
 
And isn't it also true, Mr. Minister, that the projects on the 
Crown side, as the auditor says, 40 per cent of them, 40 per cent 
of the budget on all those Crown sides, are making something 
like $600 million net to the province of Saskatchewan for 
economic development? And you acknowledge that. That pays 
for itself — of a some $15 billion debt, there's something like 7 
or 8 billion that sit there that is self-liquidating. And the 
projects like the fertilizer plant, which contributes 80 to $90 
million to the province of Saskatchewan directly linked to 
economic development, you are very proud of it. 
 
When in New York — not here, when in New York — you say: 
look at these projects, look at how open we are, look at all of 
these things. You don't talk about the past which was, well our 
economic development strategy used to be anti-gambling, 
nationalize the potash industries, take over the farm land, all of 
those things. No. 
 
That's why I come back, Mr. Chairman, to this philosophy. 
They have a great deal of suspicion about the philosophy on 
economic development. This new-found socialism is just a bit 
thin when people are looking at economic development. They 
say: I don't see any new strategies for economic development; I 
see a flip-flop on gambling — which was immoral, is now 
moral just because it's NDP. 
 
And this Bill is an indication of how you are beginning to try to 
whitewash the public about your new-found right-wing agenda. 
Well it doesn't wash, because they see right through it, just like 
they see through your preacher friend there. It just doesn't wash. 
 
So the economic development strategy that we're looking for 
isn't apparent. I don't see it in the Bill; I don't see it in other 
Bills. All you're talking about is DNS. If you want to talk about 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, in the 1970s there 
was a review by a judge in the province of Saskatchewan and 
he said under the NDP administration that was a whole 
department run amok. And it was awful. That's the reason that 
you lost — one of the reasons you lost in '82 and again why you 
lost in '86 — no economic development strategy, just  

bureaucracy. 
 
Well what we want to see is some substantial economic 
development thought and some theory, and projections of what 
you can do rather than just take from the poor in gambling. Or 
throw some money out now to some multinationals and say, 
well here's some cash. I got quite a bit from the poor here in 
Elphinstone through gambling. I'll maybe give some to, you 
know, a big company that comes in because now we can afford 
to do this because we've convinced our own supporters it's okay 
to do that for economic development strategy. I just say it's 
pathetic and people see through that. 
 
And this Bill or other Bills are not going to do much to correct 
that. You've taken from farmer . . . Is economic development 
strategy — is that take the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) money and put it in the budget, that's economic 
development strategy? Take it from the poor, take it from the 
farmers, take it from . . . he'll cancel the pension plans for the 
single widows, parents. 
 
Economic development strategy is more than taking from 
farmers and taking from widows and taking from the poor and 
giving it to the multinationals. There's more to economic 
development strategy than just opening up gambling to young 
people, teenagers, the poor — those that are most tempted. 
That's why I don't buy it. Any reasonable person wouldn't buy 
it. 
 
So your logic, there's no story line here, there's no logic. It just 
says, we're going to do good because we're NDP. 
 
It's like Tommy Douglas. Would Tommy Douglas say 
gambling's a good idea? Mr. Chairman, do you think the former 
NDP premier of Saskatchewan, the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) premier, Tommy Douglas, would 
stand up and say gambling is good for the province of 
Saskatchewan? Do you think that'd be the case? 
 
Well it got them chirping, Mr. Chairman. Do you know what? 
Tommy Douglas would say, no it's not. Tommy Douglas would 
be ashamed, ashamed of the NDP. Tommy Douglas would be 
ashamed of the gambling that's been initiated. Tommy Douglas 
would be ashamed that people have to steal from churches to 
fund their gambling habits and they call it economic 
development. Douglas would be ashamed that the co-op got 
robbed in Stoughton to fund a gambling addiction. And they 
call it economic development strategy. It's not . . . 
 
The Chair: — I will ask the member for Estevan to come to 
order again. Again I listened carefully, I hear the member's 
debating comments, and I'm hearing no reference whatsoever to 
the repeal of The Economic Development and Tourism Act. 
That is the title and that is the purpose of this Bill and I ask him 
to tie his comments to that directly, right now, or I will 
recognize another speaker. And I'll ask him to do that directly. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Directly, Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the 
minister if he could elaborate on his theory of due diligence  



April 13, 1995 

 
1589 

when he's talking about economic development strategy in the 
province, including due diligence on gambling and the 
consequences of gambling when he is promoting his economic 
development strategy. Part of the Bill is due diligence. I want to 
know what are the terms of reference for that due diligence, 
particularly as it affects an awful lot of people who'll be 
affected and influenced by his gambling strategy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to 
the member opposite, and I was in New York recently, and the 
banks are disappointed in our government in the fact that we're 
not down there borrowing bags of money as we were during the 
1980s when you were the premier, sir. That's true. The banks 
pay a little less attention to us. But on the other hand, the 
financial people wonder how it was that you stayed in 
government for nine years and ran up $15 billion in debt. 
 
They are so pleasantly surprised that we now have an 
administration in Saskatchewan, supported by business people, 
that run a business style of government. And that's the truth. 
The people in New York are not disappointed in this 
government; they're impressed with the economic development. 
The rating agencies have boosted our rating, as it would come 
to the economy of Saskatchewan, for the first time in many, 
many years, the only jurisdiction where that's happening. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you have to remember that 
the Toronto Globe and Mail refers to the government under 
your administration as the worst government in the history of 
Canada. That's the fact about your administration. And when it 
comes to northern development and economic development in 
northern Saskatchewan, what we are doing, for example, are 
things like tourism, making great strides in improving the 
tourism in northern Saskatchewan. We are working hard with 
local people who want to expand in the area of wild rice 
production. 
 
You'll know that the policy of uranium expansion, which you 
obviously didn't do any of during the 10 years you were in 
government . . . zero. No investment in uranium because you 
were too busy handing it out to people like Guy Montpetit for 
GigaText. That's what you were doing. Everybody remembers 
those stories about Michel Cogger and the Gracie Sim's trip to 
San Francisco. Remember, we debated that in here. You know 
you were wasting the money. You wasted it by the bucketful — 
billions of dollars out the window. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan money wasted. That's why we're having 
to redo much of the legislation. Absolutely wasted. You know 
that. You know you're not proud of it. And you'll know as well 
that you allowed gaming to expand drastically in the province. 
Drastically. 
 
The biggest gaming problem in my constituency of Elphinstone 
is not VLTs or the proposed casino; it's bingos which you 
allowed and encouraged when you were in government. The 
problem in my constituency with gaming is not the casino that 
might be built where tourists from out of the province will use 
the casino; it's bingos. And you, sir, were the biggest  

proponent, the biggest proponent of bingo expansion of anyone 
in western Canada. It expanded drastically while you were 
premier. 
 
You'll know as well . . . And you question about VLTs and why 
they are being put into place in Saskatchewan. You asked the 
question. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Now I'm listening carefully to the 
response of the minister, and for a period of time he was 
directing his remarks directly to the content of the Bill, but now 
I'm finding his remarks are just as out of order as the remarks of 
the questioner were. 
 
Order, order. Order. And so I bring that to the minister's 
attention and ask that if he has more remarks that tie back to the 
purpose of the Bill, to the intention of the Bill, that he do that, 
and to do that directly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member will know that the Bill 
is being brought here as part of our economic development 
strategy and part of the Partnership for Renewal document that 
the chamber of commerce and the business people in the 
province helped us develop. And it's leading very clearly to jobs 
being created almost in every sector of the economy. 
 
I say as well that on the question of gaming and as it might 
relate to northern Saskatchewan, you will know that the reason 
that we allow VLTs is because your friends in Alberta and 
Manitoba, Conservative governments, have them. Your 
conservative friends to the South of us, the conservatives to the 
South of us in Montana and North Dakota have them. 
 
You might as well have a Conservative government, but you're 
not. I mean you're not in government and there's good reason 
for that. There's good reason for that. Because you were wasting 
billions of dollars on . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Now I've asked if the minister 
would direct his remarks to the Bill. There is a fairly 
wide-ranging attempt to have a debate related to economic 
development generally, but that's not what is in the Bill that is 
before us. 
 
The Bill that is before us is both entitled and appears to be the 
intent to repeal The Economic Development and Tourism Act. 
Again I'll ask the minister to limit his remarks to that if he has 
anything more to say on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the only question 
that was asked related to VLTs so I can't answer it. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. I asked the minister 
if he would elaborate on his due diligence on economic 
development projects, because it's . . . as it relates to his 
economic development strategy. He introduced gambling and 
VLTs and slot machines into the debate, which I assume is part 
of his strategy. 
 



April 13, 1995 

 
1590 

Now if economic development does not include VLTs, Mr. 
Chairman, or slot machines, then he can say so. But if it is part 
of it, then would he just elaborate on how he is going to apply 
his due diligence to economic development in this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I'm going to tell you how 
VLTs relate to economic development. Because the question's 
allowed, I imagine that I will have the opportunity to respond to 
VLTs and how they relate to the economic development. 
 
VLTs are allowed in Saskatchewan because your Conservative 
friends in Alberta and in Manitoba have them, and the hotel 
industry along the borders of the province indicated to us very 
clearly, that in order to compete, they wanted to be allowed to 
have VLTs in their hotels. And the member knows that. He 
knows it. And clearly, Mr. Chairman, that was the reason that 
VLTs were allowed. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister has said 
exactly what I knew he would eventually say. He said, Mr. 
Chairman, that the NDP in Saskatchewan is following an 
economic development strategy with respect to VLTs and slot 
machines because the neighbours in Alberta and the neighbours 
in Manitoba have done that, therefore he had no choice. That's 
what he said. 
 
And I hope there's a big audience out there today because I 
want to tell the minister from Elphinstone, this new NDP 
economic development strategist, if you think that the strategies 
in Alberta and Manitoba have an impact on Saskatchewan that 
you would care to emulate, then why — and if you say you're 
doing it because they're doing it over there — why don't you 
look at the tax measures in Alberta and the tax measures in 
Manitoba associated with economic development strategy? 
 
If you go into the community of Medicine Hat, you will see all 
kinds of Saskatchewan people over there shopping and it isn't 
helping economic development at all in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I'm trying to be patient and to allow as 
much relevant debate in question and response in the Bill as 
would be reasonable, given the rules of our Assembly, and I'm 
have a very difficult time hearing relevance to the Act. And I 
remind the member again — the Act is, An Act to repeal The 
Economic Development and Tourism Act. That is its title; that 
is its purpose. And I'm hearing no reference being made to that 
Act. 
 
I will ask the member to make his comments and put his 
questions directly related to the Act now or I will recognize 
another member. I remind the member, as I've said earlier, it is 
not the subject before the House, the debate of economic 
development strategy; that is not the subject of debate. If the 
member for Estevan will put his remarks directly to the Bill 
which is before us. 
 

Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll just come back 
to the question of due diligence associated with this and the 
discretion that a minister might have in applying appropriate 
due diligence to projects that would come forward. Now you 
can relate that to anything from trees to mousetraps to VLTs or 
whatever. But could you elaborate a little bit more on what you 
expect might be the appropriate due diligence and what kind of 
discretionary powers would be associated with your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — In terms as it would relate to the 
northern revolving fund, which we are in the process of 
eliminating or winding down or what was in place as it would 
relate to this Bill, as I explained to the member from 
Souris-Cannington, there is a process of a business plan that is 
needed. Part of the business plan would obviously have to 
speak to the potential for sales for the product being produced. 
We have moved away very much from storefront operations, 
restaurants, or laundromats, that kind of thing. And so that's the 
kind of due diligence that we would have in place. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
when I was questioning you earlier about the due diligence, you 
suggested that if it was a high-risk area, you would want to have 
some signed contracts. If you felt it was something other than 
that, that perhaps would not be necessary. 
 
I wonder if you could give us some indication of how you 
gauge that risk factor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I use the example again of, for 
example, sale of wild rice. If somebody was needing equipment 
to process or improve the quality of production, we would see 
that as being a fairly sure and secure market for the product. If 
somebody was working on woodwork, for example, and wanted 
to build a furniture plant, we would want to make sure that they 
would have sale, and we would see that as a potentially a high 
risk. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Who makes that determination, Mr. 
Minister? Is it someone within your department? Do you make 
it? Who makes the evaluation that this one is the risky business 
and this one is the winner that doesn't need to have that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This is not greatly dissimilar from 
the credit union you used to belong to. There is a process of 
granting loans based on the viability of the project, and it would 
be done by the professional staff within the department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, would you 
personally have any involvement in those decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, the minister's office is never 
consulted, or there's no involvement from my office in that 
decision. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In your debate 
with the member from Estevan you made the comment about 
ensuring that monies would not be lost, that everyone would 
have to pay back every cent of their principal, every cent of  



April 13, 1995 

 
1591 

their interest. What means do you have in place to ensure, to 
guarantee, that that will in fact happen, that every cent being 
loaned out in this development fund will be returned to the 
fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The intent is obviously to collect 
back the money you lend and we tell them that that's the 
expectation. Obviously, as in any lending institution — the 
credit union you were on the board of or the credit union in 
Shaunavon which I had the opportunity to serve on for a 
number of years — provisions are obviously made for loss 
because there will be those times when because of certain sets 
of circumstances . . . What you have to do though is try to, as 
clearly as possible, mitigate the amount of loss within the 
lending program. That is made very, very clear to the recipients 
— that the expectation, which is what I said, the expectation is 
is that all of the money will in fact be repaid. 
 
Obviously, as in any lending program we will try to ensure that 
the money is repaid but one would have to understand that at 
the end of the day, as in any program, there will be those 
circumstances, extreme circumstances, where loans will not be 
totally repaid. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I'm glad that 
you've admitted that within every such financial program there 
are always some losses. Under this new proposal, what is your 
expectations of losses? Do you have a loss exposure that you 
expect to carry forward and what would that be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, we have a loss provision. In 
these kind of programs, the loss provisions are set relatively 
high. In fact much higher than we expect. But in order to keep 
the books balanced and make the auditor satisfied that we have 
included a provision for that, the amount is set at 25 per cent 
although we would expect not to come anywhere near that. But 
because of the auditing program of the department, in order to 
make sure that we aren't surprised at the end of the day, we 
want to make sure that we have lots of leeway in the accounting 
system. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. From my 
days at the credit union, a 25 per cent loss exposure would be 
extremely high. I mean I can just see Credit Union Central 
would descend on us like a ton of bricks if we suggested that 
our loan portfolio had a 25 per cent loss exposure. 
 
If you look at a loss exposure of a few per cent, you're getting to 
the limit. But 25 per cent is extremely high, Mr. Minister. And 
perhaps what you need to do in there, if that's what the loss 
exposure is about to be, is to tie it in a lot more closely to the 
due diligence to ensure that those projects have a lot more 
viability than 25 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much money are we talking about here when 
you're looking at a loss exposure of up to 25 per cent under 
your new program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — What you have to remember is, the  

member should remember, we're talking about the program 
we're winding down — the loss provision allowed for in this 
program. And this is the program that you had in place. And so 
when we're talking about the amount of loss provision in the 
program, we're talking about a program that you folks had 
administered, and that loss provision was 25 per cent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed 
the previous administration had administered it, you've 
administered it now, and when you were government before, 
you started it and administered it. So I think if there's any blame 
to be thrown around, it goes on everyone, not on anybody in 
particular. 
 
Mr. Minister, but when you're winding this down, you're also 
transferring it over to another entity. It's going some place else. 
I believe in your comments from Hansard, it says: 
 
 All assets and liabilities will be transferred to the 

General Revenue Fund, and under the powers of The 
Department of Economic Development Act, 1994, my 
department will continue to administer outstanding 
loans that were made under the revolving fund. 

 
So on those loans, are you expecting a 25 per cent loss 
exposure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, for the member's information, 
the same loss provision will be allowed for in the . . . in what's 
left of the program as what it was when it was in the general 
program. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How many 
dollars are we talking about left within the loan structure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It's approximately 13 million that's 
being transferred to the general fund. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the Bill it 
talks about existing and all assets and liabilities of the fund will 
be transferred. Now that $13 million is the total assets and 
liabilities of the revolving fund, or are there other monies or 
properties or chattels that may be involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — This is a loan portfolio and so there 
would be assets that would be attached to the loans. But this is 
the amount of money that we would have out on loan at the 
present time or as the program is being transferred. It's about 
$13 million. 
 
Just so that we understand, it's a loan portfolio. So there's no 
real asset, but there are assets tied to the loans to secure them or 
to back them up. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well indeed, Mr. Minister, we're talking 
about loans. But at some time if you've got a 25 per cent loss 
exposure, hopefully part of that loss exposure can be offset with 
whatever assets were used as collateral on those loans. 
 



April 13, 1995 

 
1592 

So you will per chance gain some actual physical properties or 
chattels to deal with. And if you do realize on some of that loss 
exposure, what will happen with those assets and how will they 
be handled in the roll-over into the General Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, if there were to be 
repossessions, I guess is what you're talking about, if the loans 
weren't repaid and there would be a process, the goods would 
be sold to the public at the best offer that we could get for them. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


