






















































March 27, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 27, 1995 

 

 
1123 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people from Medicine Hat, 
Regina, Cabri, Saskatoon, Edmonton, Consul, Saskatchewan; 
Melville, and Tompkins and Swift Current areas, all through the 
south-west a lot of people interested in the prayer that I will 
read: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights), which will benefit all property 
owners in Saskatchewan and specifically firearms 
owners, in order to halt the federal Liberal government 
from infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This petition comes, Mr. Speaker, from Regina. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 

funding dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
a notice of motion that I'd like to introduce respecting first 
reading for Bills. I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next 
move first reading of a Bill, An Act to amend the Members of 
the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Jess: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
to you and the other members of the legislature, 16 students, 
grade 11 and 12 students from Maymont, Saskatchewan, in the 
Speaker's gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher Doug 
Sevick; chaperons Darlene Melrose, and Bill Melrose, Diane 
Sevick; and the bus driver is Darrell Spence. 
 
This group of students are soon going to be in a new school in 
Maymont, and I would like to ask the legislature to help me 
welcome them here. I will be meeting with them later in room 
218. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Spring Snowstorm in South-west Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 
saw the arrival of the most significant snowstorm for the entire 
season in south-west Saskatchewan. An intense low pressure 
system built and intensified in the foothills of Montana and 
surged northward into the Cypress Hills, blanketing most of the 
area with about a foot or more of snow. 
 
While ranchers with new calves were sent scurrying to have 
their herds protected and to take care of them, most were very 
happy to see the much needed moisture. Now while dry dugouts 
will probably now fill, the people in the deep south-west, living 
in the Battle Creek basin, are once again deeply frustrated at not 
having a dam in place to save and control the much needed 
water supply. 
 
Irrigation, wildlife, and recreation all would have greatly 
benefited if this project had been completed two or three years 
ago when it was first promised. 
 
The people of the Gull Lake area are to be complimented and 
commended for having taken the effort to billet a lot of people 
that were stranded in the storm, and I want to congratulate 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Medical Health Care Plan in Saskatchewan 
 

Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
all the discussion generated around health care reform these 
days, I'd like to remind the Assembly today of one of the 
originators of medicare. If Tommy Douglas is called the father  



March 27, 1995 

 
1124 

of medicare, then Matt Anderson of Bulyea, reeve of the RM of 
McKillop No. 220, must have been its grandfather. 
 
Matt Anderson, a Liberal, was dedicated to equality in health 
care. Mr. Anderson worked with the provincial Liberal Health 
minister, Dr. Uhrich, to get the Patterson Liberal government to 
pass legislation in 1938, allowing municipalities to set up their 
own health insurance plans. Premier Patterson felt the province 
could not afford a provincial medicare plan in the 1930s, so 
they passed legislation enabling RMs (rural municipality) to set 
up their own. 
 
As reeve, Mr. Anderson introduced the first municipal health 
care plan in 1938. His plan provided unlimited access to a 
municipal doctor, 21 days annual hospital care, as well as 
prescription drugs. His plan, which became a model for 
Saskatchewan, charged members of the municipality a $5 per 
capita or $20 per family annual fee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Anderson's health care plan was the very first 
health care insurance plan in the province. A second plan was 
started in the RM of Longlaketon. The idea of health care 
insurance plan then spread rapidly throughout the province. 
These plans worked very successfully until the present 
provincial plan came into effect. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
4-H Speak-offs 

 
Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Usually when I 
attend a function in my riding, I'm the person who is asked to 
speak, sometimes even under circumstances under which I'm 
. . . which are not so desirable. But on March 17, I was one of 
the 12 judges at the district 36 4-H speak-offs in Rapid View. 
 
District 36 consists of 4-H beef clubs from the Meadow Lake, 
Makwa, Pierceland, and Loon Lake areas. The Diamond 4-H 
Multiple Club and the Woodland 4-H Multiple Club are also in 
district 36. 
 
The Woodland Multiple Club hosted this year's speak-offs. The 
first-place winners were: in the peewee division competition, 
Jason Sergent of the Meadow Lake club; in the junior 
competition, Nicole Peno of the Pierceland 4-H Club; Andrea 
Burgmaier from Makwa 4-H Beef Club won in the intermediate 
category; and in the senior competition first place was taken by 
Valerie LaBrash of the Meadow Lake 4-H Beef Club. 
 
These first-place winners advanced to the regional competition 
which was held this past weekend in Shell Lake. The winners of 
that event will then advance to the provincials in Cut Knife, 
which is in the north-west region. 
 
I am sure it will not be too many years before we see a number 
of these orators here in the legislature as elected representatives. 
 

I would like to congratulate all of the participants for their 
contribution to 4-H. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Induction of Buffy Sainte-Marie into the Juno Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 
entertainer, originally from the Piapot Reserve at Craven, 
Saskatchewan, received a great honour last night at the Juno 
Awards which were presented in Hamilton, Ontario. Singer 
Buffy Sainte-Marie was inducted into the Juno Hall of Fame. 
 
Buffy has a long-established career in the music industry and 
always entertained audiences with her own person style of 
folk-singing. In the early 1960s The New York Times hailed 
Buffy as a promising new talent, and in 1964 her debut album, 
It's My Way, was released. 
 
Many well-known artists, including Neil Diamond and Glen 
Campbell, have recorded her material. In 1982 Buffy won an 
Oscar as co-writer of Up Where We Belong, the theme for the 
film, An Officer and a Gentleman. She released her 14th album, 
Coincidences and Likely Stories, in 1992. And she has appeared 
as a regular on Sesame Street. Music fans across Saskatchewan 
and throughout North America can probably remember many of 
Buffy's big hits that were released over the last 25 years, 
including "He's an Indian Cowboy in the Rodeo" in 1972. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say congratulations on behalf of the 
Legislative Assembly to Buffy Sainte-Marie for her 
contribution to the music industry, which spans three decades. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Tribute to the Navy League of Canada 

 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
afternoon I want to pay tribute to the cross-country flag run of 
the Navy League of Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan is about as far from all three of our nation's seas . 
. . The term landlocked is probably coined well to define us. 
Nevertheless it is an historic fact that many Saskatchewan 
citizens have served Canada with distinction on the world's 
seas. The reason of course is that the limitless horizons on the 
prairie is like that of the ocean. 
 
In light of the close connection between the prairie and the sea, 
I want to mention and pay tribute to the Navy League of Canada 
which is celebrating its 100th anniversary this year. 
 
The Navy League is a youth organization which trains Canadian 
youth in the way of the sea. In Saskatchewan there are six Navy 
League corps for children age 12 to 16, with six Sea Cadet 
corps for all of those to the age of 18. 
 
To celebrate this anniversary, the Navy League is holding a  



March 27, 1995 

 
1125 

cross-country flag run. At 326 corps locations across the 
country, the flag will stop and have the individual crests sewn 
on them. 
 
The flag has been in Swift Current, Prince Albert, in Yorkton, 
Saskatoon, and will end Saskatchewan's journey in Regina this 
Friday. With its completion of its journey, it will then be 
presented to the Governor General of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Navy League is a fine training organization for 
our youth and has many distinguished Canadians amongst its 
alumni. With that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to wish the Navy League 
of Canada another successful second century. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Folkorama 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday I attended 
the annual folkorama celebration in Weyburn held in the 
Weyburn Square mall. This event was organized by the 
Weyburn and District Multicultural Council and hosted by Greg 
Lee of radio station CFSL in Weyburn. 
 
There were displays of African, Ukrainian, and Philippine art, 
and there was music and dancing. The Ukrainian dancers from 
Weyburn, from young to old, were excellent. Dance groups 
from Regina also performed, representing El Salvador, 
Germany, Poland, and Hungary. I tapped a toe myself, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And there was food. And of course it was wonderful and 
varied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday we observed the International Day 
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. The Weyburn 
council schedules this annual event during the week of this day 
for what I believe is good and compelling reason. 
 
It is one thing to speak against discrimination  as we all 
should do, and we should do it for more than one day a year  
but a more effective way to fight discrimination is for us to see 
firsthand the richness and vitality of our cultural variety, how 
many cultures have become one in Canada. We see in events 
like this that there is much to enjoy and nothing to dislike. 
 
I congratulate the Weyburn and District Multicultural Council 
for another successful folkorama. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden Resident Visits Ghana 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is renowned the world over for its expertise. 
Often our experts are called to other countries to teach and 
share information. This was the case with a constituent and 
good friend of mine, Ken Kelln of Lumsden, who shared his 

knowledge of solar power with some eager students in Africa. 
 
Ken recently spent two weeks in Ghana conducting 
photovoltaic training workshops. Six technicians from 
mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, and physics, 
were given instruction in the maintenance and construction of 
photovoltaic systems. 
 
The Ghanaians had invited Ken because he could provide 
practical, hands-on experience from a businessman's 
perspective. The University of Regina was more than willing to 
send him because of the opportunity to establish renewable 
energy expertise in Ghana. Developing nations, Mr. Speaker, 
are very willing to embrace new and renewable energy sources. 
 
Although Ken conducted his workshops in Kumasi; he also 
travelled to the University of Cape Coast, Akosombo, and 
Accra, where he delivered a seminar and public lecture to the 
Ghana Solar Energy Society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ken recently wrote to inform me that his trip was 
very busy but extremely successful. Though his students had 
Ph.D. or engineering degrees, they had never even seen a 
maintenance manual for a solar battery. 
 
For their part in sharing expertise with developing nations, I 
want to congratulate both the University of Regina and Ken 
Kelln. Thank you. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Corporation Construction Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Mr. Speaker. The heckling during my 
member's statement tells me that we have a government here 
that doesn't recognize the good sense of spending federal 
government money to build a dam when it's been offered for 
them, so I'd like to ask another important question in another 
area of the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Minister, time after time you have told us that your 
union-preference tendering policy is not going to increase costs. 
Then on Friday you said that the highway construction is not 
going to be subject to this agreement. Then when asked why, 
you said there are many exemptions and some of them are made 
on the basis of making sure that the costs would not increase. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, on Friday you admitted that your union 
preference policy will increase costs and that's why highways 
are exempted — your words. Now, Mr. Minister, now that you 
have admitted that your union preference policy will drive up 
costs, will you tell us by how much these costs will be driven 
up, and where is the cost analysis that you've done on this 
policy? Would you table that for us today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I 
would like to respond to the member's question. I indicated on 
several occasions in the House already that in places other than  



March 27, 1995 

 
1126 

Saskatchewan there are such agreements. There have been such 
agreements in Saskatchewan: the Shand project, the NewGrade 
upgrader, Cameco construction sites. This is not breaking new 
ground. There are no indications that it significantly increases 
construction costs. 
 
As a matter of fact, if one looks at it from the long-term point of 
view, it may help construction costs because in such an 
agreement both sides in the agreement had to give up 
something, and one of the things that was given up by both 
employers and employees was to have in the agreement a no 
strike, no lockout provision so that, in the life of any particular 
work site which falls under this agreement, that kind of an 
occurrence will not take place. And everyone well knows, Mr. 
Speaker, sometimes when that happens it increases construction 
very significantly. We have now eliminated that, and I think 
that's one of the positive elements of this agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, the 
comparisons you make are not fair ones because they are 
comparing apples to oranges. The ones that you have referred to 
are open tenders that were given to the lowest bidders, union or 
not union. That hasn't got anything to do with what you're 
talking about. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Construction Association, the 
people who bid on these projects, are telling you that costs will 
go up. They say, and I quote: 
 
 If this policy is allowed to stand, costs of construction 

will rise substantially for all buyers of construction 
services in Saskatchewan. Now these costs can only be 
borne by taxpayers and consumers in one form or 
another. Now this policy will decrease competition for 
Crown work and substantially increase the costs of the 
Crowns and to the Crowns. 

 
Mr. Minister, the people who do the construction work in this 
province are telling you that the costs are going to increase 
substantially. Will you put this policy on hold and commission 
an independent cost analysis of this policy? 
 
Obviously you don't have anything to work with yourself; you 
haven't offered to table it, and you've beat about the bush for 
everything else. So will you commission an independent 
commission to investigate what this is going to cost the people 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite and the members of the House that the 
construction labour relations council indicates that they do not 
anticipate a significant increase in costs. So I guess it's a matter 
of opinion. And that's a group of people who have done 
construction work for as long as I can remember in 
Saskatchewan and should know what the industry is all about. 

I indicated one provision in the agreement, Mr. Speaker, which 
should help to make sure that there is stability on the work site 
and therefore prevent escalation in costs because of a lockout or 
a strike, but there are others. And I want the member opposite 
to know that one of the elements of this agreement is that the 
costs of overtime have been reduced to time and one-half from 
double time. That's a significant cost saving. Also, Mr. Speaker, 
that the wasteful practice that was created by the former 
administration to pay for living allowances — in Estevan, for 
example — has been eliminated; that's $80 a day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, all of the things that the member opposite 
refers to have been taken into consideration here and there are 
elements in this agreement which in fact will reduce some costs 
in these particular areas. And once again, that's also a benefit to 
the taxpayer and it's a benefit to the Crown corporations, which 
is the only sector of the public sector where this agreement will 
apply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Amendment to Transportation Partnerships 

Corporation Bill 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, on Friday I asked you a question and on Friday you 
said that the new Highways Crown is not going to be part of 
your union preference policy — and quite frankly we're glad to 
hear that. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, NDP (New Democratic 
Party) words do not always match NDP actions. 
 
For two years we listened to your government say that there was 
no union preference policy. As it turned out, there was such a 
policy. So really, Mr. Minister, we cannot take your words at 
face value. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the opposition has prepared an amendment 
to ensure that the highways contracts are not subject to your 
union preference policy, as you say. So if you're serious about 
this commitment, will you support our amendment, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well of 
course, we are not in the business of considering amendments 
here. If the member opposite has an amendment he wants to 
make in due course when the Committee of the Whole 
considers the legislation, he can make the amendment and the 
House will consider the amendment and we'll see how the 
House disposes of it. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, in essence what you have been saying and what you 
are continuing to say is simply, trust us. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has broken that trust too many times in the past. 
 
They said trust us, we don't have a union preference policy; and 
it turns out, Mr. Speaker, they did. They say trust us, we won't  



March 27, 1995 

 
1127 

implement all the provisions of The Labour Standards Act; but 
they leave them on the books to be stroked out with a stroke of 
the pen or brought back in with a stroke of the pen. And now 
they say trust us, highways won't be subject to union preference 
tendering; yet they're unwilling to put it in writing. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we and the people of Saskatchewan simply 
don't trust you, because we think that is exactly your plan. We 
plan to debate this Bill, Mr. Minister, until we get that 
amendment, until you give this legislature a guarantee that you 
aren't going to change your mind a couple of months down the 
road. 
 
Mr. Minister, instead of saying, trust us, will you put that 
amendment into this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the member for 
Rosthern talks about trust, and I want to say to him: I said on 
Friday quite clearly that this agreement does not apply to road 
construction work. That's what it is. 
 
The member opposite talks about trust. I want to say we said to 
the people of Saskatchewan and we said to this legislature, trust 
us because we will get this mess of the former administration, 
financial mess, straightened out. And we'll balance the budget, 
and we balanced the budget. 
 
We said, Mr. Speaker, we would have job creation in 
Saskatchewan, and all the record and all the statistics show that 
there have been a tremendous increase in jobs in Saskatchewan. 
And it's moving along very well. 
 
We said that when we balanced the budget, Mr. Speaker, there 
would be tax reduction for Saskatchewan people who have 
contributed to that balanced budget, and in this budget there is a 
tax reduction, Mr. Speaker. The word of this New Democratic 
Party government, Mr. Speaker, can be trusted, and the record 
proves it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Leases Deadline 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
other day I attempted to ask the Minister of Agriculture some 
very specific questions about ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and other land agencies in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Instead of an answer from the 
minister, I got a political soliloquy from the Premier. 
 
This is an important issue, Mr. Minister, because farmers out 
there need some answers, so I'm going to try again, Mr. 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
I understand that the normal leasing deadlines associated with 
ACS, lands branch, and other provincial government agencies 
has been set back by two weeks, and this is because of your 
inability  and inaction  to come to some kind of a 
conclusion on the Crow buy-out that the Liberals in Ottawa  

have shoved down upon us, Mr. Minister. Can you explain why 
you have done this and what the procedure is going to be for 
thousands of people in this province who normally would have 
those leases signed by the end of the month? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is 
fairly simple, as I think I explained it to the member opposite 
last time he asked this question. We have a problem in that our 
bills go out . . . and they go out on a yearly basis, by the way. 
We had about 4 or 500 that should have gone out on March 10. 
 
We've made the commitment to pass on some of the benefit that 
we get from the Crow, if we get it, on to our lessees. As are all 
landowners in this province, whether it's banks or individuals or 
whoever owns land, will have to make a decision as to what the 
lease is going to be like for this year. And Mr. Goodale tells us 
probably the money is going to be paid to the landowners. It 
doesn't say when it's going to be paid, it doesn't say how much 
is going to be paid, and it doesn't say for sure it's going to be 
paid to the landowners. It may even be paid to the renters. Right 
now he's off in South America on a trade mission; we don't 
have those answers. 
 
And we will do . . . our only solution is going to be to mail out 
bills to these farmers on the basis that it's conditional on getting 
the money and maybe we'll have to send them another bill later. 
I don't know how other landowners in this province are going to 
deal with this situation, but we've been put in a great mess. 
We've had the whole pins knocked out from under the . . . under 
rural Saskatchewan in agriculture in this province with the great 
Crow change and we've got no answers. We don't know which 
rail lines are going to be abandoned or when they're going to be 
abandoned. We have no answers at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you haven't noticed, 
spring is here and people are going to be seeding. Now what 
they expect out of you, what they expect out of you, Mr. 
Minister, is that irregardless of how irresponsible Ralph 
Goodale and the Liberals are, that you're prepared to move 
ahead  that you're prepared to move ahead and sign 
agreements with people, making sure that the provincial 
government is prepared to pass on those benefits to those 
producers, sir. That's your responsibility. So rather than 
dithering around and not coming out with a stand that's 
unequivocal and saying, we'll stand behind you; we'll go to the 
wall for you, you dither and vacillate and won't move ahead. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what I'm wanting from you today is a 
commitment that you're prepared to go out and back our 
producers, that you're willing to sign leases and if the benefit 
comes along, you'll pass it on to them instead of finding a way 
to claw it back. Would you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 27, 1995 

 
1128 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we have backed our 
farmers. We've fought the Crow battle for many, many years. 
We fought very hard. It's the Liberals and Conservatives 
opposite who have sold out and not fought for the benefit. Now 
that disaster has struck, now that the federal Liberals are 
dithering with the money and not making a decision, you're 
pointing at us. 
 
We're going to send some bills out based on the best 
information we have. I don't know if you're demanding that 
other landowners in this province do the same thing  to send 
out bills or make signed leases on some promise and good faith 
that there's going to be some money coming sometime from the 
Liberal government. That's a very tough situation for us. We're 
a very small part of agriculture in this province. There's a whole 
lot of other people who are more at risk from this than our 
lessees are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Taxes 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
quote a well-used phrase: any fool can balance a budget by 
increasing taxes. If there were an Academy Award performance 
for tax increases, this NDP government would win an Oscar, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I table a government budget document that demonstrates the 
Saskatchewan government's terrible taxation record. This list 
compares provincial levies paid across the nation. It includes 
personal income tax, retail sales tax, gasoline tax, and, Mr. 
Speaker, health care premiums in those provinces where 
premiums are paid. These numbers show that Saskatchewan 
people pay the highest provincial levies in the country, except 
for Newfoundland. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, 
interprovincial comparisons show Saskatchewan people pay 
outrageously high taxes relative to their neighbours. Can you 
please explain to the people of the province why? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 
for the question. I would suggest to the member opposite that 
we begin on a sound factual basis. With the budget documents, 
we included tables comparing the cost of living across Canada. 
And in fact what those documents showed was quite contrary to 
what the member opposite has said. They show that if you take 
the basic cost of living across Canada, Saskatchewan is among 
the least expensive places in which to live. 
 
So I would say to the member opposite, the first thing that we 
have to do is to establish a consistent factual basis. This is a 
reasonably priced place to live. It's also a place with a very high 
standard of living. And I'm sure we're all proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker,  

selective attention that the government has paid to put in their 
documents has become a very common, common way of their 
trying to communicate what is far from truth to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are some taxes, Mr. Speaker, that are simply ludicrous. In 
1991 when this government came to power, the gas tax was 10 
cents per litre. It started to rise when this government took 
power and it is now 15 cents per litre. That is an increase of 
more than 50 per cent in four short years. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan gas tax is higher than any province in 
Canada except Newfoundland, and the same amount as Quebec, 
despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we are the second-highest 
producer of oil in the country. Not only is this a hardship on 
Saskatchewan people, it discourages tourists from even coming 
here. 
 
My question to the minister: Madam Minister, what have you 
done to determine the impact of gasoline taxes on our tourist 
industry, and what are you doing about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I find this line of 
questioning astonishing. The Liberal leader recently said she 
thought the federal budget was fair and regionally balanced. 
The one tax increase in the federal budget that affects people all 
across this province is the increase in the gas tax. 
 
Now I have to ask the member opposite to try for some measure 
of consistency. She says she wants to balance the books. First 
session of the legislature, she shows us how she would do that 
by adding $300 million more to the deficit. You didn't spend 
enough on infrastructure, not enough on agriculture. And we 
have the list, which I will also table if the member so desires. 
 
Then she comes back in session two and she's the small-
government, reform Liberal. We're spending too much. Then 
she looks at the federal budget, which does have tax increases 
in them, that being one, and she says it's a fair budget. Then she 
looks at our budget which has tax cuts and she says it's an 
unfair budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what people expect from politicians is some 
measure of consistency and straightforwardness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, this kind of performance is 
exactly why the people of Saskatchewan don't trust anything the 
government says. They can't blame the federal government for 
this one because the federal gas tax is equal all across the 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I table another government budget document that compares gas 
prices at the pumps in major centres across the country. It 
showed that prices in Regina are the highest amongst those 
surveyed in all of Canada. Mr. Speaker, farmers, small-business  



March 27, 1995 

 
1129 

people, transport and trucking industries, schools, everyone is 
affected by high gas prices. And Saskatchewan people are at a 
particular disadvantage. 
 
My question to the minister once again, who simply likes to 
pretend that in fact something is different from what it really is. 
Can the minister explain why the people in our province pay the 
most in the country for gas at the pumps when we are the 
second-highest oil producers in Canada? Just answer the 
question. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I would answer the 
question if the member opposite would show some integrity in 
asking it. She certainly has to know that one of many factors in 
the price of gas is the level of taxation. It has been an issue 
across this province that the federal government needs to do a 
better job ensuring that there is competition in the gas industry. 
The gas tax in this province in similar to Ontario's, yet the gas 
prices in this province, in particular cities especially, is higher. 
 
But I come back to my main point. The standards we use in our 
budget to decide the cost of living here relative to elsewhere is 
not unique. In fact it was taken from the Manitoba budget. We 
have a standard base of facts. But the member opposite doesn't 
like to deal in facts; she likes to flip-flop all over the place. She 
likes to say balance the books, spend more money. And by the 
way, she has on the books as well, four cuts in taxes that she's 
promised. What's wrong with this picture? What people expect 
from their politicians is honesty and coherence, not flip-flop, 
day-by-day finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
Minister of Finance is trying to ignore the fact that people in 
downtown Toronto pay 8.8 cents a litre less than the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Nobody in 
Saskatchewan can explain why we pay more for gas than 
provinces that don't even produce gasoline. It's like the people 
in Nova Scotia having to pay more for fresh lobster than we do. 
It doesn't make any sense. 
 
Madam Minister, whether people are filling up in Carlyle or 
Meadow Lake or on Albert Street and Victoria, they all think 
the same thing as the pump is clicking away at almost 60 cents 
a litre. You may find it a huge joke, but I'll tell you something. 
One of the most often-asked questions on coffee row is the one 
I'm going to present to you, Madam Minister. Why doesn't your 
government do something to get the price of gas in line with our 
neighbours? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I 
honestly have to say I'm astonished at this. There are two issues: 
the level of competition in the gas industry and the taxes on gas. 
And there is one government that has the power to deal with 
both: the federal government. It's the federal government that 
deals with competition. 
 
We have consistently complained to them about the lack of  

competition, as have MPs in Ottawa. It's the federal government 
that recently raised the gas tax even though — and I don't want 
to break confidences here — that the vast majority of Finance 
ministers said this is the last tax that we want to have raised. 
 
Please, Mr. Speaker, what we have to have here is some 
measure of consistency. We came out with a plan to balance the 
books of the province. We delivered on that plan. We have 
another plan to pay down the debt. 
 
Would the member opposite come out with just one plan that is 
coherent and consistent to deal with the province's finances? I 
doubt it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rather 
enjoyed the last few moments, as I'm sure most people in 
Saskatchewan did, where we have the Leader of the Liberal 
Party and the minister opposite each vying for the Oscar of best 
actress. My question is, is it for the supporting role or is it for 
the lead role? I'm not quite sure. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as the minister has also said, we see another 
example today of the Saskatchewan flip-flop amongst the 
Liberals on the gun issue. Saskatoon Liberal MP (Member of 
Parliament) Morris Bodnar has admitted to the Saskatchewan 
responsible firearms owners, that he will vote in favour of Bill 
C-68. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I spoke at a gun rally in Saskatoon and I 
warned the people that Liberals tend to say one thing to you and 
another while you are looking the other way. Mr. Bodnar has 
proven my point, to the detriment of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, it 
appears that Saskatchewan Liberals are caving in to the Liberal 
leader at an alarming rate. Mr. Minister, would you not agree 
that it is time that you, as a provincial leader, acted to protect 
the rights of Saskatchewan people first and foremost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would agree and 
I think the hon. member, if he were fair-minded, would agree 
that we've been attempting to do just that. A resolution was 
passed in this House which provided for an all-party committee 
to make representations. 
 
We really are waiting to see whether or not the Liberal Party is 
ever going to get its position straightened out. In May the 
Liberal leader was apparently in favour of gun control; then in 
the House she's opposed to the gun control; and I suspect before 
this matter is resolved, we'll see her flip and flop many more 
times yet. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1130 

If we were able to get a consistent treatment, consistent 
behaviour by all parties in the House, I think we could put a 
much more effective case to the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my 
colleague, the member from Rosthern, has pointed out, the 
Liberals are doing what they do best, Mr. Speaker, and that's try 
and play on both sides of the fence. 
 
But unfortunately, today they're coming down on the wrong 
side of the fence as far as the interests of Saskatchewan people 
are concerned related to the Liberal gun registration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's more and more important that we start to do 
something, that we act on this issue. 
 
I've received a copy here of a warning being issued by the 
police that requires prospective handgun owners to sign. And 
this warning says that if you purchase a particular handgun after 
February 14 of 1995, that these firearms will be seized without 
compensation if the Liberal legislation passes. Mr. Speaker, it's 
legal to have these firearms today, but the police are going to 
take them. 
 
The Minister talks about an all-party committee that was struck 
— nothing's happening on that issue. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, we have 
three Bills before the legislation which will protect the rights of 
Saskatchewan citizens over and above the political whims of 
the Liberals. Will you finally do something more than talk, 
something more than the previous minister of Justice did, which 
was only talk? Will you agree to support these Bills and help 
fight for Saskatchewan people's rights? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — As I've pointed out to the member on 
previous occasions, while well intended, the Bills which have 
been put forward by the hon. member from Souris-Cannington 
are not very effective. 
 
What we think would be effective is if we could bring to the 
attention of the federal government in an unequivocal way that 
this law is opposed by all the parties in this legislature. We 
think that would be effective. 
 
It is very difficult to do when we have the Liberal leader on one 
side of the issue when Mr. Chrétien is in Saskatchewan and on 
another side of the issue when he's out of the province. 
 
We say to members opposite, and I say to the Liberal Party 
opposite, make up your mind once and for all; quit the flipping 
and the flopping and join us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Report on Former Justice Minister 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a ministerial statement and I have provided actually about 
a half an hour ago copies to all . . . both opposition parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to advise members of this Assembly 
regarding a matter that was raised in this House on February 17, 
1995. 
 
My deputy attorney general has now received and provided to 
me the report of Mr. William McIntyre. Mr. McIntyre is a 
special prosecutor who was appointed in relation to the 
investigation of an incident involving the alleged disclosure of 
the identity of a young offender by the former Justice minister 
and the current member for Saskatoon Fairview during a 
broadcast by a Regina radio station. 
 
After receiving and reviewing an investigation report provided 
by the Regina Police Service, Mr. McIntyre has directed that no 
prosecution of the former minister of Justice be undertaken for 
a breach of the Young Offenders Act. 
 
Mr. McIntyre provides the reasons for his decision in his report. 
I will provide a brief summary of Mr. McIntyre's report for the 
record. 
 
Mr. McIntyre states that two principal questions must be 
considered in deciding whether to prosecute. The first question 
is: is the evidence sufficient to justify a prosecution? In other 
words, is it sufficient to raise a reasonable prospect of a 
conviction? 
 
In answer to this question, Mr. McIntyre states that he accepts 
that an offence under section 38(1) of the Young Offenders Act 
was committed by the former Justice minister. 
 
The second question is, assuming, as here, that the evidence 
does raise a reasonable prospect of conviction, does the public 
interest require a prosecution to proceed? In answer to the 
second question Mr. McIntyre states, and this is a direct 
quotation, Mr. Speaker: 
 
 It is clear in all the circumstances that no public interest 

will be served by a prosecution of Mr. Mitchell. 
 
Mr. McIntyre then goes on to explain why it is not in the public 
interest to prosecute. Rather than attempt to paraphrase Mr. 
McIntyre's words, Mr. Speaker, I will let his explanation speak 
for itself, and I will now table a copy of his report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1415) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to  



March 27, 1995 

 
1131 

first of all thank the minister for having taken the time to send 
over to us a copy of the report. 
 
I'd just like to make a couple of comments, and certainly we 
accept the report as it's been presented to us by Mr. McIntyre. I 
find it interesting that public interest is another term that comes 
to mind. 
 
But I would also ask the minister, if indeed everyone is treated 
equally in this province, will the minister now take the time to 
guarantee that the North Battleford paper that was basically 
fined for having inadvertently referred to a young offender, is 
treated on the same basis of the recommendation that is being 
brought forward by Mr. McIntyre today. Thank you. 
 
Manufacturing Agreement with Pelorus Navigation Systems 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this morning there 
was an announcement in Saskatoon about a project that's very 
exciting for that city and for the entire province. The 
Government of Saskatchewan has signed an agreement with 
Pelorus Navigation Systems of Calgary. The agreement will 
lead to the manufacture of innovative, ground-based aircraft 
navigation systems in the province. 
 
Pelorus has developed a local area differential global 
positioning system. It's designed for installation on the ground 
of an airport, where it works in tandem with a receiver that's 
installed on board an aircraft. These components work together 
to improve the safety and the reliability of air navigation and 
landings. 
 
Global positioning systems is believed to be the future of air 
navigation. They're expected to eventually replace existing 
navigation aids at airports around the world. They're not only an 
improvement over existing systems; they're also less expensive 
to buy and to maintain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're very excited that we'll have the opportunity 
right here in Saskatchewan to manufacture this leading-edge 
technology developed by the Pelorus. Through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program, the 
provincial and federal governments will provide up to $l.5 
million towards the purchase of five Pelorus systems. 
 
The first system will be installed at the Regina airport and 
tested with a receiver, made by the Honeywell corporation, 
that's installed in an executive aircraft. After certification by 
Transport Canada, Pelorus will install and arrange for the 
certification of four more systems at airports in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Pelorus will also establish a manufacturing plant in Saskatoon 
in 1996. It will be the worldwide marketing distribution and 
installation centre for the Pelorus systems. 
 
This project gives us a great opportunity to increase our exports, 
Mr. Speaker. That's one of our goals under our Partnership for 
Renewal long-term economic strategy. 

Pelorus has a marketing agreement with Honeywell for the 
ground-based systems and on-board receivers made by the two 
companies. That should increase worldwide sales considerably. 
Pelorus is already predicting annual sales of $25 million from 
the products made at the Saskatoon plant. We'll also be 
developing an expertise in Saskatchewan with this new 
technology, and we expect many prospective customers to come 
here to find out about it. 
 
Besides increased exports, this project supports two other 
important goals under Partnership for Renewal: job creation 
and increased manufacturing. Pelorus expects to create six jobs 
immediately and up to 100 within three years of production. 
The jobs will be high tech, giving Saskatchewan people an 
opportunity to work with very advanced technology. 
 
Our manufacturing industry will further diversify with this 
project. It will be yet another world first for Saskatchewan. It 
could also lead to spin-off business and jobs in electronics, 
printing, and metal fabrication. So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, 
there are numerous benefits that this project will bring to 
Saskatchewan and to the city of Saskatoon, and we congratulate 
Pelorus on this endeavour and wish it every success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, we certainly welcome the addition of the high-tech 
jobs that this initiative, through Pelorus — I believe it's 
pronounced — will bring to Saskatchewan. The global 
positioning systems are indeed the wave of the future. Many, 
many applications, we understand, are being looked at from 
airports, aircraft. Agricultural applications as well are being 
considered. 
 
I think this follows on the lead of the previous administration 
bringing high-tech jobs to Saskatchewan, things like Hitachi, 
SaskTel and the fibre optics network that were brought forward, 
ISM (Information Systems Management Corporation), the 
Co-op Data Services and the health services card, agri-business, 
biotechnology, were all initiatives begun by the previous 
administration. Our own leadership contest used the latest of 
technology in terms of telephone systems, Mr. Speaker, and we 
welcome these jobs and this opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we certainly appreciate the government 
taking the initiative and helping out in any way they may have 
helped and as well following the lead that was set by the 
previous administration in bringing good, high-paying, 
high-tech jobs to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to add some positive comments this afternoon. We 
are delighted that there is going to be further industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan, particularly the kind of focus that 
this initiative brings to Saskatoon and the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1132 

I do wish to take an opportunity to point out that this is through 
a Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program, Mr. 
Speaker, and one of the things that the government often fails to 
do in this province is to give any acknowledgement whatsoever 
to the federal government in any positive way. They continue to 
choose to ignore the $125 million that went to the NewGrade 
upgrader for example. They have chosen to ignore the millions 
upon millions of dollars that were added in further equalization 
payments that have gone completely unrecognized in the 
province of Saskatchewan by this provincial government. 
 
They rarely come forward and acknowledge the other programs 
that are in place primarily because of infrastructure monies that 
were the initiative of the federal government. And in fact the 
only way in which there is any acknowledgement here is one or 
two comments with the focus on the Canada-Saskatchewan 
infrastructure works program. 
 
As much as we are absolutely delighted with this initiative, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that it just really points out to us once again 
that there is a role for the federal government to receive some 
acknowledgement as far as their initiatives that they've taken, 
and it would be of the highest order of behaviour if perhaps 
every once in awhile this administration would acknowledge 
that. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 
Student Financial Aid Fund Act, 1985 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to explain the purpose of this 
amendment to The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 
Act. 
 
The student aid program is administered by a branch of the 
Department of Education, Training and Employment, and under 
the existing legislation all costs associated with the 
administration of the program must be included in monies 
appropriated for the purpose by the legislature. In other words, 
these costs must be part of the annual administrative budget of 
the branch and the department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this arrangement works well except in two 
situations involving the collection of student loans. The first of 
these situations relates to collection agencies. The department 
turns loans which are seriously in default over to collection 
agencies, since the department itself does not have the resources 
to carry out this role. It goes without saying that these agencies 
charge a fee for their services in the form of a percentage of the 
loans which they recover. 
 
Under the existing legislation, all of the loans collected by 
agencies must be deposited in the fund, while the agency's  

charge must be paid out of the department's administrative 
budget. This arrangement is impractical because it is difficult to 
predict how much will be collected in any given year, and hence 
how much will have to be paid out in these fees. 
 
The second situation where the current provisions cause 
difficulty involves bankruptcies. In some cases where the 
recipient of a loan claims bankruptcy as the basis for inability to 
repay, it is necessary for the department to retain legal counsel 
to challenge the claimed bankruptcy. Again it's difficult to 
budget for the costs of these legal services because the volume 
of services which will be needed in any given year cannot be 
accurately predicted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment to the Act will overcome 
the problems I've outlined. Under the new arrangements most 
administrative costs of the student aid program will continue to 
be budgeted for on an annual basis as they are now. However, 
monies which have to be paid to third parties, that is collection 
agencies and legal counsel, under agreements for service related 
to the collection of loans in default, these monies will now be a 
charge-on and paid from the fund itself. This arrangement will 
create greater flexibility. Further, it's appropriate that these costs 
associated with the collection of loans be taken from the fund 
from which the loans were originally made and into which the 
loans are repaid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new arrangements do not transfer any costs 
from government to other parties, they simply establish a more 
flexible and appropriate method of handling some of the 
administrative details required under the program. 
 
I'm pleased therefore that Bill No. 51, An Act to amend The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Act, 1985, be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
information that the minister relayed to us here today regarding 
this Bill is of some interest, I believe, because of the fact that 
students are a big concern and getting their education is a major 
concern not only of the Department of Education, but thousands 
and thousands of parents who send these young people to 
school. The student aid program has been, I believe, a success. 
Many times though, however, in recent years there have been 
concerns. And as the minister has pointed out, there are two of 
them that have raised and I think they both are of major 
significance. 
 
One is the collection and how the department goes about 
collecting the ones that are difficult to get any money out of — 
the individuals who have serious financial difficulties or maybe 
do not want to pay. 
 
The other area that I noticed and I asked questions about in the 
Public Accounts regarding the bankruptcies, the minister has 
indicated that legal fees and administrative costs will be paid 
from the fund. And it's probably a step in the right direction to 
have those people who are providing the source of income also 
have the cost of delivering that. 



March 27, 1995 

 
1133 

We will be asking quite a few questions on this, Mr. Speaker, 
therefore, the . . . as we look at the Bill and the minister's 
remarks, we'll be needing to research a few of these things, and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this point, we will just move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Teachers' 
Federation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
explain the purpose of these amendments to The Teachers' 
Federation Act. Under the Act, the Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation or the STF has a wide range of responsibilities. It is 
responsible for maintaining high standards of professional 
competence and conduct among teachers. In this respect, the 
STF has a statutory authority and responsibility to deal with 
disciplinary matters. 
 
As well, the STF deals with professional development for 
teachers with a variety of teacher welfare issues. Mr. Speaker, 
over the past few years, the federation has identified several 
problems with the current legislation which are hindering the 
federation's ability to conduct its business and carry out its 
responsibilities effectively. 
 
The amendments in the Bill are designed to overcome these 
problems. I would like to outline the specific amendments 
involved, and they can be divided into four categories: (1) 
federation's internal matters; (2) definition of professional 
misconduct; (3) application of the federation's disciplinary 
authority; and (4) housekeeping and updating provisions. 
 
First there's a series of amendments related to the federation's 
internal affairs, and more specifically, voting criteria on matters 
before the federation council, the composition of the executive, 
the procedures by which elections of the executive are 
conducted. Under one amendment, routine matters before 
council will now pass with a majority of votes cast rather than 
requiring a majority of all those present. 
 
(1430) 
 
The amendments will also make it possible for the executive to 
maintain a consistent number of members in years when the 
president is re-elected and there is no past president. Under the 
existing legislation, the executive ends up being one member 
short in these circumstances. The other amendments around 
election procedures result from an internal study by the 
federation of its elections and resulting recommendations for 
improvements. 
 
The second group of amendments deal with the definition of 
professional misconduct in the Act, and there are two of these 
amendments. Addiction to alcohol or drugs will no longer be 
defined as professional misconduct. While addiction might lead 
to professional misconduct, the problem itself is viewed as 
being a medical matter which might affect a person's  

professional competence rather than as a type of misconduct. 
The Act already contains provisions whereby a teacher can be 
removed from teaching because the teacher's competence is no 
longer adequate. 
 
A new provision is being added which will make it clear that a 
conviction for a sexual offence under the Criminal Code does 
constitute professional misconduct. Given the role which 
teachers play and the trust that we place in them, by parents, 
society, legislators, it is appropriate to specify that in the 
legislation this type of behaviour constitutes professional 
misconduct. This doesn't mean that until now teachers could not 
be disciplined for sexual offences; it simply means that there is 
no longer any question about the matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not all teachers with Saskatchewan teaching 
certificates belong to the federation. Only those teachers 
employed in publicly funded provincial school systems become 
full members and only they are subject to the disciplinary 
provisions of the Act. 
 
A problem can arise therefore, if a teacher ceases to be a 
member of the federation before disciplinary action can be 
initiated or completed, even if the teacher was a member at the 
time of the incidents which gave rise to concern. This Bill 
includes an amendment to help overcome this problem. 
 
The federation will be given additional authority under two 
situations to discipline a teacher: in the case where the teacher 
was a member at the time proceedings against the teacher 
began; and two, in the case where the teacher ceased to be a 
member less than two years before proceedings are initiated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act is being brought up to date in several 
ways. Gender neutral language is being incorporated 
throughout, such as by the replacement of chairman with 
chairperson. And while this is now standard drafting policies, 
members will appreciate that it is of particular significance in a 
profession such as teaching. Outdated references to other 
statutes and to the titles of ministers and government 
departments are also being revised. 
 
As I've indicated, Mr. Speaker, these amendments have the full 
support of the STF. As well, other major stakeholder 
organizations such as the Saskatchewan trustees association 
have indicated that they have no objection to any revisions of 
this Bill. 
 
The STF represents over 12,000 teachers in our province, and 
it's important that the federation continue to have the legislative 
authority which it needs to effectively serve its members, 
students, and the general public. 
 
I'm pleased to move therefore, that Bill No. 52 — An Act to 
amend The Teachers' Federation Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1134 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
respond in a few matters as it relates to what the minister has 
indicated are in the Bill, the matters that I thought of significant 
concern. She mentioned four of them in the Bill, internal 
matters dealing with how the teachers' federation would 
operate. 
 
And I was taken into getting involved in this discussion because 
of the second point she made about the misconduct. And I agree 
with her observations about taking addiction, for example, of 
alcohol and other things as a part of treatment that's necessary 
and taking it out of a position where a misconduct has to be 
credited to that individual. 
 
I want to point out to the minister though, that my wife and I 
dealt with a couple who were . . . had to go to court because of 
sexual misconduct on the part of the husband in a school 
situation. And he was found not guilty. And the case was 
actually dropped by the individuals who pressed the charges. 
 
And I found to my surprise that the public did not treat them 
with the same common sense I believe that the justice system 
did. And so there is a very, very serious problem that occurs in 
these kinds of situations where the public do their own sense of 
justice and don't have all the facts. 
 
And I think that in order to have this be done right, it really 
seriously needs to be tackled from a situation where this 
individual should have the privilege of being innocent until 
proven guilty, both by a court of law and by the public. And so 
often that doesn't happen under these circumstances because 
there are a whole lot of feelings involved in these cases. 
 
Disciplinary actions, I can understand the concern that the 
minister had and I think that we agree with that. She mentioned 
some gender neutral things and housekeeping. I'm certain that 
we're not going to be defending our male position in relation to 
that. 
 
So I would just say that there are some things that we're going 
to be specifically asking questions about, and I think I indicated 
enough concern about which ones they would be. 
 
I know that there has to be very serious consideration made of 
these, but it's a very, very sensitive issue and it has to be dealt 
with in a sensitive way by the people who are not only 
administering it but who deal with it from the school board 
perspective, but also from the perspective of the parents and 
also the teacher. 
 
And so it's going to be of some interest to all of us, Mr. 
Speaker, as we get the department here to talk about these 
issues as we raise questions. And the member responsible for 
the Department of Education is going to take a pretty serious 
look at some of these things. And I just want to, for that reason, 
Mr. Speaker, adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting Agricultural Operations 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I'll move second reading of 
The Agricultural Operations Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food works closely 
with producer groups, industries, and other stakeholders. Our 
consultations with producers and industry resulted in the 
development of a strategic direction, for government to assist 
the agricultural industry to move in the direction it has chosen. 
 
The strategic direction as put forward in Agriculture 2000 calls 
for the government to provide opportunity for farm families to 
manage their land better, control their future, and be 
economically successful; to assist the industry to diversify and 
add value to agricultural products, and to develop institutions 
and relationships which enable producers to compete in the 
world economy. 
 
Agriculture 2000 directs the provincial government to work 
with the industry to create a favourable environment for 
diversification and development. This legislation will help to 
create a responsible and favourable climate for the expansion of 
intensive livestock operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers have been diversifying 
their operations. Cattle, hog, and sheep numbers continue to 
show steady growth on Saskatchewan farms. The number of 
pigs is up 2 per cent from a year ago, to 906,000, the largest 
inventory since 1973. The number of beef cows and 
replacement heifers is up 6 per cent from a year ago to 1.275 
million head, the largest inventory since 1977. 
 
Saskatchewan's intensive livestock sector is growing. As well 
there are many opportunities to further diversify the agricultural 
community. In 1994 there were 68 permits issued to new or 
expanding intensive livestock operation under The Pollution (by 
Livestock) Control Act, 1984. Since 1990, a total of 199 
permits have been issued. 
 
There is, however, a need to ensure that development and 
diversification can proceed while being sensitive to the 
environment. Concerns about nuisance hamper development of 
new or expanding intensive livestock operations. 
 
The Agricultural Operations Act provides a mechanism which 
recognizes the realities and importance of agricultural 
production to Saskatchewan, but also the need to consider 
impacts on those affected by development. The legislation will 
protect farmers from unwarranted nuisance lawsuits and ensure 
proper manure storage and utilization to protect ground and 
surface water. 
 
This legislation provides a mechanism for resolving disputes 
related to agricultural nuisance such as odour, noise, and dust. 
The legislation will provide a flexible, more effective, and less 
expensive method than lawsuits to resolve complaints about  



March 27, 1995 

 
1135 

farming practices. 
 
This legislation also provides the opportunity for the industry to 
develop guidelines for the start-up and operation of intensive 
operations. The legislation provides for the establishment of the 
Agricultural Operations Review Board. The board will have the 
ability to determine what is normally accepted agricultural 
practice. The board will have the ability to look at each 
situation individually. 
 
The Agricultural Operations Act supports expansion of the 
livestock industry and provides new procedures to resolve 
nuisance concerns arising from any farm operation, while not 
overburdening agricultural operations with extensive 
regulations. 
 
The Agricultural Operations Act also incorporates provisions of 
The Pollution (by Livestock) Control Act, 1984. These 
provisions will require certain classes of new or expanding 
intensive livestock operations to obtain approval for manure 
management plans before development can take place. These 
provisions will ensure surface and groundwater are protected 
from pollution. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is responding to the needs of 
the agricultural community and the people of the province. The 
balanced approach of this legislation will ensure the continued 
development of our agricultural sector while protecting the 
quality of our Saskatchewan way of life. 
 
The proposed Agricultural Operations Act is based on extensive 
consultations with the industry and the public in response to 
concerns and a desire for legislation. 
 
I ask the members of the Legislative Assembly to support this 
Act, and I therefore move second reading of Bill 53, The 
Agricultural Operations Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to make a few remarks about this. I think that this is the 
kind of Bill that just touches the surface on most of the major 
issues because what we're dealing with is beneath the surface 
most of the time and it will be dealing with how we deal with 
the regulations, as each one of these various intensive livestock 
operations is likely going to be different. 
 
The concern that we would have, Mr. Speaker, as we move 
around and discuss this, would the individual municipality still 
have some right to maintain some control about how they, with 
their by-laws, divide their municipality and zone it and put 
certain areas for intensive livestock operations, or whether they 
would move them out, and how they would respond to that. 
 
There have been a lot of people who have begun intensive 
livestock operations who've had to move them. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is borne out by some of the people who have lived in 
the Outlook area, for example, where they had to move a hog 
barn — or they moved it before they built it — with the fact 
that the people in the community thought that their groundwater  

was going to be polluted and that's the reason why they moved 
it. There are a lot of things, Mr. Speaker, that are going to be 
impacted here and we cannot always see what they're going to 
be. 
 
One of my family members is a construction contractor in 
British Columbia in the delta where they have the residences 
below sea level. What they have to do is they have to put ballast 
into the ground in order to have the facilities stabilize, and 
when they do this they ask an engineer to come along and put 
this all together. 
 
They tell him that they have to have X amount of solid ballast 
to stabilize the soil underneath and they put that in. And what 
that does, Mr. Speaker, is it increases the weight, pushes the 
water out, stabilizes the part underneath the facility that they're 
going to build, and consequently, what happens is it squirts the 
water underneath the ground, pushes the water out to where all 
these other residences are, and that erodes the stabilizing 
material underneath those houses. 
 
And so the engineers have to be fairly careful in how they put 
this stabilizing compound — whether it's dirt or rock or 
whatever — how they put it into this . . . underneath facilities 
they want to build. Because if it impacts negatively on the other 
one, then everybody is going to have a problem. 
 
And that's exactly what we have with how these intensive 
livestock operators are going to be dealt with in the future. If 
you put intensive livestock into one location and it pushes out 
something else that is not compatible with the general public, 
you have serious problems developing. 
 
(1445) 
 
And so as we look at this, we're going to have to take serious 
consideration about a number of things. And the minister 
pointed out the waste control in intensive livestock operations is 
a very serious problem and concern to the people who live in 
those areas where there is an intensive livestock operation. 
 
There are some, as I have found out, having driven by certain 
ones, there are certain intensive livestock operations that have 
more waste management requirements necessary than others. I'll 
just go . . . Hog operations have a very serious odour problem, 
Mr. Speaker. And I've had to deal with that in our communities 
in my constituency. 
 
Feedlot operations have an odour. Whereas you could have a 
major cow-calf operation and you don't have that odour 
problem, not nearly to the same extent that you do when you 
deal with intensive feedlot operations, whether it's pork or 
whether it's beef. 
 
And so you're going to have variable kinds of regulations that 
are going to have to be put together to deal with the kinds of 
intensive livestock operations that we have in the province. And 
dairies are going to be wanting to have certain specifications in 
a differential in relation to hog operations, and I'm sure that  



March 27, 1995 

 
1136 

feedlot operators will be concerned about how they have their 
operations challenged by this Bill. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, because of all of those implications, our 
Agriculture critic is going to take a pretty serious look at all of 
these things and take the time to study it. 
 
And I would suggest to the minister that one of the things that 
would be really helpful is if he had some idea about how these 
regulations would be set up, how to manage each one of these 
intensive livestock operations, would seriously help the 
discussion on how to bring these into a better working 
relationship in the communities. 
 
And so if he would take the time to do that, I'm sure our critic 
would be appreciative of that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, we just want to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to establish an Aboriginal 
Courtworkers Commission 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I'm pleased today to move second reading of The Aboriginal 
Courtworkers Commission Act. 
 
One of the greatest challenges facing the judicial system today 
is the effective delivery of justice services to aboriginal peoples. 
An important aspect of delivering these services is taking steps 
to ensure that aboriginal people, particularly the accused, have 
the appropriate access to the justice system. This includes 
having sufficient information on their rights and 
responsibilities. 
 
To be effective, information must be provided in a culturally 
sensitive manner that utilizes the expertise and input of the 
aboriginal community itself. Establishing a co-managed 
Aboriginal Courtworkers Commission to administer and deliver 
the aboriginal courtworkers program will constitute a small but 
significant step in the direction of a more sensitive justice 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill establishes the Aboriginal Courtworkers 
Commission. It will be an independent corporation, to be 
appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, following 
consultation by the minister with Indian and Metis 
organizations. Membership in the commission is intended to be 
comprised primarily of representatives from the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), the Metis Nation 
of Saskatchewan, and the provincial government. Once 
established, the commission will appoint a chairperson from 
among its members and appoint an executive director to the 
commission. 
 
The commission will administer the delivery of courtworker 
services to persons of aboriginal descent who are charged with  

an offence, or in the case of young offenders, who are charged 
with or who are alleged to have committed an offence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commission will have the following powers: 
to design, allocate, and coordinate courtworker services; to 
establish procedures to determine the eligibility of individuals 
to receive courtworker services; to establish procedures for 
requesting courtworker services; to establish procedures for the 
selection of courtworker service carriers and agencies; and to 
establish accountability mechanisms for contracts entered into 
by the commission as well as program-related audits and review 
of the organizations delivering courtworker services. 
 
Under this Act, courtworker services are defined to include: 
providing counselling information and referral services to an 
individual; assisting an individual to understand his or her 
rights, options, and responsibilities; assisting an individual to 
understand the procedures of the court; assisting an individual 
to obtain legal counsel and advice; working to reduce the 
cultural and linguistic barriers between that individual and 
those involved in the administration of justice; and enhancing 
the justice system's awareness and appreciation of the cultural 
traditions, values and customs, languages and socio-economic 
conditions, of a specific aboriginal person and of Indian and 
Metis people in general. 
 
These courtworker services are to be delivered by local carrier 
agencies contracted by the commission. The carriers will be 
required to provide program delivery that is 
aboriginal-inclusive, community based, and accountable to both 
the community and funding authorities on a financial and 
program basis. 
 
Finally, programs will be required to be cost-effective. Mr. 
Speaker, this program will initially establish the equivalent of 
21 full-time courtworkers in targeted areas throughout the 
province. Funding for this program will proceed on a 50/50 
cost-share basis with the federal government. 
 
The Bill also provides conflict of interest provisions regarding 
the members of the commission and requires an annual 
independent audit of the commission and requires the 
commission to comply with The Tabling of Documents Act, 
1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill establishes an Aboriginal Courtworkers 
Commission that is independent, co-managed, and yet 
accountable. It will provide courtworker services to a 
community that undeniably requires these services. This 
government has heard clearly from aboriginal people and 
justice professionals that there's a real need to reinstate this 
program and to reinstate it in partnership with aboriginal 
people. 
 
There are difficult challenges in the area of the reform of justice 
services for aboriginal people. However, models such as this 
program, which allow for the delivery of services in partnership 
with all concerned parties in a cost-effective and culturally 
sensitive manner, are a positive development in this area. 



March 27, 1995 

 
1137 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to establish an 
Aboriginal Courtworkers Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's interesting to 
listen to the statements by the minister on this new, proposed 
venture in legislation. And of course, like so many other things, 
on the surface it sounds kind of nice, and it sounds sort of 
flowery and acceptable. But as I listened I realized that here we 
have a Bill that is going to very greatly affect our justice 
system. It's going to affect it in terms of access to justice, which 
seems like a reasonably good thing. 
 
But I would ponder in my mind, if it's good for aboriginal 
people to have access to the justice system or better access, why 
wouldn't it be better for everybody? 
 
Input, the minister says, is going to be improved. And input is 
good, nice to have lots of input, sounds great. But why would 
we just limit ourselves to having input to the justice system for 
one group of society? I guess what I'm thinking in my mind is 
the old phrase, what's good for the goose is good for the gander. 
So if all of these things are so great and wonderful for one 
cultural group in our society, why wouldn't it be equally good 
for everybody? 
 
Now does this proposal, as has been suggested, build the justice 
system, or might it just be doing a lot of unforeseen things that 
we haven't considered? Might it in fact be tearing the justice 
system down by segregating different cultural groups in our 
society? 
 
Is it wise for us to deliberately legislate a justice system that 
segregates one cultural group away from the rest of society in 
our justice system? Equal justice for all comes to mind. Why 
then would we be pursuing a piece of legislation that would 
discriminate against all of the other groups and not provide 
them with the same opportunities? 
 
Now it's true of course that we have heard arguments that the 
aboriginal people need special consideration. Those arguments 
are always well-made, but it seems to me that immediately that 
someone else from another cultural group gets into some 
trouble in our justice system, they can equally make a good 
argument that they need special consideration, special 
education, special tools to work with. 
 
And it sounds good when you say we're going to have a 
courtworker's services provided to the aboriginal people so that 
they can have counselling service, and that's . . . you know, 
seems kind of like a good idea. When you hear those words and 
explained that way, counselling services for people who are 
getting into trouble is a good idea. But why would we be saying 
here that we have to have a special Bill that only caters to one 
group in that sense? 
 
If I were in trouble with the law, I'm sure that I would like 
somebody to have some counselling time for me. I don't think  

that anybody in society deliberately goes around expecting to 
get into trouble and needing these kind of services. But once 
you are into some kind of trouble with the law, certainly if this 
applies to our aboriginal people, it must also apply to every 
other cultural group or individual from any other cultural group 
that finds themselves in some kind of society glue, as we might 
put it. 
 
So I'm saying that we may in fact with this Bill be creating as 
many problems as we are solving. Not in terms of the aboriginal 
people maybe needing these services and wanting them — and 
certainly they will — but we might be setting up a perception in 
the minds of the people that once again we are giving special 
status to one group at the expense of all other people in our 
society. 
 
Is that fair, is the question we have to ask. Is it wise, I guess has 
to be the other question you would ask. Would we deliberately 
put in a law that might pit people against one another? I thought 
we were working to try to solve the problems of discrimination 
in the minds of people, not deliberately wedging some more 
things between our different classes of folks in our society. 
 
I think we have to learn to work towards pulling people together 
rather than to segregating them and driving them apart. And that 
might be what's happening here and I really think we have to 
research this somewhat to find out for sure if we are doing more 
good than bad. And perception is very important. You know it's 
not necessarily truth or fact, but it's what minds get developed 
within themselves, within society. And so perception is very 
important, especially in terms of the law and of justice and what 
people perceive to be right or good. 
 
Now we say that under this Act we're going to talk about court 
procedures with the folks that get into trouble and explain those 
court procedures, and that's really a good idea. I mean you 
couldn't hardly say anything against that when you first hear it. 
But again I ask the question: why wouldn't we do that for 
everybody that gets into trouble? Why should aboriginal people 
be singled out as the only ones that might need this kind of 
assistance and this kind of help? 
 
They want to have their rights explained. Why wouldn't I want 
my rights explained if I'm in trouble with the law and having to 
face the justice system? Why would we provide these services 
just for one group of people? Why wouldn't we treat everyone 
equally well in this circumstance? 
 
Cost-effective, they say. Well that's good. Right away though 
they tell us that, ah, the federal government is going to maybe 
pick up 50 per cent of the cost of this. Well I'm not so sure that 
they are. I kind of ponder through my mind things like 3 to $4 
million that the federal government had offered to this province 
to build a dam at Battle Creek in south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
This provincial government threw that money away. Refuses to 
take it. Refuses to accept the federal money to do the program. 
It's just a waste, the way they approach things, something that's 
as good and as necessary as water in the desert and these people  



March 27, 1995 

 
1138 

have rejected it out of hand and not taken the money. Now 
today they say we're willing to take 50 per cent of the money to 
support an aboriginal court system and legislation and to bring 
it into effect. 
 
Who would trust them to take the money or to have enough 
sense to know how to get it? I surely wouldn't because I've seen 
them throw away $300 million worth of federal money in the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program — threw it 
away, gave it back, and then said to the federal government 
we'll take it back in another plan some place else, through the 
back door, and call it a new program that we thought of. 
 
(1500) 
 
No thank you. I'm not going to accept this, Mr. Speaker, 
because I just don't believe that these people have enough sense 
to know how to get 50 per cent of the costs of this plan out of 
the federal government. And I haven't seen any guarantees in 
writing from anybody saying that they are in fact offering it, let 
alone ready to pay it up, or that this government would have 
enough sense to take it if it was offered or even put into writing 
because they've thrown away so many other things that have 
gone by us in last few months. 
 
So why would we trust this government? I can't see that we can. 
And why would we support a law that is going to give special 
consideration to one cultural group in our society at the expense 
of all others and create a perception that in itself might cause a 
deepening of the racial discriminatory problems that we have in 
our society and have been working hard to try to get over. 
 
So I think we have to research this very, very carefully, Mr. 
Speaker. In this Bill we have legislation that is fraught with 
many, many dangers in our society. And I think we really have 
to look at this very closely to make sure that we are actually 
helping people and maybe not causing them more trouble than 
they already have. 
 
And having said that, I guess what we're going to have to do is 
to throw this piece of legislation out into the hands of the public 
and have our justice system and judges and our lawyers, our 
aboriginal people — not just their top organizations again, but 
the average men and women, and folks that live in the city of 
Regina and out on reserves . . . we want them to take a really 
careful look at this to see if the benefits are going to outweigh 
the pressures that might come as a result of those things that are 
not really mentioned. 
 
And so I think we will simply have to buy some time for people 
to be able to get some input into this, Mr. Speaker, and with 
that, I'm going to move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. Before we proceed to any motions, we 
would ask the Minister of Finance to introduce the officials 
who have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you very much. On my left is 
the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright. Behind John 
Wright is Larry Spannier, executive director of the Treasury 
Board branch. Next to Larry Spannier is Craig Dotson, 
associate deputy minister, budget analysis division. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 
 That a sum not exceeding $350,737,000 be granted to 

Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 
March 31, 1996. 

 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As we take a look 
at the motion for this sum of money, would the minister 
indicate to the legislature if this is exactly one-twelfth for each 
of the budgets of the volume of dollars that are going to meet 
the one-twelfth requirement. I just raise that as the first 
question. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, to the member opposite. This is 
a straight one-twelfth and it might be appropriate to just take 
one minute to explain the process. 
 
One of the keys to our democracy is the idea that all monies 
have to be supported by a vote of the legislature. So that means 
that the budget monies cannot be spent until the legislature has 
passed the budget. But the budget has not yet been passed and 
we're nearing the year end of March 31; and so therefore in 
order to ensure that schools, health districts, and other key 
government agencies have enough money to get them through 
until the budget is passed, we are requesting support for interim 
supply. But you're right — it is one-twelfth. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is it one-twelfth for each of the areas? I 
notice that there's some zeros, so they wouldn't be one-twelfth, 
but there is also a necessary requirement for you to tell me 
whether they are exactly one-twelfth for all the rest. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes. To the member opposite, I 
passed a sheet across to him. The first column tells you what 
the appropriation is for that department. The second column 
says what's statutory, what amounts of money are going to be 
paid by statute; and then the rest of it is one-twelfths. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There's Executive Council electoral expenses. 
It's anticipated that you're not going to be voting any for this 
month. And I would assume that that's not going to be done 
before the budget is passed. 
 
Now there's one that is of interest to me, and that is servicing 
the public debt. Is that all by statute, that $872 million — that's 
all by statute? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, to the member opposite. He's 
correct. Both of the ones that he identifies. That is, Executive  



March 27, 1995 

 
1139 

Council electoral expenses is just totally statutory so there's no 
discretion there. And servicing the public debt is statutory as 
well. 
 
Mr. Martens: — The 872 million, is that going to come before 
the House in a Bill that we're going to be talking about, or is 
that going to come through here some other method? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, no. 
Anything that is statutory has already been approved by an 
umbrella law and it does not have to come to the House each 
and every year as the budget does. So there's an umbrella law 
which provides this statutory authority to spend that money. 
 
Mr. Martens: — It's interesting that that would be identified as 
. . . that volume of money would require one law and then it 
would be for ever. Is there a sunset on either one of those two? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, no there is 
not. 
 
Mr. Martens: — In dealing with the various areas, the 
requirements are going to be different for each department. 
Have you asked them for consideration of what they need or are 
you just automatically giving them one-twelfth to provide the 
money that they may or may not need or that they might need 
some more of. Obviously if they would have needed more, they 
would have asked for it, I guess. 
 
But we're taking a look at this and saying, are there some 
surpluses here that aren't required and does the department have 
the authority not to pay out that volume if it isn't required? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, yes, you're 
correct. The department does not, obviously, have to pay out the 
money if it's not required. But if you go back many, many years 
through all governments, governments of all political stripes, 
what has always happened is you have traditionally given 
one-twelfth across the board. But obviously departments should 
never be spending money unless there is a requirement that they 
spend it today. If they can wait, of course they would wait. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There is a question that I have regarding two 
Bills that are before the House. One is The Agri-Food 
Innovation Act and the other is the transportation. There is no 
money in this budget for either one of them, is there? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, no, there 
isn't. 
 
Mr. Martens: — The agri-food innovation has $9 million that 
are money that is available through the budget to The 
Agri-Food Innovation Act. And is that not going to be paid out 
of the budget, or is that not of the . . . is that a different kind of 
method that you're going to use to put that money into the 
Department of Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, funding  

for that is provided for in the Bill and it will come out of this 
year's budget, the current year. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Right, but in the budget estimates for 1994, 
'95, '96, there's a $9 million budget item that deals with 
agri-food innovation. And is that included in this volume of 
dollars in the agri-food estimate here? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I'd like to clarify to the 
member opposite is that this is a program, first of all, or a fund 
established by the federal and provincial governments. There's 
two parts. The share for this current year is $18 million. That's 
separate and apart from anything in this year's estimates and 
separate and apart from the interim supply money that we're 
asking for today. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Right, but there's a $9 million line in the 
Department of Agriculture estimates. Is that included, or do you 
just get a volume dollars . . . one-twelfth from the Department 
of Agriculture without getting assignment of what is needed 
within that department? There might be some areas of that 
department that need the money and other areas that don't need 
the money. Could you explain that to me, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, the member opposite is correct. 
What happens is you just give them the one-twelfth. And 
pursuant to your earlier question, they determine which needs 
are the most pressing from that one-twelfth. But it doesn't mean 
that you just spread it right across the total estimates. The 
department will make that decision. 
 
Mr. Martens: — There are some general questions that I think 
that we should maybe look at. One of those things is a concern 
that I have. I was going through the estimates . . . or your 
budget address in dealing with the debt and the deficit and 
things related to that. Would you be able to provide me a value 
of the total debt for the province of Saskatchewan — not the net 
debt, the gross debt — and from that explain the various 
components of that gross debt? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would refer the member opposite 
to page 95 on the budget where it outlines the gross debt of the 
province to be $14 billion — 14,159.878 million. And then it 
breaks that down with the total Crown corporation debt being 
5,655.958 million; and the general government purposes debt 
8,503.920 million. 
 
Mr. Martens: — When you're dealing with the debt and its 
relationship to the government and paying interest on all this 
volume of dollars, how do the CIC Crowns fit into this? And do 
those Crown corporations do their financing all through the 
Department of Finance if they need to have financing? Or does 
SaskPower go get their own? And we'll start with that for 
general answers. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite is correct in 
his first assumption, that is the Department of Finance does all  



March 27, 1995 

 
1140 

borrowing for the Crowns. So the Crowns would essentially 
come to the Department of Finance with their schedule of 
borrowing. We would go out and borrow the money on behalf 
of the Crowns as well as the requirements of the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Martens: — On the other side of that, on the monies that 
are related to assets in the Crowns, do those Crown 
corporations have their deposits in their surpluses deposited 
with the Department of Finance, and do they use those monies 
to offset their borrowing cost? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, the 
Crowns have their own accounts which they manage 
themselves, so it's just the overall borrowing requirements that 
are a responsibility of the Department of Finance. The rest of 
their finances they deal with individually. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So if the SaskPower Corporation needed to 
have $10 million in the first month of doing business in a given 
year, they would say to you, I need $10,000 but I'm going to 
need . . . or $10 million. I'm going to need another $30 million 
in the next quarter. You go looking for the money to borrow it, 
and then you transfer, when those monies come in, you transfer 
them to that Crown corporation that has requested that. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, what 
happens is that the Crowns will come forward and say, these are 
our borrowing requirements, usually annually. That is more 
likely, that they're going to say, this is the money we require for 
the whole year. Unusual for there to be a change in mid-year or 
for them to do it every three or four months. 
 
So they'll come and say annually, this is what we require. Then 
the Department of Finance goes out and arranges to borrow the 
money. 
 
Mr. Martens: — When the Department of Finance gets the 
money and then it transfers that to the Crown corporation, is the 
Crown required to pay the interest on that, or are you giving 
interest to the Crown corporations in relation to that so that they 
will have a vested benefit from the Department of Finance 
carrying that, or is that all allocated to that Crown corporation 
that is asking for the borrowing? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, the 
Estimates, page 137, the Crowns pay interest on the money that 
they borrow, so that the government does not cover the interest 
for them; they pay the interest themselves. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Okay, there's . . . I think the number is $636 
million or is it 536 million — $536 million. That number is the 
interest paid. When the money is borrowed, is the Department 
of Finance responsible for any of the borrowing costs? Now 
there's interest accruing. There's the function of the business to 
get the money and all of those requirements. Do the agencies 
that are borrowing the money, do they pay you for that service? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, the Crown 
will be responsible for any of the fees associated with 
borrowing the money. So we would pass that on to them as 
well. 
 
Mr. Martens: — When there's a specific currency that is not a 
Canadian dollar currency, are those values translated to the 
requirement that the Crown corporation has to pay? For 
example, the U.S. (United States) dollar, if there's a U.S. dollar 
that fluctuates . . . and we all see that every day on our 
television. You go out and buy the dollar at what you consider a 
good price, and then you have . . . of the information that you 
can gather about that U.S. dollar. You say that on May 31, I 
calculate a good day to go buy the U.S. dollar. 
 
And I will bring that in here on a borrowed level, and then I'll 
pay a certain amount of interest. Now let's say that best guess is 
a margin of a percentage point out. Do you pay that or does the 
Crown corporation pay that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — In that particular situation or that 
scenario, the Crown corporation would pay that. So they pay all 
things associated with the cost of borrowing, whether it's the 
interest, whether it's any exchange rate issue, or whether it's any 
fees. 
 
Mr. Martens: — That leads me to the written question that I 
asked you. In '94-95 we borrowed $1.2279 millions . . . or a 
billion and a quarter dollars we borrowed. Some of them were 
from The Industrial Bank of Japan, some of the U.S. public 
market, and some of the Canadian. The volume of dollars that's 
outlined there, for example, in the yen — it's calculated the rate 
of interest is at 4.48 per cent. But when you add in the hedge 
against . . . hedge it into Canadian dollars, it turns out to be 8.82 
per cent. Is that the way that these Crown corporations pay the 
Department of Finance based on that value — they'll pay in 
wherever that dollar was borrowed? 
 
And then my question to you is also who chooses which one? 
Now if SaskTel was going to get it at 8.82 per cent and 
SaskPower had to pay at 9.4, who chooses? Do you choose who 
gets which money in relation to the interest payment by these 
Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite has asked two 
questions. In response to the first one, on page 53 the Crown 
would pay the 8.82 per cent rather than the 4.4 so they take into 
account the currency issue as well, or the hedge. 
 
What will happen is that if we feel, in the Department of 
Finance, if we think that it's a good time to borrow, there's a 
possibility of a reasonable deal out there, we will get some 
sense of the terms and conditions. We will go to SaskPower or 
SaskTel or whatever Crown and say this is what the deal looks 
like. This is what would be available to you right now. Is this 
acceptable to you? If it's acceptable, that we proceed; if not, we 
say well we have to go and keep trying for an alternative 
arrangement. But they get . . . they have an opportunity to 
decide whether or not what is available at that time is  



March 27, 1995 

 
1141 

something they would like to agree to. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Now let's take and put that . . . we talked a 
little about the debt side. When a Crown corporation has a 
surplus in a given year, or profit we'll call it, do they pay you 
only on the basis of what is required on due loans or payments 
in instalments on loans? Do they pay you only that, and when 
they do that how do they control and manage their surplus? Do 
you require certain interest requirements from them to charge 
back to their . . . or is it only calculated on the basis of the cost 
of borrowings? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Interest to the Crown is an expense. 
They pay it to us, we flow it through to the appropriate parties. 
If they have surplus cash, they treat it the same as you or I 
would treat any surplus cash we have. I don't have a lot. I don't 
know if the member opposite has a lot. But you put in the 
Credit Union or the bank or you invest it in some appropriate 
way. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Okay then, they get a return on their personal 
portfolio on investment. You don't manage that for the Crown 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member is correct; we do not. 
 
Mr. Martens: — The Crowns have a significant, under CIC, 
have a significant amount of surplus funds. I think their profit 
. . . or their profit, I believe, or their . . . no, their gross revenue 
was about, before interest was taken off, was about $1.2 billion. 
And their interest cost was about $536 million so that the 
Crown corporations really have about $600 million, six hundred 
and sixty, fifty million dollars worth of surplus that they have in 
investments that they manage. Is that pretty close to being 
accurate? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — As the member opposite would 
know, CIC's annual report for this report isn't out yet. And I 
quite frankly do not have their annual report from last year here 
so that particular detail will have to wait until the CIC officials 
are here. But what you're talking about — and I'm not saying 
that I'm agreeing with your numbers — what you're saying 
about the process is correct, though. 
 
Mr. Martens: — The individual Crown corporations then can 
take, in terms of their own investment . . . they invest the 
money, and they will have earnings from that in each of theirs. 
 
Do you require any from the Department of Finance? And I was 
in the treasury benches, so I understand that they want to get 
everything so that they can manage it — I was going to use the 
word control, but Mr. Wright wouldn't let me use those words 
— but manage it. You don't have any restrictions on how they 
manage that surplus account, do you? Do you measure out how 
they do it into certain investments? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I would say to the member 
opposite if he was on Treasury Board, he will remember that 
the commercial Crowns report to the Crowns Investments  

Corporation, not to the Treasury Board and that the processes 
are quite separate. So the deputy minister of Finance really has 
no direct control over how they handle their monies beyond 
what we've talked about in terms of their borrowings. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Right. I understand that. The thing that I was 
going to point out was that the requirements for debt are 
managed by the Department of Finance; the others are made by 
investments made by the Crown corporations. And that's the 
point I wanted to make. 
 
Is there, when you're dealing with this sort of a thing, is there a 
difference between the Crown corporations like SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, and STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company), is there a difference between them and the Crop 
Insurance Corporation and Agricultural Credit Corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes. The difference that you've 
highlighted there is the difference between Treasury Board 
Crown, in which the Department of Finance and the Treasury 
Board is much more involved in the actual management of the 
funds, and Crown corporation CIC Crowns which, except for 
the borrowing, are separate and apart from the Department of 
Finance and report only to the CIC board, not to the Treasury 
Board. 
 
But the Treasury Board Crowns — and you've used an example 
of one — have many more aspects of their financial affairs 
managed by the Department of Finance through the Treasury 
Board. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Do those include ACS? Do they include 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance? Do they include the Liquor 
Board? Do they include . . . Could you give me a list of them, if 
you've got them handy there? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I refer the member opposite to the 
Estimates, page 10. And there they have the Treasury Board 
Crowns and there's a list of the ones . . . and you've mentioned 
them. There's two others, and I'm not sure if you mentioned 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) and 
SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation). 
 
Mr. Martens: — Is the Liquor Board in the . . . liquor and 
gaming commission in the Treasury Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — What I would I refer the member 
opposite to is page 153 of the Estimates, and it talks about the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority there. And it talks 
about the fact that there is a piece of legislation, The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Act, which mandates the . . . which 
places some restrictions on what occurs with that particular 
agency. 
 
Mr. Martens: — We were dealing before with the CIC 
Crowns. I understand their management. Will you explain to me 
the borrowing and the paying and investing of debts? As I  



March 27, 1995 

 
1142 

just went through the CIC Crowns, will you explain that to us in 
the Assembly, on the Treasury Board corporations? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The process is pretty well identical. 
That is we borrow on their behalf, they pay us the interest costs, 
and we pass that through to the agency from which we have 
borrowed the money. So the process is pretty well similar to the 
other one that you described. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Okay, that deals with the borrowing. What 
about the surplus? Liquor and gaming commission have 
significant surpluses. Would you require a certain format for 
investment in relation to that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — With respect to the Treasury Board 
Crowns, one of two processes can occur. One is we can take the 
money in. We can invest it on their behalf and provide them 
with the appropriate return. Or in some cases, they may act as a 
CIC Crown would and do that which I just described 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Martens: — So in essence the General Revenue Fund 
could borrow from the liquor commission. It could borrow from 
some of these funds and use that money instead of having to go 
to the general markets. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite is correct. 
 
Mr. Martens: — How many dollars, on an annualized basis, do 
you have? And you don't have to be to the last penny, but if you 
give me in the $10 million area, how many dollars in the 
Treasury Board Crowns would you have available for doing 
things like we just suggested, using that money for . . . instead 
of going to borrow from someone else? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — That particular number can vary 
quite significantly from day to day, depending on what the 
particular cash flow is at that time. And the kinds of ranges that 
we're talking about are several hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well as some point, Madam Minister, you 
have to have a cut-off. Let's take one in the last year, like '93-94 
just for a figure that will have to have a cut-off some place, and 
that will be set some place. I won't ask you for the '94-95, but 
'93-94 should be some place, and we should have that number, I 
believe. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, he's 
correct; there will be a cut-off on March 31, and we can 
certainly provide that information. We have information here 
about '95-96, but there's no problem ensuring that you get that. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I knew you wouldn't have '94-95 because that 
cut-off comes in a couple of days, but your '93-94 will give me 
some ballpark figure about how many dollars you're talking 
about. 
 
The reason I'm asking the question, I want to know from you 
how much interest you're paying on these forms of money that  

come from in house, and whether there's interest returned on 
this investment to these different players, and what kind of rates 
you use when you're using this kind of to have a fluid, positive 
current account. I'd like to know what kind of interest you're 
paying to these entities or these Treasury Board Crowns. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — There's a standard, traditionally 
accepted rate which we pay them, which is a 30-day rate, so that 
there is a kind of a fairness across the piece, and there is a 
predictability and certainty to it. 
 
Mr. Martens: — You're referring to the treasury bills — a 
30-day treasury bill, I take it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite is correct. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I appreciate 
the fact that the minister has been generous in answering 
general questions about the Department of Finance, and if you 
would like to go through the interim supply and we have your 
assurance you're going to be here until 5 o'clock, we will 
continue to talk in a general way about estimates in a general 
way and in a particular way. And if you want to do that, Mr. 
Chairman, you feel free to do that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member has my assurance that I 
will certainly be here until 5 o'clock. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I hereby move: 
 
 That towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1996, the 
sum of $350,737,000 be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 

 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I move that the resolutions be now 
read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 
 That Bill No. 55, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1996, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 

 



March 27, 1995 

 
1143 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — By leave of the Assembly and under 
rule 51(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
(1545) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to consideration of the 
estimates, I would ask the minister to introduce the officials 
who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated 
on my left is the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright. 
Seated next to John is Gerry Kraus, the Provincial Comptroller. 
Seated behind John Wright is Bill Van Sickle, the executive 
director of administration. Seated next to Bill is Craig Dotson, 
the associate deputy minister, budget analysis division. Seated 
next to me is Mr. Rae Haverstock, executive director, treasury 
and debt management division. And seated behind Rae is Len 
Rog, the assistant deputy minister of the revenue division. 
 
And just to be sure that we can answer all of the questions for 
the member opposite, we have seated at the back Kirk 
McGregor, who is the executive director, taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs; Jim Marshall, the executive director, 
economic and fiscal policy; Brian Smith, the executive director, 
Public Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, and welcome to Mr. 
Wright and your department. I appreciate your being here. 
 
There is a concern that we have on the west side of the province 
and it relates to higher taxes and taxes that are of a significant 
difference between Saskatchewan and Alberta. And it has 
raised a serious concern among businessmen. 
 
I noted even that the national news covered the town of Maple 
Creek and it showed a number of businesses. I think there were 
three or four businesses that had a serious problem. They closed 
the door. And they went to speak to the manager of the co-op in 
Maple Creek and they said to him, what's the problem? And he 
said, if we carry anything that can be duplicated or has a 
competitor in Medicine Hat, we can't compete on the basis that 
our rates are . . . our tax rates are so high and so that's the 
reason why we have a serious problem. The mayor was also on 
television saying the same thing. 
 
We have established islands in this province, and that's a  

concern to us on this side of the House. We have established an 
island in tax at Lloydminster. We have exactly the opposite 
effect to Lloydminster in St. Walburg. We have an opposite 
effect to Lloydminster in Swift Current. We have an opposite 
effect to a large extent all the way along the west side that is a 
serious problem to small business. 
 
That's a concern to me in dealing with it because I live in that 
same community that has an opportunity to go into those areas 
to buy. I have made it a personal commitment that I will . . . as 
the member of the legislature for the rural area around those 
major centres, I'm not going to go and shop in Medicine Hat. 
 
But that's a personal decision. And it's a personal decision that's 
probably cost me a few dollars. But it's still a personal decision 
because I want to have those businesses in Swift Current and in 
the communities that I have in my constituency also benefit 
from my involvement there, and our family does a significant 
business in those communities. 
 
We do that for a specific reason. Because it's not fair for these 
businesses. They can't transfer the tax anywhere. What we have 
. . . We have other islands in this province — islands in gaming. 
There's going to be islands on reserves. We're going to have 
islands that say gaming can be carried out in this community; 
gaming will be done in Regina, for example. The services 
provided will have one tax structure. You go into an Indian 
reserve and you're going to have a whole different tax structure, 
and perhaps none. And that's another island that we have in 
Saskatchewan's taxation policy. 
 
We have, as you pointed out in the budget address, on the 9 per 
cent on rebate to those individuals who buy manufacturing and 
processing equipment, they will be allowed to have a rebate of 
the 9 per cent. That's significant. I have people in my 
community that are probably going to take advantage of that. 
 
But you know what happens, Madam Minister, is you have this 
island where there's no tax paid. And the people who are in 
competition around it will have to pay tax, or have had to pay 
tax on the same product, and now are paying interest. They're 
paying the whole cost of doing business at the cost that was 
incurred when they decided to increase their business size by 
. . . in processing and manufacturing and all the things that now 
get a 9 per cent sales tax cut. 
 
That's exactly the same — as I'm going to point out — situation. 
There are families in the south-west who have decided that they 
were going to go into the livestock business. They're in the 
livestock business and they decided to seed their land to grass. 
And in this decision they seeded all this land to grass, and now 
Mr. Goodale is coming out and he's saying, oh, we won't pay on 
seeded grasses; that's cultivated land, we won't pay on seeded 
grasses. 
 
So what you have in fact is the person who has decided to go 
out on his own, decided to buy this change in how he does 
business, he's decided to buy that change himself. Now Mr. 
Goodale is going to come along and say, I'm going to pay on  



March 27, 1995 

 
1144 

cultivated land and I'm going to pay those people who only 
have cultivated land, and not the person who has already seeded 
grass. The person who has the cultivated land is now going to 
decide to seed grass and then he comes in competition with that 
individual who's already done it. 
 
And that's the islands that are set up that do not make a level 
playing-field with competitive businesses doing business in the 
same area, doing the same things. And they don't have to be in 
the same centre, but if you've got a manufacturing component in 
Swift Current that does not get the same benefit as one would in 
Saskatoon and he manufactures products that are similar, then 
what have you got? You've got an island of protection that 
isolates this individual from the same competition and the same 
competitive systems that the other person had to deal with. 
 
Those are islands that you build up. And I think that if you do it 
too many times, you cause a problem. You cause a bigger 
problem than what you have people to fight off the fires that 
start up. Because I know people who have put off buying 
because they wanted to have a 9 per cent cut. And that is a very, 
very significant cut. 
 
And the operations on a family farm, that could range between 
. . . on an ordinary sized farm, a thousand acres, that one little 
item could be between 2,500 and $3,000 a year on taxes that 
that individual pays at 9 per cent. 
 
Now let's take that individual and compare him to the individual 
in Alberta who doesn't have to pay those taxes. And then you 
have another isolated variable, that neighbours have to compete 
against neighbours doing the same business and always having 
to pay that additional cost in relation to the government. And 
people in the province of Saskatchewan have significant 
difficulty with that. 
 
And if you think I'm speaking by myself, just come to the 
chamber of commerce meetings in Swift Current some time and 
they will tell you in exactly the same tone as I have — not 
angry, belligerent, or anything — just telling you very carefully 
that they have a very serious problem. 
 
A case where this occurs consistently is in the furniture 
business. It's consistently happening in the appliance business. 
And there's no way that these problems can be dealt with, I 
don't believe, without a policing system that is so huge you 
wouldn't even want to be driving through the west side of the 
province. 
 
A place where this doesn't happen is on the automobile side. In 
the automobile side you don't have these problems existing, 
because in order for you to get a licence in the province of 
Saskatchewan you have to pay the E&H (education and health) 
tax. So it doesn't matter where you buy it. If you can get it 
cheaper some place else, buy it, but when you come here you 
have to pay the tax anyway. 
 
So when we talk about this, I'd like to have you give your 
perspective of how you can avoid these islands, and maybe  

instead of giving one guy a break here and another guy a break 
there, why not just average it out by a point, 1 per cent? Why 
don't you just average it out by one point, and then let 
everybody sink and swim on the basis of his own competitive 
advantage? 
 
Because I'll tell you this: you know what happens in Medicine 
Hat? Their chamber there estimates that their volume of 
business is $550 million. And they calculate 10 per cent of that 
comes from Saskatchewan. That high volume of dollars gives 
that a heated market-place. So people will be able to say, I can 
charge the cost of doing business plus a certain rate. And let's 
say it's a 100 per cent mark-up on the furniture goods or 
appliances or that sort of thing. They can say, I'll charge 100 per 
cent of wholesale value, I'll charge that to the customer. He can 
offset his costs, but he never, ever has to have a sale. He doesn't 
have to have a sale because the people in Swift Current or 
Maple Creek or Leader, they have to have the sale plus they 
give the 9 per cent on the sale price, and then you have 
competition on that basis. 
 
But in Medicine Hat, they don't have to do that. They just 
maintain that high price all the time. So people get this in their 
minds, that they can get it cheaper in Medicine Hat. They go 
and buy it in Medicine Hat and never even shop in communities 
inside of Saskatchewan. And I have had retailers tell me that 
they have, with the sales tax, lower prices in these other 
communities, but the mind-set isn't that. 
 
So how do you change the mind-set so that it starts to have the 
people purchase in Saskatchewan? And this is a consistent 
happening, and I would say it goes 150 miles off the Alberta 
border. If you go 150 miles in and go straight north and south, 
you have a line there that people will take the opportunity to go 
to Alberta to buy. And that creates a very serious problem. And 
what it also does is it makes higher cost to those people in 
Saskatchewan doing business. And that causes all the rest of us 
who carry the tax load to have to pay more. And that causes a 
very serious concern. 
 
I wonder if the minister would respond to that? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well the member opposite has 
raised a number of questions, and I'll begin to try to deal with 
them. 
 
I think he's highlighted one of the key issues in any government 
decision making, that is cliffs, whether it's in taxation and you 
say well, you know, Lloydminster has a special situation but 
another community 10 miles down the road doesn't, or whether 
it's in subsidization, you know, up to a level of $5,000 you get 
this subsidization; at $5,001, you don't. So he has raised a very 
good point about cliffs. 
 
As the member will know, in terms of Lloydminster this is a 
pattern that goes back to 1937. It's historical; it's traditional. 
And it's quite simply there because the main street is the border  



March 27, 1995 

 
1145 

between the two provinces. 
 
I would also point out though that there is a glaring example of 
creating tax islands that the member did not mention that was 
avoidable. And that's the actions of the federal government with 
respect to the tobacco tax. And I would also point out I 
appreciate the support of the members opposite on that 
particular issue because here we had a situation in which we 
had a problem of smuggling. And there was a solution. That is 
there could have been different measures taken to enforce the 
law. We also knew that there was a very great downside to 
lowering the tobacco tax and we now have more information 
confirming the downside which is the health risks to young 
people who purchase more cigarettes if the price is low. So 
these tax cliffs are problems and we try as hard as we can to 
avoid them. 
 
But what I would say to the member opposite is the most 
glaring recent example of a government decision taken that 
created islands when the islands did not have to be taken . . . 
did not have to be created, was the actions taken by the federal 
government on the tobacco tax. 
 
And I would again reiterate my thanks to the members opposite 
for their support in that measure because I think both sides of 
the House agreed that islands are a problem, but they're 
especially a problem when they didn't have to be created. 
 
Mr. Martens: — What are the answers you give to those 
people in Swift Current and in Leader and in Maple Creek 
about how those problems exist? Ignoring them doesn't make 
them go away. And that's what I think you need to tell them and 
us. Why you couldn't have just said, instead of making these 
islands exist, why not just lower it a point to deliver it. And I'm 
not sure that you . . . with increased shopping and with an 
increase of people saying stay at home, that you wouldn't have 
reached the same conclusion and had a whole lot more benefit 
accrue to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, there are 
always these discussions along the border — you've raised one 
part of the discussion — where people say in some parts of 
Saskatchewan: boy, we would rather have the Alberta sales tax 
level. But I'll tell you. I was in Lloydminster the night that 
Premier Klein came on television and outlined his plan for the 
Alberta side of Lloydminster. And the people in that community 
told me that when his plan was fully in effect, they would be 
getting $350,000 a year in grants to their municipality for 
services and improvements in their municipality from the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and they would be getting zero 
from the Government of Alberta. So on that particular day those 
people living in that community said we would rather be living 
in Saskatchewan than in Alberta. 
 
So you have this going back and forth. And one of the things 
that we're trying to teach the Liberal Party in this legislature  
with some difficulty I would say  is you have to take the 
whole picture. That is, you can't say, well what we'd really like 
is we'd like to have Alberta tax levels and Saskatchewan service  

levels. We say well that's very nice, but the people of this 
province are too sophisticated to believe that this is what you 
can have. You have to make your choices. So you make your 
choices on the whole piece. And so you say yes; we will have to 
have a sales tax in Saskatchewan, but on the other hand, we will 
be having a certain level of services as a result of that. 
 
My final comment would be . . . because you are talking a lot 
about the community of Swift Current. They obviously are quite 
a generous group of people down there because, although 
you've raised the sales tax issue, I note in the Swift Current Sun, 
February 22, their response to the budget. And I won't read the 
whole response, but they say: 
 
 First and foremost it's balanced, something that hasn't 

been seen in the Saskatchewan legislature for a decade. 
This budget even forecasts a modest surplus of 24.4 
million for 1995-96. Provincial taxes will not rise. That 
alone should be reason to praise this budget, ignoring 
for the moment grievances about how high the NDP 
jacked up taxes in past. Taxes in fact will come down. 

 
And they go through some of the tax reductions: 
 
 The corporate income tax rate will be reduced; the 

aviation fuel tax . . . and that there's actually a cut to 
personal income tax. The New Democrats showed 
remarkable restraint in not doing more to please voters 
when they're so close to an election. They showed 
prudence in using surplus money to pay down 
accumulated debt. And they showed a keen sense of 
timing by producing a budget that lays a tight hand on 
the economy when it's best to leave well enough alone. 

 
Their concluding line is this: 
 
 This is a good budget. There, somebody had to say it. 
 
So I mean, I think what they're saying and what I hear people 
across the province saying is what's most important to them is 
that we got the fiscal problem under control and that we did it 
within the context of a holistic plan. We didn't just say gee, you 
know, let's hope that maybe we could have Alberta tax right in 
Saskatchewan services. We said realistically here's the plan. 
The plan has worked, and now we are in a position to look 
forward to the possibility of tax reductions in the future. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Well, Madam Minister, that's fine to say that. 
You knew, the deputy minister of Finance knew, the Premier 
knew how much debt there was in the province. He said, we can 
do this for less. We can do all of the above for less. I didn't say 
that. The Premier said he could do all of this for less. I didn't 
say that; he did. 
 
Now if I take all the waste and mismanagement out and discard 
all of that, I can balance the budget on the same tax level. And 
that's what I'm talking about, Madam Minister. The volume of 
dollars that you took in have not reflected what the Premier 
promised the province of Saskatchewan. It doesn't reflect that.  



March 27, 1995 

 
1146 

He said he could do all of these services and not have to tax you 
any more. 
 
And so I'm saying to you, Madam Minister, that he made a 
mistake. Either he did it for political reasons or he decided not 
to do the things that had to be done about service reduction in 
various places. 
 
You said, okay, we'll cut back in health care. You rearranged 
the whole thing. You took the bag in health care, and you shook 
it, and you shook it, and you threw it out, and it cost you more 
when you're done than it did before. In your budget book it talks 
about increasing the health care budget 4.3 per cent, I believe. 
You didn't reduce the costs. That 4.3 per cent probably just paid 
for administration. 
 
But the Premier said he could do all of the things that were 
being done for less money because he knew where the waste 
and mismanagement were. And I'm just saying to you, with all 
the taxes that you've raised . . . If you take the total volume of 
corporate tax that you have raised, the volume of dollars that 
you have raised money with since 1991 in corporate tax 
increases, in fuel tax increases, in personal income tax 
increases, in E&H tax increases — all of these things; you put 
them all into a pile — the business community in Saskatchewan 
has paid and paid and paid and paid . . . 
 
And that's what they're complaining about. That's what these 
people are saying to you and to me. They're saying we're tired of 
paying when we can't be competitive with other people because 
the majority of the stuff we do is export component. 
 
So you have to have a better reason that what you described to 
me about why you didn't  say  cut a point or two off of the 
E&H tax to give us a balance so that the people do stay home. 
 
And the chamber of commerce in Swift Current has told you, 
and he's told the Premier, and he's told the member from Swift 
Current over and over and over again — chamber meetings, 
club meetings that have been held there  they tell him 
consistently the same thing over and over again. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I think it's time to do that. Not set up 
islands where specific individuals can benefit from that tax 
rebate and be competitive in an international market. And you 
are the one that can do that. You're the one that can say, I'll give 
a balance. 
 
And my question to you is, why the two things, one, where your 
Premier said you could do it for less and you say no, we've got 
to raise it over and over and over again. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well the member opposite has 
raised a number of issues, and I'm not sure that we want to go 
back into the '80s, but he's ventured back there, so I guess we're 
back there. 
 
The member said in 1991 when we became government we 
knew exactly the situation. My deputy minister says the only  

thing that he would say is that we didn't know the situation. 
What he would say is that we did not know what was going on 
on the Crown side. What I would refer you to are comments 
made consistently by the Provincial Auditor saying look, we 
just can't tell you what the books of the province say. I would 
refer you to comments from the Gass Commission saying that 
Saskatchewan has amongst the weakest financial statements in 
all of Canada, saying look, you simply cannot look at these 
statements and figure out the true finances of the province. 
 
And I would also point out — with, you know, as you say, I'm 
not interested in history here, but if we're into it, we're into it — 
the letter from the minister of Finance, Lorne Hepworth, during 
the election campaign, assuring the people of Saskatchewan 
that the deficit would be $200 million for that year. And of 
course when the books were opened it was well over 800 
million, was brought down to 842 million. 
 
So the first thing is . . . I think the public record is going to 
show when the history is written that nobody could have known 
exactly what the finances of the province were, not even the 
deputy minister of Finance. 
 
The second point I would make is that the Premier said we can 
live on less than 4.5 billion, and we are. We are spending less 
today than the government spent in 1990-91 if you take out 
interest on the debt. If you take out what is being spent paying 
for the debt, then we are spending fewer dollars now — $275 
million less than in 1990-91. And what's truly amazing, if you 
look at all the spending right out to 1999 at the end of our 
second plan, we'll still be spending less than in 1990-91. 
 
And I'll guess I'll make one final comment here. When you look 
at indicators of whether or not a government is tightly run, there 
are several: number of civil servants per capita, the cost of 
delivering a basic basket of programs and services to the people 
of Saskatchewan. And I would say to the member opposite that 
if you want to look at Alberta, or if the Liberals would like to 
look at all of the Liberal provinces, the cost of doing that in 
Saskatchewan is less. 
 
Now to come to your main point, are we interested in reducing 
taxes? Of course we are. And I can assure the member opposite 
that as soon as it is affordable to bring in further tax reductions, 
this government will do it. 
 
I will also say to the member opposite, we have consistently 
said to the Liberal government in Ottawa, why won't you 
overhaul the tax system? Why keep fiddling around with this 
little part of it and that little part of it? And this one doesn't 
work, and that one doesn't work, and we're going to raise this 
one, take away some exemptions there — overhaul the tax 
system — and we'll do it. We've offered to do it cooperatively 
with them. You do yours; we'll do ours at the same time. 
 
I can say to the member opposite that if the federal government 
were prepared to get involved in that kind of effort, we would 
be prepared to lay everything on the table and see if there is a 
better way to structure the tax system. But until we get some  



March 27, 1995 

 
1147 

kind of answer from Ottawa in terms of what their plan is 
vis-a-vis taxes — particularly GST (goods and services tax) — 
it would be counter-productive for us to start down that road 
ourselves. 
 
The bottom line — are we interested in tax cuts? Of course we 
are, but affordable ones, and we will do it when the province of 
Saskatchewan can afford them. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
and officials, I have several questions here today, but I think for 
a while we're going to have to stay on the theme that the 
member from Morse started in regards to sales tax, especially 
the tax imposed and increased by you and your administration 
along the west side and the south-west part of the province; the 
effect it's having. 
 
And when I take a look at the communities from Swift Current, 
Shaunavon, Maple Creek, Leader, and the letters that I've 
received from those communities, I don't think, Madam 
Minister, that you have ever alleviated any of their fears and 
concerns of what they're having. In fact I look at the 
Leader-Star services in December 16, '94, some few months 
ago, Madam Minister, when you're talking about the reason for 
not reducing any level of tax and it's because . . . and I'll quote 
right from here: 
 
 The provincial government can't afford the economic 

development and jobs that would result from a sales tax 
cut because such a move would mean less in federal 
transfers, says Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon. 

 
So the questions that come up then, Madam Minister, are ones 
. . . How much money would the province be forgoing say if 
you're to drop the PST (provincial sales tax) by 1 per cent? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite, as I 
mentioned in dealing with the Liberal caucus, we're trying very 
hard on this side of the House to enforce some sense of 
consistency there. 
 
Now I do find it interesting that the member from Shaunavon 
would be standing up in this House talking about why this side 
of the House increased the sales tax, when he voted for it. What 
particularly were you thinking that day when you voted for the 
sales tax increase? What was it that made you decide, in that 
particular budget, that increasing the sales tax was a good idea 
for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Could you elucidate the thinking then that made you say, in 
1992 and 1993, that the sales tax increase was a good idea? I'll 
check whether you voted for just one sales tax increase or two 
sales tax increases. You may want to clarify that when you 
stand up. 
 
Was it one sales tax increase you had voted for or two sales tax 
increases? Was it moving it from seven to eight, or from eight  

to nine? But you voted at least for one sales tax increase. And 
you had a reason for doing that consistent with your values and 
your principles. And now you stand up in the House and you 
say how devastating it is that we increased the sales tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Member, what people expect from politicians is some 
measure of principled consistency. This flipping and flopping 
all over the map is being noticed around the province. The cost 
of reducing the sales tax one point is $81.6 million, Mr. 
Member. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — I missed the figure, Madam Minister, 
because I wasn't listening to your rhetoric, but I would like to 
have the figure. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member, perhaps you were 
thinking of your answer to my questions. The number was 
$81.6 million. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — So that's $81.6 million. That's for every 
percentage point increase in the PST, that's how much the 
province raises. I think the question is, if I'm not wrong, I asked 
how much does the province have to forgo if you reduced the 
sales tax by 1 per cent, because . . . and I'll bring you back to 
this article, Madam Minister. You're saying that in the event 
that sales tax is cut, that you're also forgoing revenues from the 
federal government. 
 
So what I want to find out from you . . . and I guess if you want 
to answer in a rhetorical way, it's just going to take a lot of 
days, but we're going to stay at this. What I'm asking you is over 
and above the 81.6, if I'm right in saying that that is what you 
would raise in revenue from a 1 per cent cut, on the other side 
of the ledger you're saying you're losing money from the federal 
government. And I'm trying to find out how much. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member, a short and simple 
answer to your question, you lose nothing. 
 
But, Mr. Member, it is not a simple point to say, now please 
gloss over the fact that I'm prepared to stand in the legislature of 
the province of Saskatchewan as an elected member of this 
province — and stand, because these were standing votes — 
and say I support an increase in the sales tax; those are my 
principles, people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in this era of new politics, people judge politicians by 
their record. They look at your record; they say, he supported a 
sales tax increase. Now what has happened to the gentleman's 
principles to make him change his mind? That is a fair and 
reasonable question to be asking of the member opposite, and 
I'm asking it. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, obviously we're going to 
take some time at getting the answers from you. But just to cut 
to the chase, because I know you think you're being very 
comical here on the voting, but just for the people that are 
viewing the proceedings here today, no one on the government 
side of the House is allowed to vote against the budget. And  



March 27, 1995 

 
1148 

you know that; I know that. 
 
So now let's get down to the facts and figures that I'm asking 
for. And that is, Madam Minister, how much money are you 
forgoing from the federal government? I know it's somewhat 
embarrassing for you, having been caught making such 
ridiculous statements throughout the province that you want to 
remain a welfare state. The people of the province could not 
believe what they were hearing from you. You recall you were 
on all the front pages of the newspapers with that ridiculous 
statement, one of many you've made. 
 
But just to get down to the facts and figures, Madam Minister, 
can you tell us how much money you are going to forgo from 
the federal government? Because you're the one making the 
statements that you would lose federal transfer money. So I 
want to know how much federal transfer money you're losing 
for every 1 per cent drop in the PST. 
 
It's a simple enough question. And if you want to play games, 
so be it; we'll do this another day. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would say to the member opposite 
I am prepared to stay here as long as he wants to stay. Integrity 
is at the heart of politics — integrity, integrity. Okay. 
 
The member opposite knows precisely what the answer to that 
question is because I wrote him a letter giving him the answer. 
The answer is simple: we lose nothing because the two issues 
are not related. Now the member opposite knows that that is the 
answer because he has it in a written letter from me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I don't have it. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well we will get you a copy of the 
letter so we can refresh your memory. I certainly recall signing 
it off. 
 
So you've got the answer. There is no relationship between the 
two. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, you stated in the 
front pages of the newspapers around the province that there 
was a direct relationship, and I'm asking you — surely with all 
those Finance officials sitting all around you, that you could for 
a moment quit being comical and tell us what the answer is. 
 
Now you have said many times that you can't reduce the sales 
tax because it's going to cost you money in federal transfers. 
That's a simple enough question. Can't you answer that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member knows the story here. 
The member knows that that particular quote was taken out of 
context. The member knows that that was sent to him in a letter. 
 
If the member wants to sit here and go back and forth like this, 
that's fine. But I will say to the member opposite, people sense 
whether politicians have integrity or not . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — I'll be back, but I don't know if you will 
be. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes. You have to have a sense of 
humour in this job, don't you? 
 
The member knows the answer to that question. If he wants to 
stand up here and ask the question again, I can read him back 
the answer. 
 
But I do think that the people of Saskatchewan will have some 
questions to ask to the member opposite. They will ask why he 
voted for a sales tax increase; why he now opposes a sales tax 
increase; why when he asks me a question and he gets a written 
answer and he still stands up and asks the same question again, 
gets the same answer, he feels obliged to stand up and ask the 
same question. I'm prepared to answer any questions that will 
enlighten the people of Saskatchewan. And if you think this 
particular exchange is doing that, we can continue. I just think 
the people of Saskatchewan might prefer a more enlightening 
exchange. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, the people of 
Saskatchewan aren't sure if now the comments that you're 
making are being taken out of context too, because really you're 
making not a lot of sense for a Finance minister who is asked a 
financial question — and it's a simple enough question — and 
you can't seem to get an answer for it. So maybe we'll just have 
to come at it from another angle. 
 
You told me that it's $81.6 million that the province raises for 
each per cent of PST that you have tacked on to the folks of 
Saskatchewan. But can you tell me then how much increased 
economic growth would you expect for each 1 per cent 
decrease? Because you're the one that said, Madam Minister, 
that there would be enough increased economic growth by 
lowering the sales tax that you're going to be cut out of federal 
transfers. So for every 1 per cent of decrease, how much 
growth? Can you give me that answer? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member opposite, to go over 
the facts again. The loss to the treasury of Saskatchewan would 
be $81.6 million. No effect on any money coming from Ottawa. 
 
Now, the logic of . . . I want to take the member through some 
logic here because I think that the Liberal caucus also needs 
some lessons in logic. Okay. So they're saying we reduce the 
sales tax by one point, and therefore the economy grows by 
whatever, and that there be a logic to that. 
 
Now when the member opposite was on this side of the House 
and voted for the 1993 budget which had the sales tax increase 
in it, if his logic is right, if there's some reasoning to what he's 
saying here, there would have obviously been a significant 
decline in sales and growth in the economy. Because if the 
taxes are going up, then the sales decline. If you're arguing the 
opposite, when taxes go down, sales and the economy 
increases. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1149 

So when the member opposite was on this side of the House 
and voted for the increase in the sales tax in 1993, in fact the 
opposite happened. The economy had one of its best years in a 
long time and grew second best of all the economies of the 
provincial economies in Canada. 
 
So what I'm saying to the member opposite is if that logic is 
used, what the logic says is that a movement of one point in the 
sales tax has very little effect on the economy. And I think the 
average person can identify with that. If I go buy something for 
a hundred bucks and I pay a dollar less in sales tax, does that 
mean I'm going to go on a spending spree? No, I'm probably not 
going to dramatically increase my spending habits. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, when we're talking 
about whose logic we're using, it's yours. And I'll keep quoting 
from the newspaper articles, as these are your own words, 
Madam Minister: 
 
 New economic activity would mean the province has 

increased capacity to raise revenue and would therefore 
require less federal financial support under the 
equalization program, which helps so-called "have-not" 
provinces . . . 

 
 MacKinnon conceded (it's a quote) a sales tax cut would 

mean increased investment, job creation and, finally, 
more income tax revenue. 

 
So, I mean, it's your logic. 
 
 That could offset the loss in sales tax revenue but it 

would also mean reduced equalization payments, 
"leaving the province worse off fiscally . . ." 

 
So I mean, for you to make these statements — and it's your 
logic, Madam Minister — you must have supported these 
statements with some facts and figures from your officials. And 
what I'm trying to get out of you, either you feel terribly 
embarrassed for ever making these comments -- you now 
realize that you were completely off base; and that's possible — 
or in fact you're holding back the facts and figures. 
 
So if maybe you could just answer some of those other 
questions instead of all the rhetoric, we could move on a lot 
quicker onto another topic. But what I need to know from you, 
Madam Minister, is just how much increased economic activity 
your officials — if not you — thought would come to the 
province for every 1 per cent decrease. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite, I really, I 
really honestly don't understand whether it's a lack of 
understanding or a desire to go back and forth here for ever. 
What we're saying is, all of what we know tells us there will not 
be any significant increase in economic activity. And I've told 
you the evidence that we're using, the key piece of evidence, 
which is, in 1993 when the sales tax, which you supported, the  

increase in the sales tax occurred, the economy grew by — let 
me get you the exact number — 6.7 per cent. 
 
If you'd like another piece of evidence leaning in exactly the 
same direction, Alberta has no sales tax. We do. Our retail sales 
in 1994, the growth in our retail sales, was higher than Alberta. 
So what I'm asking the member to try to do is to expand his 
horizons. When you look at what people . . . When somebody's 
sitting down . . . all you have to do is think about the average 
person. I'm sitting down and I'm thinking about, well, am I 
going to go out and buy something. 
 
Well what I say is I ask a first question — do I have a job? Do I 
have a job? And if I have a job, I'm much more likely to go out 
and spend money than to consider the level of the sales tax. So 
the factors that determine whether or not people are going to 
spend money are things like economic security — do I have a 
job? — interest rates, which your friends in Ottawa could 
certainly give us some help in ensuring that interest rates remain 
moderate. All of these factors, all of these . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . friends. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I'm not sure whether they're 
friends today or not, but I think they were friends today. 
 
All of these factors are very important factors in determining 
whether or not somebody spends money. 
 
Now I think that I've answered the question as logically as I can. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister  I mean you talk 
about logic  using your logic, what you're then saying is that 
the higher you're going to push the PST, the better off the 
people in the province are going to be. 
 
Well that's quite a change from December when your statement 
is: MacKinnon conceded a sales tax cut would mean increased 
investment — were you guessing at that? — job creation, and 
finally, more income tax revenue. And that's why you couldn't 
give any breaks to the people of Saskatchewan. Because of the 
money that you thought you were going to lose from the federal 
government. 
 
Now today you're saying, well that amount is insignificant or 
very little. Well if it's insignificant or very little, then why are 
you now . . . Yes, are you considering lowering the PST? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member, I'm prepared to stay 
here as long as you want to be on this issue, and I'm prepared to 
keep taking you back to one central point because it's a central 
point that I think you're going to have to wrestle with. And it's 
the issue of integrity. You know very well what that letter was 
about, and you know very well the letter I wrote to you and the 
letter that I wrote to the editor explaining that quote. But if you 
want to keep coming back and using it, we will stay here for a 
long period of time. 
 



March 27, 1995 

 
1150 

Now what I said to the member from the Conservative caucus 
was quite straightforward. Because we balanced the books of 
the province, this government is in a position to look forward to 
a future of declining taxes rather than increasing taxes. And 
we've already done that in our most recent budget where we 
decreased income taxes $150 per taxpayer, $300 per dual 
income family. And of course we're committed to looking at tax 
reductions in the future. 
 
But I will also say this: we will only reduce those taxes when 
they're affordable. And so we will, in future budgets, be going 
around the province and discussing these issues with the people 
of the province. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, the only letter that I have 
that has your name on it is one that was written to you from a 
Miss Irene Houston at Shaunavon. Let me just read a quote 
from it: 
 
 Dear Madam, I am thoroughly ashamed to be a citizen 

of Saskatchewan since I hear that the Minister of 
Finance choose to be a welfare state rather than striking 
out on building up its revenue by reducing the PST and 
allowing the province to become more self-supporting 
and reducing the equalization payments from the federal 
government which is paid for by our own taxes which 
will have to be raised to support this welfare province. 

 
So what she's saying is that you're going in a circle here, 
Madam Minister. And the last two paragraphs: 
 
 This is a very bad example to people on welfare, stating 

it is better to stay on welfare than try to support oneself. 
Saskatchewan will never be a rich province, even with 
all the diamonds and diversification, as long as we are 
governed by welfare mentality. 

 
Now you can talk about voting records or you can talk about 
logic all you want, but — see — this is what the people of 
Saskatchewan view you as being: somebody who has made a lot 
of ridiculous statements. And now, instead of owning up to 
them and in fact admitting that you've made some serious 
blunders . . . either you've made the blunders then or you're 
making them now by saying, well we have to keep the high tax 
even though there wouldn't be a drop in federal transfers. I 
mean I could actually get that from your comments today. 
 
So which is it, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member, I could read here the 
letter to the editor that I wrote, explaining this issue. But, you 
know, you have to ask yourself a question. You have 
constituents out there that you have undertaken the 
responsibility to represent. I think you've already probably let 
them down in one sense, that is being elected as a member of 
one party and then shifting to another party and not giving them 
the right to decide whether that's appropriate. 
 
But you now have some time to stand here and to talk about the  

way the Department of Finance is proposing to spend its 
money. And what you've decided to focus on is a dispute about 
words in which I say to you, sir, if we reduce the sales tax it's 
going to cost the treasury of Saskatchewan $80 million. It will 
have no effect on what money we get from Ottawa; that that 
letter was taken out of context, and that has been fully 
explained; that because people decide to make decisions when 
they're spending money on all kinds of bases, tax levels are one 
small part of that decision making. And our commitment is, as 
our finances improve, to lower taxes. 
 
Now if you really feel that your constituents will be proud to 
see you stand here and go through this scenario again and again, 
we can do it. But there are the answers to that, and I would 
wonder if the member has any other issues that his constituents 
would feel proud to have him raise today in the legislature. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, they have many 
problems with you and your government, and in fact the way 
that you've attacked rural Saskatchewan. And this is just one 
other way that you have done it, by increasing the sales tax the 
way in which you have and forcing people to shop not only out 
of their towns, but in Montana and Alberta. 
 
And in fact, can you give us some idea what sort of revenues 
that the province . . . guesstimate how much revenue we're 
losing in the province by those people shopping outside of the 
provincial boundaries. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member, what I would point 
out to the member opposite is that the retail sales in 
Saskatchewan are higher than they are in Alberta. And if he 
would like me to read it again, I could read, as I did to the 
member from the Conservative caucus, the commentary by 
Swift Current on our budget. They said well done; good budget. 
 
So I think the problem that the member is going to have is when 
he looks at it and he says, well if in fact our retail sales are 
significantly higher than Alberta, when we talk about what 
people decide to do with their money, sales tax is but a small 
part of it. 
 
And probably many people in Saskatchewan are like the 
member from Morse. They have a strong sense of commitment 
to their local communities, and that's usually where they do 
most of their purchases. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — But, Madam Minister, your former 
associate minister of Finance, the member from Swift Current, 
stated just the opposite. In fact he talked about how great it was 
and how many people do shop in the community of Medicine 
Hat, I believe, was the example he gave at one point. 
 
And what I'm trying to find out from you, because your 
Department of Finance must do some . . . work some 
calculations in this area, how much revenue do you think the 
province actually loses in retail sales when you increase the 
PST by 1 per cent? 



March 27, 1995 

 
1151 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite would know 
that we have no capacity to estimate that. 
 
But I would ask the member to think about what his 
constituents are going to believe about him as they listen to this 
line of questioning. When we're talking about the budget of the 
province and how tax dollars are raised and how they're spent 
and the theoretical framework and the overall plan and the 
overall philosophy, surely we shouldn't be down to talking 
about what the member from Swift Current said about shopping 
in Medicine Hat. 
 
We can — I mean it's your choice. But surely your constituents 
are going to, I would hope, expect a slightly more elevated 
discussion to occur. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, they are expecting 
a more elevated discussion to occur, but I'm afraid it's your end 
that's going to have to be picked up on a little bit. 
 
I guess we're going to have to change the topic here because 
you haven't given one answer, other than the one on $81.6 
million; other than that, it's been rhetoric and we're just going to 
revisit this and revisit this again. 
 
Madam Minister, do you have a phone line . . . or there was sort 
of a squeal-on-your-neighbour line that you set up for people 
shopping out of province. Or did you ever put that into being, 
or did you just discuss it with your department officials? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I would say to the member opposite 
that it was the Liberal government of New Brunswick which 
was discussing that particular proposal and as I recall, put it 
into effect. This government has not. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, I remember you 
talking about that also. And I'm asking you, did you ever put 
one into effect? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Member, I don't know where 
this member is coming from here. We have never had any 
discussions with anybody about putting into effect such a line. 
 
If any discussions occurred — and I will certainly be sure to 
check the record for the member opposite — my recollection is 
it was the Liberals in New Brunswick who talked about such a 
line and put it into effect. If it wasn't New Brunswick, it was 
one of those other Maritime Liberal provinces. It has never been 
a policy discussion in this government. It has never been 
considered. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, we're going to change 
the topic here because you're just not answering any of the 
questions. But it's not that you're not going to have to 
eventually. 
 
In the area of the gas, the rebate on farm fuels, now I know that 
there's been some of my constituents that have wrote you 
letters, Madam Minister, in regards to the cap on the rebate of  

some $900. And I want to know if the Department of Finance is 
considering perhaps raising that cap to a higher level? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, no, we're 
not. But I want to ask the member opposite, is he suggesting we 
should? Because we could add that on to your previous 
session's additions to the deficit. I know that you added $300 
million to the deficit in the last session. We didn't have that 
particular item on it. So if you would like to tell us how much 
you would like to raise it by, we could add it to your deficit 
figure for the last session. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, can you tell us how 
much revenue that the province would have from fuel tax on 
farm fuels that isn't rebated back? I'm trying to get . . . what I'd 
like to know is a total revenue picture on farm fuels and then 
what the total rebate coming back to the farmers would amount 
to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Yes, I can certainly tell the member 
opposite. We had 49,000 applicants  49,387. And 21,659 
were over the cap. That's 43.9 per cent. The entitlement without 
the cap would have been 46,265,782. Without the cap, it's 
36,201,571. If you would like me to do the subtraction, the 
difference is 10,051,343. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, are you able to table that 
sheet that you're quoting from? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — No, but we have provided the 
information that's requested to you. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well, Madam Minister, then if I had your 
figures correct, 43.9 per cent were over the $900 cap. Is that 
right? Just nod your head. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To the member opposite, that is 
correct. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Well then, Madam Minister, if we're only 
talking . . . say we're talking about 44 per cent of the farmers 
over the cap. Then see where the problem comes is in the part 
of the province that I'm from where your government has 
actually taken away so many of the services that people are now 
having to drive an extra hour or two to get some of these 
services. 
 
And in fact if you take a look at some of the farm operators, if 
you lived in the community of Consul for an example, and you 
try and think of what that $900 cap would mean if you farmed 
in the area of Consul versus if you farmed say one or two miles 
outside of Maple Creek or Shaunavon. Now do you then think 
that this is a fair way to distribute back this money to the 
farmers, given that distance alone is such a disadvantage for 
some? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I would say to the member  



March 27, 1995 

 
1152 

opposite that if you take the exemptions or the fact that you 
don't pay any tax on diesel, you take the rebate program, 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan are providing to farmers $122 
million in benefits that don't go to other people in the province. 
 
Now what I would wonder, the member opposite talks about 
living in that part of the province, and I can sympathize with the 
problems there, with the distances and the need to drive. I'm 
very sympathetic to that concern, extremely sympathetic. 
 
But the member opposite may have wanted to raise that concern 
when the recent federal budget came out and there was a one 
and a half cent per litre increase in the gas tax because I'm sure 
that your constituents would have been more concerned about 
that increase than probably other people in the province. And I 
was wondering what your response was when that tax increase 
came into effect. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Madam Minister, you may say you're 
concerned, but I'm not even sure that you understand some of 
these problems, let alone concerned about them. 
 
Getting back to this 44 per cent of the people that are over the 
$900 cap then, have you done calculations or have the 
department staff, the people that actually could do that work . . . 
has there been calculations done, say, what the real cost to the 
provincial treasury would be if, say, the cap were doubled? 
 
Use 1,800 as an example because we're not talking about all the 
farmers. As you've said yourself, we're talking about 44 per 
cent. And the higher . . . of course then the higher that the 
amount of rebate be, the less farmers you would have involved. 
 
So then has your department officials done for, say, every $100 
increase in rebate on farm fuel . . . have you done some 
calculations to see exactly what that cost would be because this, 
Madam Minister, would mean so much to, say, someone raising 
hogs, for an example, near the community of Consul or Val 
Marie or Mankota versus, you know, being up around 
Assiniboia, Shaunavon, Maple Creek, because their fuel bill 
would be so much more to deliver the product. 
 
But not only that, but just the cost of repairs and the cost of 
services due, as I said earlier, to the fact that your government 
has decimated rural Saskatchewan in some of these areas. Have 
you calculated this out, say, for every $100 increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I do find it passing strange that 
within weeks of the federal government taking 100 per cent — 
100 per cent — of the transportation subsidy from this province 
that you are standing up talking about what this government has 
done to rural Saskatchewan. I think if we are focusing our 
attention on anything in this province right now, it's what the 
decisions of the federal government have done to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And again, when I talk about consistency and integrity . . . if we 
could only get a consistent answer from the members opposite 
on that because one day the federal budget is fair to the  

province — and if you want quotes, we have quotes — the next 
day it isn't. 
 
So when we talk about concerns about rural Saskatchewan, 
what are we concerned about? We're concerned about what the 
elimination of the Crow benefit will mean to rural 
Saskatchewan and the fact that the federal government has no 
plan, no plan for transportation in this province . . . what that 
will mean to farm families. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I've been sitting and listening, and I wanted to know what your 
reflection was at where the limit is on raising taxes and having 
the economic growth increase at the same rate that it has done, 
like you mentioned earlier that there really wouldn't be much 
negative implication. 
 
If you cut the taxes there would be . . . well things would 
consider as they were if you cut taxes. And my contention is 
that if you'd cut taxes, you'd have more economic growth. And 
more economic growth to stimulate the economy, you wouldn't 
have to do the things that create islands here and islands there 
and islands in different places. 
 
At what point do we have diminishing returns on raising taxes 
for having economic growth? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well I think the member opposite 
raises a good question. And I think it's one worthy discussing 
because I think you have a point in one sense because once you 
get away from specific taxes . . . we were talking before about 
the sales tax, and I'm saying whether you raise that a point or 
not isn't going to affect the economy dramatically. But there are 
taxes that you can cut, and we know they are very likely to 
create jobs and promote economic activity. For example, in the 
1993 budget we reduced the E&H tax on direct agents and 
manufacturing and processing. And we saw an increase in jobs. 
We have further tax cuts in the area of manufacturing and 
processing. 
 
And I'll tell you quite frankly, when we decided on which tax 
cuts to put into place, what we did was we sat down at the table 
with various business groups, and we said okay, now we still 
have some fiscal problems here, but what tax cuts could we 
make that would really affect the economy and would really 
create some jobs and are affordable to the province? And so we 
implemented some of those suggestions that came from the 
business community. 
 
To give you one final example, it's exactly what we did as well 
with gas and oil royalties. We still need some money from gas 
and oil royalties for financing the programs of the province, but 
we sat with the industry around the table, and we said, how can 
we restructure these so we still get some money but there's more 
growth and activity? 
 
The member opposite has asked the right question. Don't just 
focus on the sales tax because that doesn't affect a lot in terms 
of what people do and jobs created, but there are taxes that you  



March 27, 1995 

 
1153 

can cut that do make a difference. And the member is heading 
in the right direction when he suggests that. 
 
The committee reported progress. 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
The Chair: — The Committee of the Whole is called to order, 
and it being near 5 o'clock the committee will recess until 7 
p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


