






















































May 12, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 12, 1995 

 

 
2181 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It pleases me 
to rise again today to present petitions on behalf of the people 
of the province. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Gainsborough, 
Storthoaks, Fertile, Redvers, Melville, Weyburn areas of the 
province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions to 
present to the Assembly this morning, and I'd like to read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And these petitions are signed by individuals from the Punnichy 
area, from Saskatoon, Kindersley, Rosetown, Fiske, Eston. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have several 
pages of petitions referring to the same subject. Therefore I 
would like to read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to the legislation regarding firearm ownership, 
and instead urge the federal government to deal with the 
criminal use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on 
abusers, recognizing that gun control and crime control 
are not synonymous, and allowing provinces to deal  

 with the gun control legislation on a provincial basis. 
 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are signed by people from Canwood, 
Shellbrook, Mont Nebo, Prince Albert . . . we go into Weyburn, 
Weyburn, Corning, Estevan. As a matter of fact, they're 
scattered all over the province, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present them now. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it's my 
pleasure this morning to present petitions on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan people, and I'll just read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to bring forward people from the 
communities of Wynyard, Dafoe, Rosetown, Saskatoon, 
Kindersley, Fiske, Saskatchewan. People from all over the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
my colleagues this morning to present petitions to the 
Assembly. And it's a similar petition, Mr. Speaker, and 
therefore I will simply limit my remarks to reading the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions that I present this morning come 
largely from Lake Lenore, Saskatchewan; from Kindersley; 
from Rosetown, Milden, Harris; in fact, La Ronge as well, Mr. 
Speaker. And it gives me a great deal of pleasure to present 
these on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have petitions 
to present and the prayer says: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon.  



May 12, 1995 

 
2182 

 Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, recognizing that gun control 
and crime control are not synonymous, and allowing 
provinces to deal with gun control legislation on a 
provincial basis. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
The signatures come from Rosetown, Milden, Harris, Evesham, 
Arelee, Outlook, Kindersley, Morse, D'Arcy, Lacadena, and 
various other places across the province. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today it 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
the rest of the Assembly, 19 grade 7 students from the town of 
Wilkie. Wilkie of course is in my constituency and it's a long 
drive and we don't see a lot of school kids out this far, so it's an 
extreme pleasure for me today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce you to 
those students. 
 
Their teacher is Bev Barth, and the chaperons, Mrs. Cathy 
Weinkauf, Mrs. Gloria Bajema, and Mr. Rob Barth. And of 
course, Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with the students and 
hoping to answer and inform them as to what they might have 
saw here today in their short stay, and we'll be having 
refreshments. 
 
And I would ask the whole Assembly to join me in welcoming 
these students from quite a ways away. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
pleasure to introduce to you 41 grade 7, 8, and 9 students. They 
are sitting in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. And they are from 
the Loreburn Central High School from Loreburn, 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they're accompanied by their two 
teachers, Donna Reaburn and Grant Abbott, and chaperon 
Nordice Wankel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate this large group of 
students to come so far this morning. I see by their schedule 
they were here shortly after 9, much earlier . . . about the same 
time they'd have to be in school in Loreburn. So they must have  

got up real early this morning, with the chickens when they 
crowed this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll be visiting with them for drinks and questions 
at 10:15 in the members' dining-room and I'm looking forward 
to visiting with them. And I ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome my group from Loreburn and wishing them a very 
good day in Regina and the Legislative Assembly. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with my 
colleague from Arm River to welcome the students from 
Loreburn Central School, and especially one student, Robbie 
Forrest, who's dad is helping our candidate in Arm River, 
Harvey McLane, in the coming election. I'd like to ask the 
members in the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them 
again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my distinct pleasure this morning to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the House, the 38 grade 7 students 
from St. Philip School in Saskatoon. They're accompanied, Mr. 
Speaker . . . they're in the west gallery, accompanied by teachers 
John Bundgaard, Petra Lesychen; and chaperons, Shirly 
Giasson, Kim Krienke, and Bev Shedden, if I have interpreted 
these names correctly. 
 
I'm looking forward to meeting with the students in a few 
moments. They are having a tour of the legislature, and we will 
be meeting for discussion and pictures. And I hope that you 
have a wonderful day here and safe trip back to Saskatoon. I 
look forward to seeing you in a few minutes. I know all 
members will want to give this group a warm welcome and it's 
good to see you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through 
you to my colleagues in the Assembly, two very fine people 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are Ethel Morden and 
Russell Lee. They are from Fort Qu'Appelle and they are with 
the Bahai community there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the essential message of the Bahais is world unity, 
and Ethel and Russell are certainly doing their part to ensure 
that that message is getting out. We had a very good visit this 
morning. Please join me in giving them a warm welcome. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Rolfes: — If I may this morning, I would like to join 
my colleague from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain. St. Philip 
School of course for many, many years was in my constituency,  



May 12, 1995 

 
2183 

and it still is my parish church that I attend. Also I had the 
privilege of being the principal of that school for three years 
back in 1965 to '68, so I know it was well established at that 
time, had a good foundation, and it's keeping up the good 
reputation that it received at that time. 
 
I would like to welcome them here. I know many of them very 
personally, of course. And I hope you enjoy your stay here in 
the legislature, and I would like to ask all members again to 
welcome you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Urban Park Agreement 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I was 
pleased to be at the signing of a historic agreement between 
Environment and Resource Management and the Association of 
Saskatchewan Urban Park and Conservation Agencies, a 
voluntary organization dedicated to the improvement of urban 
parts. 
 
This agreement, Mr. Speaker, will be of great interest to city 
dwellers who utilize urban parks. Under the agreement, the 
government will work together with urban park managers on 
development and education issues. Some of the programs which 
may be an initiated under agreement are interpretation, 
reclamation, Dutch elm disease prevention, environmental 
protection, and corporate environmental management. 
 
There are six urban parks which will benefit from the 
agreement: Meewasin Valley in Saskatoon, Wakamow in 
Moose Jaw, Chinook Parkway in Swift Current, Battlefords 
River Valley in North Battleford, Tatagwa Parkway in 
Weyburn, and our lovely Wascana Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a time of year when all Saskatchewan 
people leave their winter cocoons. Given our short summers, I 
think it important that we maximize people's ability to enjoy 
and utilize their parks. Thus I find it highly appropriate that this 
agreement to protect and enhance urban parks be signed now. 
 
I wish to congratulate both SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) and SUPCA (Association of 
Saskatchewan Urban Park and Conservation Agencies) for their 
efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you. I rise today to congratulate one 
individual and pay tribute to another. At its annual meeting in 
Saskatoon this week, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
elected a new president and bid farewell to another. 
 
Brian Kinder, a Regina partner with Deloitte & Touche, has  

been chosen to replace Sonya Prescesky of Saskatoon as 
chamber president. Everyone in Saskatchewan knows the 
important role the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and its 
members play in our province. They are the leaders of one of 
the key engines to our province's economy. 
 
Chamber members provide vital advice and guidance to 
government in the creation of economic policy. While the 
chamber and the government don't always agree on everything, 
the cooperative atmosphere between our government and the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has played a key role in 
the resurgence of Saskatchewan's economy. The leadership of 
people like outgoing chamber president, Sonya Prescesky, has 
also played a large part in our recent economic successes. Our 
government and the Saskatchewan people thank her for the fine 
job she has done during her term. 
 
Finally I want to say congratulations and good luck to the new 
chamber president, Brian Kinder. Our government looks 
forward to the same kind of good working relationship with the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce under Brian's leadership 
as it had in the past. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPMC-NGO Cooperation 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to report on one more 
common sense government initiative that greatly benefits 
non-government organizations and taxpayers. 
 
For some time now, it's been the practice of the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation to offer its services to 
outside government organizations, namely those that receive 
part of their funding from provincial tax dollars. 
 
Under this system, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) can use its purchasing power to buy supplies and 
services in bulk and lower the cost to NGOs (non-governmental 
organizations). Some examples of these savings include 
participation by SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) in government food contracts, saving 15 per 
cent. A 25 per cent saving in the cost of photocopier, laptop, 
and office supply rental; $62,000 saved in the area of mailing 
equipment, and delivery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this collaboration between government and the 
NGO sector has resulted in savings of over half a million 
dollars in the last fiscal year. By helping NGOs stretch their 
dollars, the benefits to NGOs are obvious but the benefits to 
government should also be noted. By reducing the costs to 
NGOs, the pressure on government portion of funding can also 
be reduced, meaning more savings to the taxpayers or money 
freed up for other programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank SPMC for continuing to offer this 
very valuable service to the NGO sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 12, 1995 

 
2184 

Recognition for Heroism 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
recognize in this Assembly four brave Saskatchewan citizens 
who have already been recognized by His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
On April 29 of this year, at the annual meeting of St. John's 
Ambulance, the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan 
presented the bronze medal for courage to Mark Anderson of 
Prince Albert, Roman Kushneryk of Wakaw, and David Conlon 
of Rosthern. As well, a meritorious certificate was awarded to 
Sheryl Anderson of Prince Albert. All four awards were 
presented, Mr. Speaker, because in July of 1992 these brave 
people saved the life of and rendered first aid to Jeanne Farwell 
after a terrible car crash on the highway through Rosthern. 
 
Jeanne's parents were both killed, and if it were not for the 
efforts of the three men to pull Jeanne from the burning car, she 
too would've been lost. Sheryl Anderson rendered first aid to 
Jeanne while the men attempted to rescue the parents. 
 
The St. John's Ambulance life-saving medal is sanctioned by 
the order titled Grand Prior of the Royal Order of St. John, an 
order that traces its history back through the centuries in 
England. We of course are familiar with its modern work of 
providing care and first aid at both public events and in private 
homes. 
 
In this case, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
recommended the award to recognize those who stop and 
render aid at considerable risk to themselves. 
 
These four are truly good Samaritans, and I join in applauding 
their heroism. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mother's Day 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sunday is Mother's 
Day. And although this Assembly is not the place to do the 
business of Hallmark Cards, I think we would be remiss if we 
did not take a moment to honour our mothers. After all, Mr. 
Speaker, even politicians have mothers — mothers who love us 
for who we are and not for what we do. 
 
One day is not enough of course, but it is good, I believe, that 
we do take a moment to pay special attention to our mothers or 
to, where necessary, honour their memory. 
 
More importantly perhaps, we should take this day not only to 
pamper our mothers but to think for a moment about what the 
term, mother, has come to mean in our society, to think about 
this in a hard, non-sentimental way. After all, selflessness is a 
virtue that is not restricted to those who are defined by gender 
or parental status. We could all use a bit more of it. The same 
goes for understanding, tolerance, and love that is freely given 
and not earned. 

I was proud on VE (Victory in Europe) Day to say a few words 
about my mother. I am happy again to honour her and all 
mothers on this and on all days. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Designated Driver Program 
 
Mr. Knezacek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although there are 
many advantages to living in a province where there's lots of 
space for us to move in, our vast distances do present some 
problems. 
 
One is that for many of us home is a long way from town, 
especially if we've been to town for an evening at the pub. 
Many people across Saskatchewan do not have access to buses 
or taxis, so Saskatchewan does not have the best record for 
drinking and driving. 
 
Given that unfortunate fact, I am happy to report that yesterday 
the province's first designated driver program was announced. 
This program, co-sponsored by the government and by the 
Hotels Association of Saskatchewan will improve options for 
people to get home safely after overindulging. This will be a 
relief to the individual and particularly to the driving public. 
 
The first stage of the program begins immediately. All 
establishments will be asked to join this voluntary effort, and it 
is expected to be in full operation by July 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a partnership effort between the private and 
public sectors, because both have an obligation to see that our 
roads are safe and our citizens protected from drinking drivers. 
And of course we also want to see all people get home safely. 
 
The designated driver program is an excellent way to achieve 
this goal. I urge all servers and users of alcohol to find out more 
about it. And I congratulate the hotels association and 
government for their initiative in reducing the danger of 
drinking and driving on Saskatchewan roads. 
 
Thank you. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, following 
on the comments from the member from Saskatoon Wildwood, 
the message from business to government was loud and clear: 
get your fiscal house in order and get out of our business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was the first paragraph of a story in today's 
paper regarding the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce's 
annual meeting held in Saskatoon. From tax increases to labour 
legislation, the message was loud and clear — get out of our 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier or his designate. Mr.  



May 12, 1995 

 
2185 

Premier, you seem to be getting in the way at every turn, 
especially when it comes to rewarding union supporters. Larry 
Seiferling said your union preference policies could cost 
taxpayers between 50 and $100 million — 50 to $100 million a 
year from taxpayers' pockets. And the Minister of Economic 
Development says that this is a middle-of-the-road approach. 
 
Mr. Premier, how does taxing the people of Saskatchewan an 
additional 50 to $100 million a year to pay union halls represent 
the middle of the road? How about just getting out of the road 
and allowing contracts to go to the lowest bidder? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 
the hon. member by saying, first of all, I did have the 
opportunity to attend, I believe, my fourth annual meeting with 
the chamber of commerce. And I can say very clearly that there 
were a lot of debate. There was a lot of debate about the role of 
government and the balance between union and non-union. And 
this has been a debate that has gone on for many, many years 
and will continue on into the future. 
 
I can tell you one thing this government will not do is get the 
province into the position that it was during the 1980s, where 
the policy of the then government, of the Conservative 
government, was to divide management, owners of companies, 
and working people for political benefit. We won't be doing 
that. 
 
I can say to you very clearly that the comments by the 
newly-elected chamber president, Mr. Brian Kinder, after the 
debate and the discussion, when he said that what we should do 
with the fair wage policy announced by the government was to 
allow it to work for a year to see whether or not there were 
problems or not problems . . . and we would see whether it 
would work. 
 
Well the members opposite say they know it won't work. That 
was not the position of the new president of the chamber, who 
said we should let it work for a year and see whether or not . . . 
the rhetoric of the members opposite who said if we changed 
Workers' Compensation, if we dealt with occupational health 
and safety, if we made changes to The Trade Union Act, that 
the world would come to pieces. 
 
Look at the announcements by companies like Cargill, CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) announcement . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, when the government is holding a loaded gun to the 
head of business, no wonder they want to cooperate with you, 
Mr. Minister. The thing that you are dividing people from, Mr. 
Minister, is you're dividing non-union workers in this province 
from a pay cheque. That's what you're dividing them from. 
 
Mr. Minister, even your Workers' Compensation changes are  

costing taxpayers money, and likely jobs as well. Mike Carr of 
the chamber labour committee said that your changes have 
caused a $12 million deficit and a $24 million increase in 
payments. 
 
As you finally admitted Wednesday night — the Premier 
admitted — this kind of premium represents another tax 
increase. Mr. Minister, instead of toeing the line thrown out by 
your union leader buddies and political supporters, how about 
doing something for job creation? How about doing something 
that creates a positive business climate like the one next door in 
Alberta that has created 80,000 new jobs in the last two years? 
How about just simply getting your government out of the way 
of business like they are requesting you do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to tell the member 
opposite that one thing a number of the chamber members were 
saying in advance to their questions was congratulating the 
government on balancing the books of the province. You can 
check the record. You can check the record and you will see 
that a number of them congratulated the government in 
balancing the books after 10 years of mismanagement by the 
members opposite. 
 
I want to say to the members opposite that we heard you cry 
gloom and doom. I remember the statements in the House that 
if we passed The Trade Union Act amendments or Labour 
Standards or Workers' Compensation or Occupational Health 
and Safety, that that would be the end of it. And there'd be no 
more jobs, and no companies would move to the province. 
 
I can tell you that compared to the hundreds of millions of 
dollars — billions of dollars — that the former premier and his 
rascals tried to bribe companies to come to this province with 
very little success, driving the debt to $15 billion . . . I can say 
the announcement of CIBC, the removal of the 1-800 E&H 
(education and health) tax, the balanced budget, the 
announcement yesterday of Thomson's Meats doubling their 
expansion . . . 
 
You can insult all those people by saying, what did you give 
them? And I'm going to be sending Hansard to them, and I'll 
send a letter to Mr. Lorne Thomson, saying that the former 
premier said about Thomson Meats, what did you give them? 
You can say that from your seat. And you can accuse Flexi-coil 
of taking something from the government, but I'll say that they 
will reject Tories in the next election as . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Union Certification Drive 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also to the Premier or anyone over there that has the 
courage to stand up and answer it. It deals with the same kind  



May 12, 1995 

 
2186 

of capitulation, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier's need for union 
support for the next election. 
 
In Drinkwater, Saskatchewan, just outside of Moose Jaw, 
there's a going concern called Brown Industries which 
manufactures Raider fiberglass truck caps. In January the 
RWDSU (Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union) 
began a union certification drive using questionable tactics and 
hiding behind the protection afforded them in The Trade Union 
Act provided by the NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 
 
When a majority of the employees heard of this drive, they 
signed a petition saying they did not want this union in any 
form and wished to have a democratic vote taken. The Labour 
Relations Board refused their request because the employees — 
get this, Mr. Speaker — because they faxed their petition in 
instead of sending in the original; and then forced union 
certification on all the employees. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you think that this is fair? Do you think that 
employees should be forced into unions that pay the union dues 
as you've set up the Act, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I really would have to 
look at the facts. I will not take as gospel the statements by the 
member from Thunder Creek, because so many times the 
information they bring to this Assembly is not accurate. 
 
I would say that the process of certification for unions in 
Saskatchewan, as it is in any other province and in most 
developed countries of the world, is not only necessary but is 
believed to be in the best interest of union and business. And 
that's why unions were certified under the previous 
administration and decertified. There's a process whereby 
people get together, sign support for unions, and if they don't 
want unions they opt out. And there's also a process of appeal. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite that this idea of 
dividing people of the province, I thought you had got over it. 
But recently the attempt to divide aboriginal people against 
non-aboriginal people, welfare people against non-welfare 
people, union people against non-union people, is despicable 
and I say is the reason you ended up as a rump party. And if you 
haven't learned anything from your experience . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, here are the petitions with the names on them; this is 
the employees. So maybe the minister is legitimate in talking 
about the Liberal Party bringing in false facts. The facts are 
right here on the paper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the employees, Mr. Minister, wrote us saying that many 
of the employees were signing union certification cards, 
thinking that they were attendance cards. When the employees 
discovered that many did not understand what was going on,  

they got a majority of people to sign a petition in opposition of 
certification and asked for a vote. Just asked for the right as 
democratic citizens to have a vote. That was denied by your 
Labour Relations Board, sir. 
 
Mr. Minister, they're asking for a secret ballot on the question 
— a secret ballot  the fundamentals of democracy in this 
province. What could be more fair? Why is there no provision 
for a secret ballot in consideration of union certification, Mr. 
Minister? Why not allow the employees at Brown Industries or 
anywhere else? And then, sir, maybe you would have the right 
to brag about what's going on in this province. 
 
But when you take away democracy from the very people that 
are affected, sir, that is oppression. Why do you oppress people 
in this province with your labour legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
in his high rhetoric is exactly what is not needed in situations 
where people are working out certification or decertification of 
unions. 
 
But it doesn't surprise me because that is the tactic that was 
used for 10 years in the province of Saskatchewan. And I can 
tell you the majority of people in this province were sick and 
tired of pitting one group of people against another, and they're 
not likely to go back in the near future to that approach that rips 
the social fabric of the province apart. 
 
And I tell you, your economic development strategy is just as 
flawed as the Liberal strategy. And I have here an article, I 
believe from today's Star-Phoenix, that says: Liberal economic 
development proposal flawed. 
 
Now this is an individual with high credibility, Jim Yuel, whose 
viewpoint as the writer is as president of PIC Investments 
Group in Saskatoon. And he says about the Liberal strategy: 
although this is a laudable objective — he's talking about 
economic development — it has some serious flaws. And he 
goes on to say that the idea, the main thrust of the strategy will 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I can 
appreciate the minister's wont to wander off somewhere and 
castigate the Liberals for the foolishness they talk about in their 
election strategy. But, sir, the question today that we deal with 
in this Assembly is the democratic right of people to have a 
vote. The petitions are here. The names are on it. And your 
Labour Relations Board says, well it came on a fax instead of 
the original. I mean how weak, Mr. Minister. 
 
If your legislation denying people democratic rights is so 
flawed that a fax is different than an original letter, then I  



May 12, 1995 

 
2187 

suggest, sir, that you are just looking for means and tools to 
take away the democratic rights of people in this province. 
 
Why, Mr. Minister, would you not want people to have the right 
of a secret ballot to determine their future in the working places 
of this province? Why would not want that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I say again that in 
these situations where there is a process or a dispute between 
management and union or even within the certification units or 
decertification unit, you will have those individuals who want 
the process to go one way or another. But I'll tell you very 
clearly that the Labour Relations Board in this province is an 
independent group, and you can argue whether they make the 
right decisions or not. And it may have been the case when you 
were in government that the minister or the premier went and 
made decisions for the Labour Relations Board and forced the 
issue as to one side or the other. But I would argue that would 
be a shameful process. 
 
And if you were doing it while you were in government, if the 
member from Estevan was injecting himself and taking 
positions on the side of business or on the side of labour, that is 
not a process that this government advocates or will become 
involved in. And I would argue that you as individual members, 
when there's a process of certification or decertification, you 
would stay away from it, leave it alone and let the independence 
of the Labour Relations Board work because in the long run it 
does work unless it's politicized the way you're trying to do it 
here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Addiction Treatment in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of gambling. Madam Minister, the 
Prince Albert Mental Health Centre is the only gambling 
addiction treatment service in that area recognized by 
Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Why is it turning away people who are coming for help with 
their gambling addiction problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, given that responsibility for 
delivering of programing around addictions to gambling and 
other addictions falls to the Department of Health, I'll speak to 
the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the facts that the member brings 
to this House. If he will share with me the facts that he 
apparently has, I commit that I will take those facts from him — 
or those allegations from him — and have them investigated. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, maybe you should phone your  

1-800 gambling line for help that's referred to the Prince Albert 
mental health clinic and find out exactly what has taken place. 
 
We have been informed that people are phoning, and they are 
being turned away. They are being turned away by a program 
funded by Saskatchewan Health. Mr. Minister, one has to ask 
themselves, why is this happening? Is it because the case-load is 
too large? Is the government counselling service underfunded? 
Mr. Minister, why is your government's counselling service 
being forced to turn away gambling addicts who really need 
your help? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let's not presume for 
one moment that allegations made in this House always reflect 
the truth, particularly when they come from either the Tories or 
the Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've committed to the member I will investigate 
the allegation that he makes here this morning, but I would 
remind that member and all members that in the province of 
Saskatchewan we offer a $1.5 million contribution to the 
program of gaming addictions, of treating gaming addictions. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is per capita by far the highest amount of 
money dedicated to this important work of any province in 
Canada. And that, Mr. Speaker, in a province where the gaming 
opportunities are somewhat less, if I may say, than are being 
offered in Tory Alberta or Tory Manitoba or Liberal New 
Brunswick, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is that? Because we've known from the beginning that this 
is an important issue and we have dedicated very significant 
resources to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it 
interesting that the minister would stand and accuse this 
opposition of bringing facts that aren't factual. 
 
What did the minister do just a week ago? He told us there was 
a $15 million loss in health care centres; then the auditor tells 
us there's 30. So who's got his facts correct? 
 
What we've been informed is that the P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Mental Health Centre has started refusing to serve new patients 
and is instead referring them to the Metis Addictions Council 
and the Diakenew Counselling Centre. 
 
Mr. Minister, it appears again that when you initially 
established a $500,000 funding for addictions and then had to 
bump it to 1.5, that you still have it underfunded. You claim to 
have the best addictions services in the country, yet you're 
turning away people who are coming to you for help and 
unloading your responsibilities on volunteer organizations. 
 
Why, Mr. Minister, or Madam Minister, or Mr. Premier, were  



May 12, 1995 

 
2188 

you so willing to rush into expanded gambling before you had 
any idea of how you were going to address the problems that 
would come with it? Why were you willing to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as that member well 
knows, when we discussed any expansion of gaming in this 
province, what did we do the very first thing? We established a 
Minister's Advisory Committee on the Social Impacts of 
Gaming. That committee worked well in advance, preparing a 
groundwork and recommendations which we have followed 
almost to the letter, Mr. Speaker. Now if that member is 
criticizing the work of that group of people, then let him say so. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is passing strange that on one day that 
. . . well the same day, for that matter, they stand up in the 
House and say they've got to shrink the size of government, 
we've got to cut, cut, cut, shrink the size of government; then 
another member stands up and says, but you should be spending 
more, you should be spending more. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
can't have it both ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that we are dedicating to this very 
important work a substantial level of resources. We believe the 
programs are valuable. I commit to the member we'll follow up 
on the allegations that he's made here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Programs Advertising 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week 
we noted the unseemly pre-election propaganda issuing from 
the Health department communications staff, at a cost of half of 
the department's '95-96 advertising budget in the first six weeks 
of the new fiscal year. Now this pre-election extravagance pales 
in comparison to the Education and Training department’s 
advertising in this highly touted job creation efforts. 
 
To the Premier: for the past two months your government has 
flooded the province's newspapers and TV and other media 
with JobStart and Future Skills advertising. How much has your 
government spent on this pre-election advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
advertising and getting ready for the election, I can't imagine 
why the Liberals opposite would be clamouring for election 
given their recent success in Manitoba. 
 
But I want to say to you that the work of government agencies 
has to be told to the public, promoted. And that is why, on the 
one hand, members of the Conservative caucus are saying 
spend more to communicate what government policy is. You're 
telling us that we're not communicating well enough, and then 
on the other hand when we communicate you say you shouldn't 
be spending the money. 
 
But it's interesting, at the same time as you're very critical, I  

have here a brochure from the member from Regina North West 
that has the name on it, that goes in in great detail about issues 
that you want to promote. And I believe this is all done at 
taxpayers' expense. It includes a nice picture of the member 
from North West and the Liberal Prime Minister and the Liberal 
leader from Saskatchewan. And I quote, it says: Anita recently 
met with the Prime Minister and took the opportunity to discuss 
federal budget and how it affects you. She also conveyed your 
personal concerns to the Prime Minister. 
 
And I say to you that you have every right, I would imagine, 
under the rules. And maybe you don't; maybe you're saying you 
shouldn't be doing this. But you obviously can't have it both 
ways. You can't spend taxpayers' money to promote your 
position and be critical of others doing the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the government has spent a lot 
of money advertising its 1-800 JobStart number, but as I 
understand it, as many as half of all training jobs in both Future 
Skills and JobStart are being filled by people the participating 
business has designated. As a result a great number of jobs, 
including those announced recently, are not and will not be 
available to those who call into the 1-800 line. 
 
To the minister: how can you promote the government as a job 
creator when you can't even match those who have accessed the 
system through your highly advertised 1-800 number, and so 
many . . . when so many of those jobs are being filled by 
business-designated trainees who have not even tried to access 
the program themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
hon. member that there are obviously many people trying to use 
the programs. They are very, very popular, and they are working 
very effectively. 
 
And the issue here is, is the government has come forward to 
try to facilitate the need of business, and I use the example of 
welders. We indicated and had indication from the private 
sector with the wrapping up of Bourgault Industries and 
Flexi-coil that we would need . . . and the pipeline construction 
in Saskatchewan about a year ago, we would need 2,000 extra 
welders in the province of Saskatchewan. There were no 
programs in existence that could move quickly to fill the gap 
from the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has moved quickly. And the 
reason that the phone lines are ringing off the wall is because 
government, acting as a facilitator to move people from 
changing workforce into the new economy, has a role to play. 
 
And that's why when right-wing parties like Liberals and Tories 
say there's no role for government to play, they're absolutely 
wrong. Many legitimate business people are saying you have a 
role to play; it's to facilitate people moving from the old 
economy to the new economy. And if there are glitches in that 
process, we want to know about them. But I can tell you that  



May 12, 1995 

 
2189 

they are very, very popular programs and working very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, the name of one of the 
programs is Future Skills. That gives the impression that they 
will create jobs for the future, Mr. Speaker. Any applicant can 
access Future Skills and JobStart through a 1-800 number. But 
as late as the end of April, there was no database set up to 
coordinate the inquiries, the applicants, and the jobs across the 
province. And in fact I confirmed today there still is no 
database set up — some future, Mr. Speaker, when officials are 
scrambling to produce jobs in time for an election and they 
don't even have access to an elementary database to match job 
seekers and jobs. 
 
To the minister: you announced Future Skills in November and 
JobStart in January. How can you justify your pre-election hype 
of these programs when you don't have the basic job skills 
yourself to produce a database? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite is that she is absolutely wrong once again. 
And it's a tradition that has only become too common in this 
House for members of the Liberal Party to stand up and bring 
information that isn't accurate. 
 
The programs she referred to are working and working very, 
very well. Hundreds of people are accessing and using the 
program. And the member shakes her head. She knows nothing 
about what she speaks. The fact is these are two of the most 
popular government programs going. Now you can argue about 
some other government programs, whether they're necessary or 
whether they're working. But these are two programs that are 
working. 
 
And it makes as much sense to believe what you're saying as 
when your leader talks about getting in the Texas auditors to 
audit health care and cut 5 per cent which would lead to $80 
million being cut out of the health care budget. What $80 
million does the Leader of the Liberal Party want to cut out of 
health care as she Americanizes the health care system? Your 
question today makes as much sense. It makes no sense. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje: — With permission, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your 
tolerance and your great ability to enforce the rules of this 
legislature. 
 
I would like to, on behalf of my colleague from Saskatoon 
River Heights, introduce to you and to all members in the  

Chamber, a group of some 50 grade 12 students from Marion 
Graham Collegiate in Saskatoon. They are accompanied today 
by teacher, Heather Hearn, and they have been sitting patiently 
and politely through question period watching the performance 
in this House. 
 
On behalf of the member from Saskatoon River Heights, who is 
attending to important and pressing matters in Saskatoon, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome you all to the 
legislature today and I ask my colleagues to join with me in that 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 
question no. 80, I move it be converted to motions for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 80, motion for return debate. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Act 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the Provincial Secretary and Deputy 
Premier to please introduce the official who has joined us here 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think 
the gentleman with me today, who will help in this committee, 
probably needs no introduction, but I'm pleased to introduce 
Michael Jackson, the Chief of Protocol for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman; welcome, 
Mr. Minister. I'd like to welcome Mr. Jackson to the Assembly 
today. I believe that this is the first time Mr. Jackson has been 
in here in this particular capacity in this legislature . . . this 
session of the legislature. 
 
My question to the minister is: how was the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal concept developed prior to the introduction of 
this Bill? Was it based upon recommendations made by other 
volunteer groups, or was it based on a concept by the 
department official? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — We have an advisory council for 
the Order of Merit, which has been in existence since 19 . . . I 
think in 1985. The advisory council throughout the years has 
been recommending the people who would be nominated for 
the Order of Merit. And in that process, has received many, 
many recommendations for people to be part of that who are  



May 12, 1995 

 
2190 

some of the volunteers, which number in the thousands in 
Saskatchewan, who certainly are deserving of some recognition. 
And in a province like ours, where volunteerism is higher than 
anywhere else in Canada on a per capita basis, we think it's 
important to do that. 
 
The advisory council also received many submissions from 
volunteer organizations and individuals recommending that this 
recognition be developed and put into place. And we have taken 
the advice of the advisory council and have therefore 
introduced these amendments to this legislation which is before 
us today. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well 
indeed the volunteers are the backbone of our society, 
especially when we look at various groups  those dealing 
with children, such as Boy Scouts or 4-H, those are all 
volunteers and they carry out a very excellent program in this 
province. 
 
But sometimes we see the volunteer system diminished by 
government action. A good many of the people who were on 
the local hospital boards prior to this administration were 
volunteers. And now that's all changed. That volunteer work 
has been discounted and we've gone to a paid service. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, at times we don't perhaps give the recognition 
to volunteers that they deserve for the very important works that 
they do. And it does affect them in a negative manner when 
somebody else comes forward to do the same work and then is 
paid for it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could go over the process 
involved for this special recognition. For example, if someone 
in one of our constituencies wanted to nominate an individual 
for the recognition of a Saskatchewan volunteer, how would 
they go about doing that and what particular criterias would be 
involved for that nominating individual or for the person who 
was being recommended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to hear 
the member speak of hospital boards who were at one time 
volunteers, and I think in many ways people in public service, 
in many cases, are volunteers. There may be small per diems or 
expense allowances because they have to leave a job or maybe 
lose some income to do that. 
 
And they play a very important role. That's one of the reasons 
why we think  I certainly, personally . . . are very much 
supportive of the need to provide for some recognition for 
people who have, in many ways, been the backbone of the 
development of this province since its beginnings and continue 
to play a very significant role. 
 
The process is one in which individuals, any member of this 
House, any member from the public, an organization, where it 
is an organization of volunteers, can propose and submit the 
names to the advisory council, the Order of Merit Advisory 
Council  which will also be renamed as the Saskatchewan  

Honours Advisory Council. Names can be proposed to this 
council — it's done a very commendable job in the past — and 
that council then will go through that and make its decision to 
the Lieutenant Governor and the appropriate ceremony will take 
place to award the medals to the people who have been chosen. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many 
medals will be awarded each year? Is there a finite number or is 
it open ended? And will the people chosen to be recognized for 
their special volunteer work, will it be simply an at-large system 
or will there be some regional representation within those 
selections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
for the question. There is a maximum of 10 medals that can be 
awarded in any one year. As is the case with the Order of Merit, 
it's not a matter of distribution on any regional basis or there's 
no quota system. It's simply a provincial honours system and the 
advisory council will look carefully at all of the 
recommendations and nominations that are made. 
 
These requests for nominations are very public; in fact I believe 
they're advertised. I've just received at my home, a couple of 
days ago, the request for nominations for the Order of Merit and 
the . . . So there is no quota system of any kind. It's a provincial 
honours event and it has a maximum of 10 that can be awarded 
in any one year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if you 
could please give us an outline, or a breakdown, of the 
members of the advisory council. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the people who are 
on the advisory council — I'll break them down into two 
groups. There's the ex officio members: the Chair is Margaret 
Gallaway from Estevan; Chief Justice Bayda is on there; Mrs. 
Ivany, the spouse of Dr. Ivany . . . oh sorry, Dr. Ivany, president 
of the University of Saskatchewan; Sandra Morgan, the Clerk 
of the Executive Council; and Trevor Powell, the Provincial 
Archivist. 
 
People who are appointed: Fred Martell from the Waterhen 
reservation, a representative of our first nations; Evelyn 
Johnson from Estevan; Anne Szumigalski of Saskatoon, a very 
prominent poet in Saskatchewan; Linton MacDonald from 
Regina, a former, I believe, Sergeant-at-Arms in this Legislative 
Assembly; and Bert Salloum from Saskatoon; and there's one 
vacancy at the present time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I think 
the volunteer award is a very worthwhile award. I believe these 
people do need and deserve the special recognition that this 
type of an award would afford them. I think it gives them . . . 
allows their communities, their neighbours, and their friends, to 
recognize the special work that they have done. And I think it 
would be a very appropriate measure for the province to 
recognize the hard work and diligence that they have put into 
supporting our communities and our social fabric. 
 



May 12, 1995 

 
2191 

The other part of this Bill, Mr. Minister, deals with provincial 
emblems, and I'm wondering why was it necessary to make an 
amendment regarding our provincial bird? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm not going to pretend to be the 
expert on this, but there is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
when I went to school we took French and not Latin. But there 
is a group of people that I think are called ornithologists — 
they're bird experts. And there has been a change in the 
definition and interpretation of the Latin word for the provincial 
bird. It's the same bird  we're not changing the bird  but 
we're making sure that we are technically and correct in the use 
of the language and that's why that amendment is here. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I know 
that the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow would prefer that 
we had birds without feathers on them, but I think that would 
not be appropriate in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could perhaps give us an outline 
on what this change will mean in costs. What will have to be 
changed, and what kind of costs are associated with this 
change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — No costs at all. Whenever new 
material is printed, we'll just make sure that appropriate 
language is used, but I am told there will be no costs involved. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, that's all the 
questions I have today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to again thank the minister and Mr. Jackson for coming in today 
and answering our questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also 
want to express my appreciation to Michael Jackson for his 
assistance here today, but more than that, for his assistance in 
all of the matters of protocol and other responsibilities that he 
has year in and year out where he's done a commendable 
service. 
 
I also want to express my appreciation to the member opposite 
for his support of what I know we all agree is very important 
legislation. It's not tax legislation. It's not this kind of stuff . . . 
But from the point of view of recognizing some tremendous 
and important work that Saskatchewan citizens do as 
volunteers, because they think it's important and because it's a 
way to contribute to their community, to the young people, to 
their old people, to Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 

I think that recognition is long overdue, and I am very happy 
that we are able to be able to do that and that we have the 
support, I think, not only of all the members of this House, but 
that the support is there from all of the public of Saskatchewan 
as well. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please reintroduce to 
us the officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I'm happy to do that, Mr. Chair. With us 
today, seated right beside me is Mr. Duane Adams, deputy 
minister of Health; Ms. Kathy Langlois, executive director of 
finance and management services; Lois Borden is here who is 
our executive director, district support branch; Mr. Steve Petz is 
here, associate deputy minister; Mr. Lawrence Krahn is here 
who is our executive director of medical insurance; and also 
with us, Maureen Yeske, executive director, health planning 
and policy development; Jahzi Van Iderstine, assistant to the 
deputy minister; and Carol Klassen, executive director of 
strategic programs. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and officials. Mr. Minister, I have some questions 
today that I'd like to deal with, the district health boards and 
their relationships with their employees. In particular, I'm 
interested in their relationships with the out-of-scope employees 
and the mechanisms that are in place if an employee has a 
complaint either with some of the board policy or with some of 
the internal mechanisms of employee relationships, etc. 
 
Does the department and do the boards have in place some form 
of mechanism to deal with employee concerns as they relate to 
the board, as they relate to the executives of the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think if I heard the member 
correctly he would like to discuss at this point, in any event, 
out-of-scope employees of district boards. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have had a circumstance in Saskatchewan where 
there have been up to 400 different district boards each with  



May 12, 1995 

 
2192 

their own administrations and out-of-scope personnel; we've 
now moved to a situation where we have 30 district boards who 
take an umbrella responsibility. 
 
Within those district boards, however, there are certainly some 
institutions that will have their own internal administration and 
so on, some affiliate, religious-owned institutions who have 
their own administration. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker — or Mr. Chair — it's a difficult question 
to answer because we're talking about a wide variety here of 
institutions and 30 different board structures. Now each of them 
are charged  and expected  with setting in place 
management structures and administrative structures, which I 
hope would provide routes of communication for people in 
out-of-scope positions as I hope they place for people that are 
within in-scope positions. 
 
So I find it a little difficult to address the member's question 
specifically. If he has a specific example of a problem that he's 
aware of, perhaps we could come at it that way. But let me just 
say with the 30 district boards and all the variety of institutions 
and programs that exist within that, you will find I would hope 
in every district, some mechanisms of communication between 
staff and the boards. 
 
Now all of that said, of course there are the other, by way of 
legislation, be it human rights legislation or access to the 
Ombudsman; these programs too are available to all citizens of 
the province. But perhaps if the member wanted to be more 
specific about a certain concern or a certain situation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, when an employee 
out of scope has a concern about some of the duties that they 
are requesting to perform or some of the procedures that they 
have to go through or if they have an individual complaint with 
a . . . as an personnel complaint with a supervisor, what avenues 
for solutions are in place to deal with that circumstance? Do the 
boards have in place a procedure for appeal if an action has 
been taken by a supervisor against another out-of-scope 
employee? What mechanisms are in place to resolve these kind 
of issues and these kind of complaints which come forward — 
and they do come forward from time to time within any or every 
board in fact. 
 
So what mechanisms are in place? Are you telling us that the 
boards do not have a procedure in place to deal with the internal 
concerns of their employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, again I'm going to have 
to ask the member, I think, if he can be, to be a little more 
specific. This is a very broad question that he presents to the 
minister in the House this morning, so again, let me try and 
address it in broad stroke. But if he wants to be more specific 
about a certain situation or a certain issue, I think we could 
perhaps more easily address it. 
 
It's not clear to me whether the member here is talking about 
issues that may be raised by administrative or out-of-scope  

individuals. If the issue relates to a clinical issue or a medical 
practice, if there is some dispute or an issue surrounding a 
clinical practice, then of course there will be the professional 
bodies and so on who are charged with hearing that kind of 
complaint and dealing with it. 
 
(1115) 
 
If it is a question of management or decision of internal 
management, each of the organizations will have their own 
operational policies, perhaps an operational manual. Each of 
our district health boards will have a personnel department with 
policies and procedures. 
 
If the member has a specific district or it's a specific issue, 
whether it's a clinical issue or a management issue or perhaps 
it's a salary or wage issue, if you could be more specific, I think 
we could address the problem more clearly. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, at this present time I do not wish to provide you with 
a specific example. 
 
But if an employee has a concern, who do they take that 
concern to if they are in conflict with their supervisor or with 
the chief executive officer of the district health board? What's 
the mechanisms in place to deal with these kind of 
circumstances? Because they do happen, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I'm sure they do. I'm sure they 
happen in any human organization. I'm sure they do. I'm sure 
they happen over at General Motors, in the plant at General 
Motors. I'm sure it happens in a small hardware store in a small 
town. Where people work together, there is the potential for 
conflict. 
 
But I think all that I can say in response to the member is that 
each district and each institution will have its own policies and 
procedures and personnel. And those who are on the site will 
know where it is. 
 
Now in a typical circumstance, I think, if you have a difficulty 
with an immediate supervisor, you would likely move to 
another level of the administration and try and address the 
problem. But without a specific here, Mr. Chair, it's very 
difficult to speak generally to the issue. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, it would have been 
my hope that the department and the district health boards 
would have a set-out program of the steps to follow. That if you 
have a complaint against your supervisor or against the CEO 
(chief executive officer) . . . not the CEO, the chief executive 
officer or the executive officer of the health district board, that 
there was a procedure to go through; that you could go to the 
board or you could go to some place within the department to 
have an appeal process to make a determination on the 
decisions that have been made in their employment 
circumstances. 
 



May 12, 1995 

 
2193 

And that doesn't seem to be the case. What you're telling us is 
that it's up to every board to do whatever they want about it. 
And, Mr. Minister, I believe that's simply not good enough, 
because some of the boards do not have a procedure in place to 
deal with these circumstances. 
 
In fact some of the management team within the district health 
boards have been going around asking employees to sign 
confidentiality forms which would deny them the opportunity to 
discuss anything within that facility with another employee, 
with a member of the board, with a member of the legislature, 
or anyone else. 
 
And I believe that's totally beyond the pale, Mr. Minister, that 
you would be asking or the district health boards or some of the 
management people within the district health boards would be 
asking employees to sign confidentiality forms that would deny 
them the opportunity to discuss with anyone some of the 
circumstances which are occurring within their facilities. How 
do you address that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, if the member could 
provide for me such a form and if — and I underline the word if 
— if it is as he claims, it prevents people from any ability to 
speak about an issue to anyone else, then I tell you, Mr. Chair, I 
would want to follow that up and see that that's not the case. 
But I can't do that in general on the word of the member that 
somewhere perhaps this is happening. If he could provide for 
me some documented evidence that this is a fact in any one of 
our health boards or institutions, Mr. Chair, I will personally 
follow up on that because I do not believe that to be 
appropriate. But I need to know some facts here before we go 
off here on some kind of a tangent. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, in this particular 
case I cannot provide you with the documentation because the 
individual that was asking employees to sign that would not 
release that document out of their possession. They simply had 
to sign it right there on the spot and then away it went. 
 
But I can provide you with anecdotal evidence of that, and I 
will provide you with the names of the individuals that you can 
contact to discuss that particular issue with because it is wrong, 
because people should have the opportunity to address their 
board members on these particular issues or to address 
members of the legislature. We deal with confidential 
information, Mr. Minister, on a regular basis. And to try and 
provide blankets of silence over issues, Mr. Minister, is 
inappropriate within our health care system if there are concerns 
and problems which arise. 
 
But that's one particular issue in this matter. The other issue is, 
how does such an individual who has been asked to sign this 
kind of a form appeal through the process, because some of the 
district health boards do not have mechanisms in place. 
 
Say you have three levels of management within the district 
health board that are out of scope before you get to the board 
itself. And the person at the lowest level is asked to sign this  

form by the person above them who has the agreement by the 
executive officer to have these forms circulated. Who do you 
appeal to? One would have hoped or expected that it would 
have gone to the board for approval, but who knows? So who 
do you appeal to in those kind of circumstances, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, again we're talking here 
kind of hypothetically. Most, if not all, of the district boards 
will have a personnel committee, which it seems to me would 
be the appropriate place. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Chair, we can't deal with an issue like this in 
some kind of hypothetical sense. Would the member please, if 
he is making these accusations in the legislature, please here in 
the legislature identify the districts which he believes do not 
have the appropriate mechanisms in place, or the district where 
he is aware that people are being inappropriately asked to sign 
some kind of a confidentiality arrangement. 
 
Mr. Chair, you cannot expect the Department of Health to 
follow up with a shotgun approach. We need to know where the 
concern is. And so if the member would please even just 
identify the districts, we can follow up. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps you can 
supply some information in this particular matter. Which boards 
have personnel committees in place to deal with the 
complaints? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we don't have that specific 
information here. I would expect that each of the district boards 
would have a personnel committee, someone on the board 
responsible for personnel. But, Mr. Chair, we'll do a search of 
the boards and provide the member with the list. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. They may be 
in place now, but in the past, and not the too far distant past, 
some boards did not have these committees in place. 
 
Mr. Minister, if there is a complaint, what opportunities to 
rectify the situation, to negotiate, to mediate, would the 
personnel committee have of the board; and how would those 
personnel committees be structured? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well again, Mr. Chair, it would vary 
according to the kind of complaint. Again if it's a clinical 
complaint, if someone in a health — let's use a for instance or a 
hypothetical — if someone in a health care institution feels 
there is a clinical practice that is inappropriate or dangerous, 
then there are appropriate professional bodies and structures to 
deal with that complaint. 
 
If the complaint is a complaint, for instance, over one's 
scheduling or one's working conditions or office space or 
responsibilities or wages, then there would be another and here 
more internal process. 
 
Now this is not different, Mr. Chair, than the way it has been, 
I'm sure, in health care delivery in Saskatchewan for the last 50  



May 12, 1995 

 
2194 

years. Each and every institution would have had its own 
policies and procedures to deal with these kinds of issues. 
 
I don't think the member would suggest that the Department of 
Health, that the centre of government, should impose on each 
and every district and on each and every institution an identical 
policy and procedure manual to deal with these kinds of issues. 
We have always entrusted this kind of management to the local 
communities, the local institutions, and now the local districts. I 
don't think he would want us to establish a system where the 
Department of Health wrote all the management practices for 
every institution and every district in the province. 
 
Again I'm asking the member if he wants us to follow up, if he 
knows of some specific violations which he's concerned about, 
if he could please direct us in a more specific direction and we 
can follow up. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not prepared to 
provide any names in the legislature because these people are 
concerned about the positions they currently hold, but I will 
give them to you in private because these circumstances are 
indeed occurring, Mr. Minister, and there are indeed some 
problems out there. 
 
And you say, what has changed? Well your district health 
boards are what has changed. You now no longer have people 
from the communities that are involved sitting on these boards 
which was the case before. And so you're moved away from the 
local community effort, and now you've become that 
amorphous them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, there is some needs here for some solution 
and some directions to move through the system when there is a 
complaint. And you seem to keep talking about hypothetical . . . 
we can't deal with it because it's hypothetical. Well, Mr. 
Minister, whenever government brings anything forward, it's 
always hypothetical until it starts happening. When the Minister 
of Finance brings forward her budget, it's all hypothetical until 
they start to spend the money. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, there needs to be in place some bodies within 
each board to deal with the complaints of the management, and 
that has not occurred in every circumstance. It may be in place 
now, but it wasn't not that long ago. So those need to be in 
place. 
 
But if these personnel committees are in place, what kind of a 
structure do they deal with? Do they make recommendations to 
the board as a whole? What do they do with the complaints that 
come forward to them? What procedures do they have to 
investigate any complaints that come forward to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, again there are a 
significant number of institutions in our province, each with 
their own management policies, each with their own policy and 
procedure manuals and practices and traditions and so on. 
There are 30 districts in our province each again with some 
variations  I'm sure  their own policies, and procedures. I'm  

confident that most, if not all, of those district boards will have 
personnel committees. I'm confident that most of those district 
boards and all of those district boards will have a human 
resource staffing as do yet some of the institutions. 
 
Now is the member suggesting that I, as minister through the 
Department of Health, should impose on each of the districts or 
on each of the institutions common sets of policies and 
procedures? Is he suggesting that the department should 
micromanage the system? 
 
Now I hear his concern, and it may well be a valid concern, but 
it cannot be dealt with in a generic kind of form unless he takes 
the position that he wants us to begin to impose internal 
detailed policies on each of the health institutions and each of 
the health districts in the province. 
 
Now I just want to, before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I do want to 
say for the record . . . the member talks about when the Minister 
of Finance stands up and talks about a budget; it's hypothetical. 
Not in the case of this government, Mr. Chair. When his crowd 
was over here and the minister of Finance stood up and gave a 
budget, it was hypothetical, hypothetical to the tune of $800 
million. The last one I think we missed the mark by $800 
million. I shouldn't get into that discussion I know, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I thank the member for his willingness to provide us names. 
And when the specific names are here — and I assure him that 
they will be kept confidential — that we can then follow up if 
there are specific issues that he's aware of. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, you question 
whether or not there should be some generic outlines as for 
dealing with these concerns, and you seem to suggest that 
somehow that is wrong. Well, Mr. Minister, your whole health 
plan is based on those kind of generic implementations and 
directions for the health districts because you limit the number 
the number of acute care beds that they can have based on some 
formula. You limit the number of long-term care beds they can 
have based on some formula. 
 
Now if you're going to say that generic is wrong, well then take 
those limits out of there, and let the district health boards 
provide the care that they need within their funding structure. 
But you don't allow that. You say you have so much population; 
you can have so many acute care beds. You have so much 
population over a certain age; you can have so many long-term 
care beds. So you are telling them what and where and how 
they can do it, Mr. Minister. So if generic is wrong for dealing 
with the employees, well then generic is wrong when it comes 
to the bed structure. You can't have it both ways. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you make the determination. Are you going to 
allow the health boards to make their own evaluations on their 
needs and supply that within the funding available, or are you 
going to be telling them exactly what to do? 
 
(1130) 



May 12, 1995 

 
2195 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, of course, of course as 
that level of government responsible for health care being the 
province, of course the province will set program standards. It 
has always been thus, and it should always be thus, in my view, 
that the province under its responsibility should establish 
program standards. 
 
Now that formerly, formerly had been done through budgets to 
local institutions and single institutions. That's how it was done 
before. It was in approval to budgets to small institutions. 
 
We've moved from that to a much better way of funding the 
health care needs of our province. And that's to base that 
funding on population, on need, on demographics, and so on. 
Now, Mr. Chair, the funding is provided to the district in some 
global amounts with standards that each district and core 
services that each district must provide. 
 
Mr. Chair, I would never want us to move away from that 
responsibility at the provincial level because it is through that 
responsibility that we can maintain universal and quality and 
accessible services for all of the people of our province. 
 
Now the member should not confuse the matter of establishing 
program standards and the matter of financing health care with 
the matter of managing in an institution specific or in a district 
specific. In this regard, Mr. Chair, we want to be moving out of 
the way to let people make their decisions locally, appropriate 
to their programs and appropriate to their communities and 
appropriate to their needs. 
 
Now again I ask the member, what is he asking us to do here? Is 
he asking us to micromanage? And if that's the case, he should 
just say so because if we get into micromanaging, then we're 
going to get into the matter of regulating equally. 
 
Now again I go back to where I think the member began this 
discussion, and that's with a concern of about the ability of 
health care providers to have input into decision making and 
have roots of access to the policy setters and so on. On this, Mr. 
Chair, he and I share a concern. And I tell you it's a concern not 
just for out-of-scope but concern for in-scope health care 
providers. And I am anxious that in each of our district 
circumstances there be mechanisms in place and there be roots 
that health care providers themselves can have influence and be 
part of decision making. On that I'm sure we agree. And if he 
has specific case again where he thinks there is a violation of 
someone's rights in the system, I'll anticipate him providing the 
names, and we'll follow up. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome, sir, to you and your officials. I wonder if you could 
outline for me the process that individuals would have to go 
through to have the boundaries of a district health board 
changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the process is described, I 
believe, in the legislation. Essentially it would be that the 
affected districts . . . there would need to be agreement among  

the affected districts. There would need to be some process of 
public education or public consultation. If agreement is reached 
and the public consultation has been done, then the request is 
made to the department, and the district boundary in fact can be 
changed by an order in council. And there have been a number 
of examples where that has happened. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Minister. I'm going to send over 
to you a letter and a copy of a petition which I'm sure you . . . 
somewhere has showed up in the Department of Health . . . that 
is from residents who live north of the Buffalo Pound valley 
and were included in the Regina Health District. And they, as 
they explain in their letter, don't wish to be there. In fact they've 
taken and spent the effort and time to have more than 80 per 
cent of the households within this area canvassed and make 
their wishes known. They have the RM (rural municipality) of 
Dufferin supporting their initiative, and they very much want to 
be part of the Thunder Creek Health District for all sorts of 
reasons — mostly tied to busing of children for school, where 
they do their majority of their shopping, all this. 
 
And they have been, to say the least, very frustrated by the 
bureaucracies involved with both of the health districts, 
evidently and hoped that it wouldn't come to the fact they had to 
bring this issue to the Legislative Assembly for your perusal, so 
I'm wondering what you say in the face of this situation. And 
this, Mr. Minister, as you can see by the dates, has been going 
on for some goodly long time. What you would say in response 
to all of these good people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I trust that they have been in 
contact both with the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District Board 
and with the Regina Board. We'll want to follow up to our 
discussion here in the House. We'll want to find out if in fact 
that has happened, where the contact has made, and what has 
resulted at the district board level. To my knowledge, there has 
not been a request put formally to the department from these 
district boards or either of the district boards in this regard. And 
so we will check with both of those boards to see where it is 
from their point of view. Now if there is a dispute, we'll do our 
level best to facilitate it. 
 
If I may say just in reference to the member for Thunder Creek 
and the remarks that he's made here, I think I can understand the 
feelings of those individuals who will be living on the north 
side of Buffalo Pound Lake. I will know some of them 
personally, and I know many of their traffic, school, and 
shopping patterns bring them to Moose Jaw as opposed to into 
Regina. So if there is a dispute or a block in the system, we'll do 
what we can to facilitate that and follow up as a result of our 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, will this process which you just 
outlined to the Assembly, will this stay in place even after the 
health boards are elected? Will it still require an order in 
council of the provincial government to change boundaries, or 
will there be more self determination amongst boards once they 
are elected by the people that they're charged with representing? 
 



May 12, 1995 

 
2196 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It would be my expectation, Mr. Chair, 
that the order in council process will still be required as I 
believe it is with school district changes that may occur over 
time. There is not a sense here that the Department of Health or 
government would want to do anything but facilitate changes 
where they're desirable and desired on the local level, but to 
maintain our overall responsibility for the legislation. I believe 
it's appropriate that there still be the final order in council 
procedure. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I anticipate, Mr. Minister, from the 
conversations I've had with people around this province, that 
you're going to run into a lot of this. Can you tell the Assembly 
who you have designated in the Department of Health to be the 
lead person in this situation? Who is the individual that will be 
in charge of redrawing all of these boundaries as things come 
along? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, from the drafting of the 
original legislation and concept around the district boards, it 
was understood that over a period of time there would likely be 
some change in district boundaries. We went through a process 
of community discussion to establish those district boundaries. 
They weren't carved out here at the Department of Health; they 
were carved out in meeting halls across Saskatchewan. But it 
was understood from the beginning there would likely be some 
change. To date there has not been an overwhelming desire for 
boundary changes; some, and we've accommodated those. It 
hasn't been overwhelming. 
 
The member may be correct that there may be more in the 
future. However we think that the process that is in place — it 
was designed to be and we think it is — is a relatively simple 
process and cheap and not involving a long, detailed sort of 
process when there is local agreement. 
 
Now in the case where there may not be local agreement, that 
may be more difficult. In that circumstance we do name then 
someone individually to be out there and trying to facilitate and 
help it through. We would rather see this as sort of a normal 
course of business, so we haven't named one individual 
particularly in the department to handle this. But it becomes 
part of the district support branch work. What paperwork was 
needed by terms of order in councils, they would flow the 
paperwork through to government. And our goal is to make this 
process simple and inexpensive. And to date, it seems to have 
worked fairly well. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, who would that be? Who is in 
charge of the district health support group that you . . . the 
working group that you have inside the Department of Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If fact . . . the two individuals probably 
who would give leadership to this are here in the House with us 
today, which is Mr. Steve Petz, associate deputy minister, and 
Lois Borden, who is the executive director. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I appreciate that, Minister, because we have 
taken the opportunity to discuss district heath boards, and  

governance particularly, with a lot of individuals in the last few 
months and how that governance is going to evolve and who 
really is going to have the say in delivery of services within 
those health districts. And there are a lot of people out there on 
the bigger question who aren't that comfortable yet with the 
philosophy of your administration. They feel that it is still 
driven from the top, that there is a lot of imaging going on here 
that people aren't totally happy with. 
 
And I think it's important for us to understand who are the lead 
people in issues dealing with district health boards and dealing 
with issues of governance because I say to you over the next 
four or five years that that issue of governance will become one 
of extreme importance, of who controls the tax dollars, who has 
access to the taxing capabilities. And I believe, Mr. Minister, 
that you have a responsibility from within the Department of 
Health as the minister to put this governance issue at the top of 
the agenda . . . And that the views of people, particularly in 
rural areas, not be ignored when it comes to issues of who is 
going to determine which services and how many and to which 
clients will be delivered within certain health districts. 
 
So I'd like your response to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I recognize the issues that the 
member raises, and we are into some pioneering here in the 
province with the regional delivery of health care services. And 
when one is pioneering new approaches, as we move forward, 
we encounter new challenges. 
 
I can report to the member today that about two to three weeks 
ago I put together a group of people from the districts and from 
our department, and we've described this group as the roles and 
responsibilities committee. And it will be their task to look at 
many of these issues, the ongoing relationship between the 
districts and the department; the roles of the districts, and the 
roles of the department. And this group of people very much 
reflects the totality of Saskatchewan in terms of who's there to 
work through some of these issues. So I'm looking forward to 
good work there. 
 
(1145) 
 
We have restructured the Department of Health to more 
precisely match this now regional delivery of health care 
services. And so we have an entire branch within the 
department, which we describe as integrated services, that 
works with the districts. And we have put in place one person to 
act as a consultant with each district, that one person being their 
primary contact with the department. And so each district may 
feel they have direct access to the department at its most senior 
levels and, through the most senior levels, to the minister. And 
so we're hoping that that line of communication can help in 
these discussions as well. 
 
We are pioneering. Many other provinces in Canada are also 
moving — if not all — moving to a more regionalized concept 
of health care delivery. We know that's happening in Alberta. 
We've seen it happening in New Brunswick. And we're all now  



May 12, 1995 

 
2197 

struggling with some of the issues around the importance of 
maintaining provincial responsibility for standards and program 
delivery and so on, while permitting and enhancing the local 
committee and regional decision making. 
 
I think key to this will be part of the work of the roles and 
responsibilities committee as they struggle with some of these 
issues. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Quick question, Minister. These liaison 
people that you have designated, are these all current or former 
employees of the Department of Health, or have you gone 
outside to appoint people into those positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to the member, all of these 
people have been put in place through the Public Service 
Commission process. The vast majority of them will have been 
employees of the Department of Health and who have been 
working through the process. And we'll be very pleased to 
provide for you a list of the names of . . . we describe them as 
consultants. So each district has its own consultant, and we'll be 
very happy to provide you a list of the names of the consultants 
and the districts that they're responsible for. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Yes, Mr. Minister, a question that comes back to 
a discussion we had — oh, about two weeks ago I believe it was 
— regarding private care homes. I'd like to know what the 
status is regarding the application from the town of Avonlea for 
their private care home in view of recent announcements you've 
made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I can report there have been 
discussions between the community, I assume, and the 
department. But there is nothing yet formally presented from 
the town of Avonlea. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I have a question regarding 
supplementary health cards. Our office has received a copy of a 
letter from Mr. Donald Turner from Estevan to Mr. Ronn 
Wallace, the director of health insurance registration. 
 
Mr. Turner had applied for temporary assistance through Social 
Services. Because of a production error at Sask. Health, Mr. 
Turner received five supplementary health cards instead of one 
and he was covered for three times the coverage approved by 
the social worker. Saskatchewan Health noticed the error and 
retrieved the cards from Mr. Turner. 
 
This incident led Mr. Turner to ask the following: one can only 
wonder what the production error has cost, especially when 
considering the cut-backs in the health care system due to rising 
costs. How many hospital beds could have been saved if it 
wasn't for production errors? 
 
Can you provide an answer to Mr. Turner's questions? How 
often does this occur? How much does it cost the taxpayer? 
How is this problem detected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member will know that  

this department of government has responsibility for, and 
knowledge of, of every citizen of our province. This department 
of government needs to deal with, I'm pleased to say, more than 
a million people now. I can also report that these kinds of — 
I'm not sure how to describe — production errors I'm told, are 
very, very small given the great volume of work that is done by 
the Department of Health. In fact it is widely recognized across 
Canada that Saskatchewan probably has the best health 
registration system of any province in Canada. 
 
And while I'm on my feet  and I may not often do this  I 
think there is some credit due to the former government in this 
regard, who worked hard to see some of this health registration 
work done and some of the health card work done. We have a 
very, very small rate of production error. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, while you've indicated you have a 
small rate of production error, is there any cost, would there be 
any cost, associated with the production errors? And secondly, 
and just a comment regarding the cards, is the department 
looking at ways in which they can expand the use of health 
cards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we're endeavouring to get for 
the member the actual error rate that is tracked; we're having 
somebody trying to find that right now. When there are errors, 
of course there are some costs. They're not large. Where there is 
an error that has had some cost attached to it, we on occasion 
will attempt to secure recovery if there's been a mistake. But in 
each case it has to be dealt with on a very individual basis. I 
believe the illustration that you began with would not involve 
significant costs. 
 
In terms of the health card itself, we are looking at a variety of 
ways that the health card might serve us better in Health, 
whether it be for verification or audit or access to health 
services. We've not come to any real conclusions around any of 
those questions. We do know that with every passing year that 
technology seems to offer more and more possibilities. So we 
are looking at a variety of suggestions that have been made that 
might see the health card prove even a more valuable tool in 
health care delivery, but we've come to no real decisions at this 
point. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I have a number of questions here 
from other residents that we just haven't had the time to raise in 
"Mr. Premier, I want to know" and I'd like to get a few of these 
out of the way. This question comes from Susan, and I believe 
it's Heaman, from Weyburn. 
 
I want to know why residents in nursing homes cannot be 
moved to other areas. The lady I have in mind moved from her 
home to be with her daughter. She was then put into a care 
home with the idea that she could return to her home town 
when the daughter retired there. Now after four and a half years, 
they still won't take her. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I don't of course know the details of the 
individual's circumstance, but I would want to assure that  



May 12, 1995 

 
2198 

individual and make it very clear to our districts that there 
should be no sense that someone is resident of a district and 
therefore bound to receive services within that district. We want 
our districts to work together. And so that if someone may be 
more appropriately cared for in a long-term circumstance closer 
to their home community or closer to family, we would want it 
to be possible that a district boundary wouldn't interfere with 
that process. 
 
Now I know that in our communities it varies. Some 
communities have waiting-lists; others have very few on 
waiting-lists. And the availability of a long-term care bed may 
be an issue here. But what should not be an issue for any 
Saskatchewan person is that your care can be provided where it 
is most appropriate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I have a question here, Mr. Minister, from a J. 
Adam from Cupar. 
 
I want to know why the Plains Health Centre is being 
considered to close within the next few years. For us rural 
residents or citizens, it is the easiest and quickest trauma centre 
to get to and also has unique features which the other hospitals 
do not have. Monies to upgrade the facility could come from 
the downsizing of cabinet, the Saskatchewan birthday party, or 
the profits from SaskEnergy and SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the decision to consolidate 
the clinical services here in the city of Regina into the two 
hospitals as opposed to three was recommended by the Regina 
District Board after considerable study. And I know that the 
Regina board has done a considerable amount of public 
hearings and education around their decision there. 
 
The decision essentially, I think, was based on three criteria. By 
consolidating into the two centres as opposed to the three, there 
will be an improvement offered in patient care because of the 
concentration in two of the skills and the technology and the 
expertise. It will be more cost effective, without doubt, to 
provide the services out of two facilities rather than three. And 
there are estimated operational savings of between 10 and $12 
million per year just simply by avoiding the extra building costs 
and duplication and triplication of equipment, so there are 
significant savings  which resources then may be available 
for other appropriate programing. 
 
And with this kind of concentration, the Regina District Board 
is very confident that they'll be able to recruit more medical 
specialities and specialists to this community and this province. 
 
It needs to be always re-emphasized, I believe, that in the 
planning towards 2000 and towards the consolidation of all 
these clinical services in two buildings rather than in three, that 
programs are not being lost, that the programing will remain the 
same, being offered out of two buildings rather than out of 
three. 
 
Now there are some capital expenditures to accomplish this. In 
addition to the renovations that we've recently announced to the  

Allan Blair cancer clinic, estimates that it may reach to about 86 
million to accomplish this rationalization. 
 
But again, I think it needs to be emphasized that programs are 
not being lost; that all of the existing programing now provided 
through the Plains hospital will be provided through the other 
two. There'll be no loss in programing. 
 
I think it needs to be re-emphasized also that the Plains building 
itself requires some renovation and would have required that 
renovation even to continue as a hospital. And that it needs to 
be also emphasized that the Plains Health Centre . . . that 
building will not stand idle, but there will be, over the years, 
valuable use made of that property. 
 
But what is achieved by consolidating in the two is a better 
quality of care for the people of Regina and the people of 
southern Saskatchewan; significant cost saving — 10 to $12 
million a year; and finally, an ability for us I think better to 
attract specialists in the future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — This question comes from Marie Heinrichs from 
Moose Jaw. I want to know why the government keeps cutting 
hospital beds, staff, etc. Soon we won't have any doctors left 
because they'll all be leaving for the States. Take some of the 
million dollar lottos and put them toward health care; get the 
nurses and doctors back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I would want to reassure the individual 
who has written that, in fact in terms of doctor services in our 
province, we're actually seeing the numbers of physicians in 
Saskatchewan on the increase. 
 
In March of last year, March of 1994, there were 722 family 
practitioners — GPs (general practitioners) — and there were 
436 specialists, for a total of l,158 practising physicians in our 
province. By March of this year, that number had grown to 739 
family practitioners and 450 specialists, to a total of 1,189. And 
that pattern is happening, that growth in the number of 
physicians, is happening both in urban and in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1200) 
 
And so certainly physicians . . . well some do choose to leave 
our province to practise in other parts of Canada and some will 
choose to leave the province and practise even outside of 
Canada and the United States — and we know that our doctors 
are being recruited actively — that does happen and has 
happened for many years. 
 
What is encouraging actually, is that in the pattern of the last 
four and five years, the numbers of physicians leaving our 
province is declining. In 1992, 118 physicians left our province. 
In 1993, 104 physicians left our province. In 1994, only 67 
physicians left our province. And so in some ways, these are 
encouraging numbers. 
 
Now we also know that we're working closely with the SMA  



May 12, 1995 

 
2199 

(Saskatchewan Medical Association) and the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons to ensure that we have an appropriate 
and adequate supply of both GPs and specialists. And this is an 
ongoing work that we want to work with our doctors, work with 
our institutions, and work with our communities to achieve. 
 
Mr. Toth: — The question coming from a Joan Reiter from 
Redvers. What is the government doing to help promote and 
enforce the World Health Organization's international code of 
marketing for breast milk substitutes? The more formula-fed 
infants there are, the more hospitalizations we will have to deal 
with. It's time the government put dollars where its mouth is in 
the promotion of breast-feeding as a healthy choice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I know for a fact, given our 
own life experience, that our public health nurses that work in 
Saskatchewan are very active in promoting the benefits of 
breast-feeding for infants. It is appropriate in my view that they 
should be doing so. It can be described, I think appropriately, as 
a good, preventative, long-term medicine. 
 
In terms of the World Health Organization and so on, we're 
going to assemble what information we have in the department 
and we'll share that with the member. But I know our public 
health nurses are very supportive of breast-feeding and do as 
they are able to do in the communities to encourage and train 
and educate. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, this question comes from Linda 
Lisa Jones from Frontier. I want to know what you are doing to 
protect the lives of pre-born children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In terms of protection for the unborn, 
one of the things that we're working diligently to achieve in a 
variety of forms across Saskatchewan would be prenatal care 
for moms, both through diet and lifestyles. We know that the 
prenatal work with mothers will have a direct influence on the 
health of the newborn child and the long life and health of that 
child. And so what is key to us in programing these days is to 
work with mothers in prenatal care. 
 
Mr. Toth: — This question comes from Marceline . . . I believe 
it's Millette, from Nipawin. I want to know why abortion is the 
leading cause of death in Saskatchewan even after a majority of 
Saskatchewan voters voted no to tax-funded abortions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker we had quite a long, I think, 
discussion in this regard the other evening. I can repeat some of 
the comment I made at that time. The therapeutic abortion 
procedure is provided in Saskatchewan in our publicly funded 
hospitals to this day because of this government's respect of the 
laws of Canada and the various court decisions which have 
been made across Canada. 
 
As I indicated to the member last time we discussed this, we 
took the result of the plebiscite very seriously, although I may 
say that when the government of the day proposed a plebiscite, I 
believe that government had exactly the same body of legal 
opinion that has been provided to our government. 

However, following the plebiscite during the last election, we 
diligently sought out legal advice, both internal to the province 
and external to the province, all of which would indicate — and 
this is consistent across Canada as this member will know and 
as the member of the Liberal caucus will know — that it is not 
an option for a provincial government to remove funding for 
the therapeutic abortion procedure lest one violates the charter 
of rights, lest one violates the Canada Health Act, and so on. 
And members will know the provinces which have endeavoured 
to do so have failed in that endeavour. 
 
What then, Mr. Chair, is an appropriate response? We believe 
that the appropriate response is to provide, within our publicly 
funded institution, the therapeutic abortion procedure. 
 
Not to do that, Mr. Chair, will mean that it will be provided in 
private clinics. And that is not something that this government 
or this political party has ever supported. If members opposite 
would desire the abortion procedure not to be provided in the 
publicly funded circumstance, then what they would be 
recommending is that it be provided in the privately owned 
clinics. We do not take that view. 
 
Mr. Chair, it has been an important endeavour of our 
government, never undertaken by the former government, to 
establish a Family Planning Advisory Committee to deal with 
all of the issues around the unwanted pregnancy, teen 
pregnancy, to begin a program of appropriate education and to 
provide resources, particularly to young people, that they can be 
making responsible choices in their lives. 
 
It has been an initiative of this government to provide the kind 
of resources that are going to be required by teen moms, 
whether it be through pilot projects now in the school setting 
where there may be day care within the school or closely 
associated to the school. These kinds of projects, this kind of 
caring, and this kind of education, Mr. Chair, is the way that we 
believe is appropriate for government to proceed in these times. 
 
Mr. Toth: — This question comes from Maria Ediger from 
Saskatoon. I want to know why the health care system will not 
cover my daughter's speech therapy after six years of age. She 
attends an independent school. What about a drug plan, even 
though if only for children? We are a moderate income family 
and keep paying and paying with no return. 
 
The Chair: — I wonder if at this point the members would 
grant the Chair leave to make an introduction? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I want to draw the attention of the 
members to a group of adult students seated in the Speaker's 
gallery. There's approximately 50 students. They're studying 
English as a second language at the University of Regina. 
They're accompanied by Christopher Gas and Laura Roszell. 
 



May 12, 1995 

 
2200 

This is an annual visit for this class to the legislature. I'm not 
sure whether it's because they see us as being extraordinarily 
skilled in the use of the English language, or whether in 
addition to learning about the English language they are also 
here to learn about our democratic institutions. But whatever 
the case, I would ask the members in the universal language to 
bid them a very warm welcome this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in terms of the provision of 
speech therapy, the Department of Health does provide the 
program, does provide speech therapists, for preschool 
youngsters. The service is provided by the Department of 
Health for preschool. 
 
After school age, that same service is provided through the 
Department of Education in the public school system. If one 
opts . . . or the publicly funded school system. In one opts to a 
private school, one then would recognize whether or not the 
private school provides the speech therapy. 
 
But up until school age, the programs are provided by the 
Department of Health; beyond school age, the speech therapy 
programs are provided through the Department of Education in 
the publicly funded schools. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, this question comes from Roger 
Fortier from Debden. I want to know, are you in accordance 
with the practice of painlessly putting to death persons who 
have incurable, painful, or distressing diseases or handicaps; in 
other words, mercy killing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Toth: — This question comes from K. Moore from Moose 
Jaw. I want to know how could you come with 29 million to 
build that white elephant named Providence Place in Moose 
Jaw when health care has been cut to the bone elsewhere. I see 
beds closed and nurses run off their feet because we can't afford 
to pay and yet we can waste money to replace two good 
facilities and lose 55 beds and a whole lot of jobs. Common 
sense has gone from government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the question of the 
construction of Providence Place in Moose Jaw has been a 
project that has been planned and dreamed for in the 
community of Moose Jaw for many years, for well over a 
decade. The Sisters of Providence and other health care 
providers in Moose Jaw planned and dreamed for this project. It 
was not accomplished in the 1980s; it has now been 
accomplished. 

Mr. Chair, the construction of Providence Place has brought 
together under one roof, not only the long-term care beds that 
formerly were available in the Providence Hospital and St. 
Anthony's Home, but has brought together the most current 
programing and thinking in terms of geriatric and long-term 
care. 
 
And so the new facility will offer not just long-term care but 
will offer geriatric assessment, will offer adult day care and day 
hospital programs, and consolidates that expertise in a new 
facility that will serve the community for many, many, many 
years. 
 
In addition, by consolidating the acute care services, the 
hospital services, at the Union Hospital, again there have been 
significant improvements to the hospital; significant 
improvements to the programing that's being offered in the 
hospital with the new women's and maternity centre, with the 
day hospital being offered now at the Providence. 
 
It is a large investment of money — $22 million from the 
province of Saskatchewan and $7 million being raised locally 
by the Sisters of Providence and the Providence Place 
committees. It is a large investment of money, but I would 
indicate to the individual who has written the letter, this 
expenditure of money will, number one, save significant dollars 
in terms of annual operation costs and has provided a facility 
that will serve Moose Jaw, and particularly the seniors of 
Moose Jaw and the pioneers of our province, for many, many 
years into the future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, this question comes from Kinga 
Duchin from White City. I understand the government is trying 
to legislate smoking at the workplace. I have great concern and 
wish something could be done to adults who smoke in their 
vehicle and in their homes with children present. I think there 
should be more concern for the innocent children. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as the member will know, and 
I'm sure he will inform the writer, we have taken some steps as 
government in terms of smoke in the workplace when it 
pertains to government. And we have felt that it is appropriate 
that we always begin at home. And I know that all members of 
the House have supported some of the initiatives of the dangers 
of smoke in the workplace and in confined spaces. 
 
We are not, at this point, looking at the kind of legislation I 
think that your writer would desire, which would legislate right 
down to the interior of a car. We approach this, I think 
appropriately, through education — through public health 
education — whether that education comes through the media 
or through the schools or through other forms, like the health 
update that we provide, or so on. 
 
It is our view at this point that it's appropriate that we do the 
kind of education that should be done, recognizing that there is 
a significant danger for anyone who is exposed to second-hand  



May 12, 1995 

 
2201 

smoke. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, this question comes from Orville 
Tallon from Lafleche. When ambulance service is more 
essential now than ever in south-west Saskatchewan, why is 
road ambulance so relied upon? Is air not more efficient, even 
in cost, than all the road equipment necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the road ambulance system 
that we do have in Saskatchewan is certainly one of the best in 
Canada. There's no doubt about that. 
 
And we've had the long and proud history in Saskatchewan of 
an air ambulance, an air ambulance service. That air ambulance 
service continues today as it has from the late 1940s. It is now 
based in Saskatoon. And in recent years, months and years, we 
have struck a new arrangement with St. Paul's Hospital who are 
now staffing the air ambulance. And it is an extremely valuable 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There has been some discussion about the provision of 
helicopter service. Each time that that discussion has been 
looked it, it is concluded very quickly that helicopters are not 
appropriate service, both by virtue of their limited, their limited 
coverage in terms of the distance they can travel, the intense 
expense. 
 
We have a great system of road ambulance and we do have our 
continuing air ambulance, which there have been improvements 
in. And now in addition to those emergency services, we've 
now built the first responders program across Saskatchewan 
with literally, literally, hundreds and hundreds of people 
volunteering of their lives and time to become first responders. 
I'm told that the total now has reached 1,200 first responders 
across the province. 
 
We're beginning to look at the importance of communication 
for emergency services. I was very happy to announce just a 
couple of weeks ago two pilot projects, one in the north-west of 
the province, one in the south-west of the province, in terms of 
the ambulance and emergency personnel communication using 
the newest technology from SaskTel called Fleet Net. 
Emergency services are key to our security, no matter where we 
live in Saskatchewan. And we're working hard to ensure that we 
have the best emergency services that we can provide. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, this question comes from M. 
Parchewsky from Saskatoon: I want to know how the Saskatoon 
Health Board is allowed to spend $5 million to renovate the old 
portion of the Royal University Hospital to accommodate 
moving maternity services. The west side public deserves to 
have these services remain at St. Paul's Hospital. More 
seriously, in these economic times, how can they justify this 
kind of expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I am well aware that the 
Saskatoon District Board studied all of the issues around 
provision of services, of acute care services, including maternity 
and emergency and the various services desired and  

needed by the people of Saskatoon. I think that question is 
better directed to the Saskatoon District Board who I know have 
done a fair bit of public education around these issues but 
could, I'm sure, provide complete and detailed explanations to 
the individual. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, could you allow me one more "Mr. 
Premier I want to know"? This is the last one I have here. It 
comes from P.J. Lakeman from Regina. 
 
I want to know, if Saskatchewan has such a good health care 
program, why do I have to take my son to Alberta in order to 
have proper care? My son has neurofibromatosis, I believe is 
how the word is pronounced. I was not only talked down to but 
I also failed to get an accurate diagnosis in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think all that I can say in this regard, 
because it is an individual case and it sounds like a clinical 
issue, that we'll just have to look into it and try and get back to 
the individual. Thanks, Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, I would ask that 
the minister please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Directly behind 
me is Jeff Parr; to his right is Graham Mitchell. To my left, in 
the front row, is Janis Rathwell; and to my right is Brian King, 
the deputy minister of Labour. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials. I'm not the normal critic, Mr. 
Chairman, on labour issues, but have a number of things which 
I wish to ask the minister about today in consideration of his 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier today I raised an issue in the Assembly 
dealing with the rights of individuals to have a vote pertaining 
to union certification and have received some considerable 
correspondence and phone calls from individuals working at 
Brown Industries at Drinkwater, Saskatchewan, who are very 
unhappy with the way that the Labour Relations Board has 
implemented union certification there through the retail, 
wholesale workers' union. And they have provided a list of 
names. In fact, 56 out of 81 in-scope employees . . . people 
have been unionized, and they are quite upset with the way that 
they've been handled. 
 
And I guess the basic point is here, as you were warned and 
others in your government during changes to The Trade Union 
Act last year, that this is what would happen when people were  



May 12, 1995 

 
2202 

denied the right of a free and democratic vote, a secret ballot in 
fact, to determine what their future should be. And it seems that 
there are technicalities that have been used to make this process 
go forward. And I don't believe, Mr. Minister, that it's right and 
proper that technicalities should get in the road of people being 
able to express their free and democratic will. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, why, in the case of these employees, why 
would they be denied a secret ballot vote to determine the 
future of their working place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I point out to the hon. member that 
there's nothing unusual and nothing new about the way the 
certification occurred. It's happened in this same manner for 
many, many years in Saskatchewan under various 
administrations, so there's no change that has taken place in The 
Trade Union Act or the policy of the Labour Relations Board 
that caused this situation that you referred to as being 
something newer or something different. 
 
The Labour Relations Board determines support at the time of 
the application. In this case, over 50 per cent of the workforce 
signed cards of support. The union took those cards of support 
to the Labour Relations Board. And based on time-honoured 
traditions and policies of the board, they allowed certification 
for the particular workplace that you refer to. 
 
There are provisions that if employees who have contacted you 
obviously are concerned about this, there's a period called an 
open period in which this can be reviewed, which is 30 to 60 
days before the anniversary date of certification. And if these 
people are contacting you with concerns, that would be the 
proper process in which to proceed, so that those that are 
opposed to the certification of that particular workplace have an 
avenue of recourse. But their avenue of recourse is not the one 
that was described. In terms of the petition that they put 
forward, the Labour Relations Board in this case acted properly 
in accordance with the rules and the policy. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well my understanding, Minister, of the 
dates involved here are that that 60-day window of opportunity 
may already be gone by — that there is no opportunity for these 
people. The union applied on January 16, '95 for certification 
and then the date was set for a hearing. Mr. Minister, can you 
tell me if this situation still has an open window for people to 
make application under the current legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Yes, as I described in my first answer, 
the open period occurs, as I understand it, 30 to 60 days before 
the anniversary date of certification, so that period has not even 
arrived yet. That would be some point into the future. So yes, 
there is an avenue for those employees. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, would you think it proper that 
people were asked to sign an attendance card, and only 
afterwards were told that this wasn't an attendance card but was 
in fact a union certification card? Would you consider that to be 
a proper process? 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well that's speculation. I don't know 
whether that occurred or not. But if someone misrepresented a 
situation, I don't agree with anyone in any situation who would 
misrepresent a situation. I don't know whether this happened or 
whether it didn't happen. If there is a case of fact where 
misrepresentation has been made, I, along with all people, 
should be appalled with misrepresentation. That's what you 
describe. If in fact that was beared out, yes, I would have 
trouble with that and I would not support misrepresentation of 
facts. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, why, as I understand the 
process took place, that on the day that this particular 
certification order took place, that 10 individuals indeed 
notified the board — which clearly would have meant that there 
wasn't a majority in place — but were told that because they 
faxed in their complaint that that wasn't proper? 
 
And I am told in legal circles that a fax is considered a legal 
document. You and I as ministers have to constantly be aware 
of the fact that when we put a fax out that that indeed is our . . . 
if our signature is on it it's considered to be something we take 
very, very seriously. Why would the board not wish to accept 
something which in most areas is considered a legal document? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — My officials tell me that what you relate 
is not quite the case. The issue is not one of whether it was a 
fax or whether it was not a fax. The issue is that the petition 
arrived at a later date than the actual application had arrived. 
And I suppose the theory behind this is, if you have a petition 
which happens a good deal later than the actual application or 
leading to the certification, that it would give the parties some 
advantage, other parties a disadvantage, in terms of the due 
process of arriving at whether or not the workplace should be 
certified. 
 
I believe that in this case the Labour Relations Board acted in a 
diligent and fair manner as per the historical democratic rights 
that they would look at, as well as board policy and past cases 
that have come before the Labour Relations Board. And so I 
don't believe that the situation you described is in fact what 
transpired. The reason for the rejection was not because it was a 
fax. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Could you tell the Assembly, Mr. Minister, 
then, what time lag we're talking about here between the issue 
as you outline it? What kind of time frame are we dealing with 
here, given that you've already told the Assembly that this is not 
an automatic certification, that indeed there is a trial period and 
that there is a period of time where employees can be 
dissatisfied with the process and in fact have this process 
changed. 
 
Can you tell us what time frame, then, we're talking about here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — The only time that the Labour Relations 
Board, as I understand it, would accept a petition from workers  



May 12, 1995 

 
2203 

who do not want to be certified by the union, is in fact during 
the open period. And that period would be 30 to 60 days before 
the anniversary date of certification. And so this is, I said 
before, a period into the future whereby they can make their 
views known to the Labour Relations Board. 
 
In this case, it's been a long-accepted practice that whereby 
there are valid cards signed by more than 50 per cent of the 
employees, that the certification will in fact be granted. And 
that's exactly what happened in this case. 
 
So the recourse of the employees that you're representing here 
today by your questions, would be in that 30- to 60-day period 
before the anniversary date of certification. So if you took the 
certification date and counted into the future so that you have 
one year from the date of certification, then you count back 30 
to 60 days, that is the period in which they can have their 
objections be known by the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — That's not the question I asked you, Minister. 
I asked you, from the time that the board had made up its mind 
until this — in the view of the board — illegal petition came 
forward, I wanted to know what the time frame was. The 
employees tell me that some of them attempted on the day of 
certification to have the board notified that they were not happy 
with the process. So I think you should tell me when this 
petition came in and why it was disallowed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I understand your question more 
clearly now, but the answer is in fact the same. Unless there 
was evidence of fraud, evidence of misrepresentation, the open 
period is the only time in which the employees who do not want 
to be certified would be able to petition for decertification of 
the union. 
 
For example, the four people that I introduced here today, plus 
myself, if we all worked in one workplace, and the three 
gentlemen around me here signed cards to certify in . . . to join 
a union, and the person to my left and myself did not sign the 
cards, we have no recourse — the two of us — until such time 
as 30 to 60 days prior to the anniversary date of the 
certification. 
 
It's much like an election campaign. When you have the vote, if 
there's two people, for example, running in an election 
campaign and you get 51 per cent of the vote and I get 49 per 
cent of the vote, I have no recourse. You got the majority of the 
vote in that particular situation. 
 
In this case, very clearly, there were over 50 per cent of the 
employees signed the cards. The certification occurred. Those 
that do not want to be part of the union, their only recourse at 
this point in time under the law and the regulations and the 
rules and the time-honoured democratic process which leads to 
some of these things coming before the Labour Relations 
Board, is  that there is in fact a certification for the union to 
be in place  the only recourse those employees would have 
would be at the 30- to 60-day period prior to the anniversary 
date of certification. 

Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, you told me earlier that the 
issue wasn't of whether the fax was legal or not, that it came in 
too late, that this process couldn't be stopped, even though there 
were employees who felt that they had misrepresentation of 
what actually was going on there. 
 
Are you telling me that in that circumstance the Labour 
Relations Board would not want to get to the bottom of the 
issue of whether misrepresentation was used, particularly when 
there were all of these employees, the vast majority of them, 
signing a petition and sending it in, and they still don't care that 
people would have that much concern about what went on 
during the process? Are you saying that it wouldn't have 
mattered if it was the original that went in, that it still would be 
disallowed even though that was one of the reasons it was given 
back to these people, that because it was a fax and not the 
original? 
 
What if they'd sent the original in? Would the same process 
then be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — That's not the issue — whether it's a fax 
or whether it's an original. The time in which . . . If there's 
allegations of misrepresentation, fraud, any kind of illegalities, 
unfair labour practice, anything that might be out of the 
ordinary in terms of fair play in certification or decertification, 
those things are argued before the board at the time of 
certification. Both parties — those that want the union, those 
that don't want the union — have the opportunity to appear 
before the board and file their side of the story. The board then 
has to look at all of the evidence. The issue is, is that process 
had already passed, and I assumed that if these people want to 
do it later, they had been missed in the process somewhere. 
 
So the issue is not whether it was a photocopy or an actual 
letter. They had missed the period by which they could argue 
that there was some kind of wrongful activity took place. They 
now have the next window of opportunity to do that during the 
open period. The open period is the period from 30 to 60 days 
prior to the anniversary date of certification. So the fax or the 
original is not the issue here. There's some misunderstanding in 
this somewhere. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Minister, that's what these people 
were told. They were clearly told that. Mr. McLaren was clearly 
told that by someone at the board. Now why would they throw 
that . . . If that's a red herring . . . if that's what you're telling the 
Assembly, that's strictly a red herring. Why would somebody 
over there do that? That doesn't make any sense to me, that they 
would say to the employees, well you sent in a fax. You didn't 
send the original; therefore your petition's invalid. Why would 
that red herring be used? 
 
I mean as I understand the process. You have the ability now to 
impose the first contract. Before this process ever gets to where 
you say it has to go, you're going to let this union, using 
whatever tactics they want, go through that workplace for the 
next 10 months. You're going to impose a settlement if one 
can't be reached mutually. And then after all of this transpires,  



May 12, 1995 

 
2204 

then you say, well folks, on the petition, have you still got the 
courage? Have you still got the will to stand up? 
 
And even then at the end of the day, they aren't going to get a 
secret ballot. They aren't going to have it set up so they can 
walk into a polling station and cast their ballot as the people do 
when they elect you and I. After all of this is done, you'll still 
find some way to thwart the process. Mr. Minister, why would 
someone over there tell them then that their fax wasn't the 
original, and that's why they were disallowed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I would like you to provide me 
with that evidence. And if someone at the Labour Relations 
Board in fact told those employees what you say was told to 
them, then I would take action on that because at the Labour 
Relations Board . . . it's a quasi-judicial body. It's inappropriate 
for politicians to intervene directly in cases. But if someone is 
not following due process — the Labour Relations Board — or 
giving inaccurate information, you provide me with the 
evidence that you say you have, and I will investigate and report 
back to you. 
 
So if you've got some evidences to that, please provide that to 
me. Send over the copies by the page, and I'll look into it. And 
if someone misrepresented something from our side on the 
Labour Relations Board, I'll deal with that. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, I'm going to get back to the 
individuals who have contacted myself and others over this 
issue, and they did not provide me with any correspondence that 
says that to the effect. And I'm going to ask them if they have 
correspondence to that effect or who they were talking to that 
verbally told them that because if this is a non-issue totally, 
then it had better not have been raised as an issue with these 
individuals because I would consider that very serious if this 
has nothing to do with the process. 
 
But I go back to the premiss, Mr. Minister, that we made to you 
and to others during the course of this debate, that nowhere in 
this process do we ever have the opportunity for people to vote, 
that we simply can have cards or pieces of paper signed by 
individuals on the work floor, that those cards . . . 
 
And I go back to the fact that a lot of people . . . when they first 
go into a large workplace, if you're the new guy on the block, 
the low guy on the totem-pole. You've never had a job before 
perhaps. You go into this situation. Somebody says, hey, you 
going to be one of the boys; you better sign one of these. And 
they don't have the experience. They don't have the forethought 
to think about what is going on. When they do, it appears that 
it's too late, that they are now lumped in. And they said that for 
the next ten months before you have an opportunity to review, 
you're going to have to live with these people. You're going to 
have to work with them. You're going to have to be in the mix 
with them doing whatever. And if you've got people in there 
that are on an agenda of union certification, they are going to 
make it very difficult. And people all around this province are  

starting to see the implications of the proposals of this 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I don't know why the minister, this one and 
the past one who likes to chirp from his seat every once in 
awhile, would not want to have workers exercise a vote, a free 
and democratic vote, on these issues rather than going through 
this process which seems to have all sorts of pitfalls in it for 
people that want to express their free and democratic rights. 
 
In this case we have clearly got names on petitions, 56 out of 
81. In my view that would be a very nice majority if I were 
running for an election. I'm sure the member from North 
Battleford would agree that would be a nice, healthy majority . . 
. Not afraid of having those names put before this Legislative 
Assembly, not at all, not afraid that their name is here saying 
. . . And I'll read the petition to the minister: 
 
 Petition for the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board 

as per letter. We, the undersigned, present this petition 
for your consideration as a show of non-support for the 
union certification. Based on this petition and the 
afore-submitted letter, it is our hope that you will grant 
us a vote. In a fair and democratic society, everyone is 
given a chance to let their voice be heard. 

 
That's the petition. That to me, Mr. Minister, strikes at the very 
basics of our society. They're not hiding. They're not weaselling. 
They're not asking for something that is foreign to this province 
or to this country. And yet they run up against a brick wall of 
you and your government and your legislation and your 
pro-union bent. What is wrong with these people, is what I ask 
you. They cover every walk of life. What is wrong with their 
wish? What is so terrible about this? In the eyes of anyone in 
this province, what is so terrible about a petition like that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — I guess what's wrong with those people 
is that they come to you to misrepresent the facts. And I have 
nothing other than that. I think these are likely all great 
individuals. What's wrong with them that they would think it 
necessary to come to you, so you can misrepresent the facts of 
the situation here on the floor of the legislature like you 
misrepresent other facts on the floor of the legislature 
 
There's nothing different about this situation than when you, sir, 
were sitting around the cabinet table in the administration 
previous to this government. Nothing is different. 
 
You say you have 56 of 81 signatures on a petition? Is that what 
you said? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's what it adds up to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Okay, 56 of 81. I maintain to you that 
when the cards were signed for certification, there was in 
excess of 50 per cent at that time. 
 
I'll tell you what happens in some of those petitions like that . . .  



May 12, 1995 

 
2205 

is that the cards for certification are signed with some degree of 
privacy. When some people find out that there has been enough 
signed for certification, that's where the coercion happens . . . is 
when they go around and coerce employees by peer pressure 
and other means to sign the petition. And that's why the petition 
came in later than the certification because they didn't have that 
evidence at the time of the hearing . . . is what I would assert to 
you. So you, misrepresenter of the facts, that's what you are. 
That's what you are. 
 
And by the way, there is a system to provide a vote. In cases 
where there's between 25 per cent and 50 per cent of people 
who signed cards, the Labour Relations Board will order a vote. 
 
In this case, quite clearly the board determined that over 50 per 
cent of the people signed cards for certification. Now I don't 
know how much longer it was later the petition got going, but it 
looks to me that somebody — either an employer or an 
employee — said we don't want a union involved in here even 
though the majority of the employees wanted it. They then 
would have gone around and got likely the most right wing of 
the employees they could find to go around and coerce the other 
employees that maybe did or did not sign a card, and people 
would be scared to tell the employer that they signed a card for 
certification. 
 
And that's why something like that objection has to be filed at 
the time of the hearing before the Labour Relations Board so 
that people who want to have the free choice of whether to join 
a union or not join a union can't be harassed into signing 
petitions through coercion of threats of losing their jobs. That's 
why the process is like it is. 
 
That's been the process for many, many years. It was the 
process under the Progressive Conservative administration from 
1982 until 1991. It was the process under the Blakeney 
administration previous to that. It was the process under the 
Ross Thatcher administration previous to that. 
 
And don't you come here before the legislature and try and beat 
on the working men and women of this province for your own 
personal gain in a way that you misrepresent the facts to the 
public through this democratic Legislative Assembly. Shame on 
you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:54 p.m. 
 
 


