






















































Februrary 28, 1995 Hansard Evening


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 28, 1995 

 

 
531 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Opposition to Gun Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to 
be able to rise today and speak on this motion. I'll be moving 
the following motion at the end of my address, and it reads: 
 
 That this Assembly transcend party lines and join 

together in demanding the federal government 
immediately withdraw Bill C-68, Firearms Act, which 
will effectively impose a costly and unnecessary 
national firearms registry that will have no effect on 
controlling violent crimes in Canada, that impinges on 
areas of exclusive provincial jurisdiction, and 
transcends the tradition of property ownership in 
Canada being inviolate of confiscation without 
compensation; and further, that this Assembly urge the 
Minister of Justice to submit a presentation to the 
Standing Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs 
reaffirming the Assembly's united opposition to this 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I stand here today both as a hunter and as a 
shooter. And like the many people, the thousands of people 
from across this province that have attended rallies, that have 
written letters, that have made the phone calls into the open line 
shows . . . They too are hunters, shooters, and in opposition to 
Allan Rock and his Liberal gun control initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole initiative has a long history. It goes 
back to 1975 under Pierre Elliott Trudeau and Warren Allmand 
when they brought in gun legislation at that time that tried to do 
exactly the same things, Mr. Speaker, that Allan Rock is trying 
to do today. At that time the firearms owners of Canada said no, 
we are not prepared to accept this. And the government of the 
day backed off some — not all the way, but they did back off. 
 
In 1991, Mr. Speaker, Kim Campbell, as the Justice minister of 
the day, tried to bring in more gun legislation. Again the 
firearms owners said no, Mr. Speaker, we don't want this; it's 
not needed. And yes, Mr. Speaker, members of this caucus, of 
the same political party as Kim Campbell, opposed that 
legislation. 
 
And what do we see today, 1995, 20 years later from Pierre 
Trudeau and Warren Allmand? Again we see Jean Chrétien, 
Allan Rock and the liberals doing exactly the same things, Mr. 
Speaker, again bringing in gun control. 
 
We had another example in this House today. Under Trudeau 
and Jean-Luc Pepin, they started the dismantling of the Crow 
and today they completed it, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday they totally 
eliminated it. It's the carrying forward of Pierre Elliott Trudeau's 
agenda, Mr. Speaker. They've done it now with the Crow and 
they're doing it with firearms. I fought that legislation  

in '75, I fought Kim Campbell's legislation in '91, and I continue 
to fight this today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it's very interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, what has 
happened with the members in this House on this particular 
issue. We've debated this issue in the House before. Last spring 
the Leader of the Third Party attended her national convention 
in Ottawa and, when interviewed on returning from that 
convention where they had passed a motion reaffirming their 
commitment to more gun control, she told the newspapers that 
she was in favour of tougher gun control. That was her 
statement. But then when she got out and about in 
Saskatchewan, she found out perhaps the politics wasn't on the 
same side as her statement, so she flip-flopped, Mr. Speaker. 
She changed her tune on that particular issue because she knew 
it was not an issue that the Saskatchewan people were prepared 
to buy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the government members, 
have traditionally been in favour of gun control. Their national 
party continues to be in favour of gun control, although I notice 
that some of their federal MPs (Member of Parliament) in 
Saskatchewan are coming forward and saying that Allan Rock's 
proposals are wrong. But the members opposite, on our motions 
in the House last spring, did stand up and vote with us, Mr. 
Speaker. They changed the motions, but they did vote against 
Allan Rock's initiatives and we're glad that they have joined us 
in that. 
 
I'd like to talk about the rallies that have gone on around the 
province, Mr. Speaker. I have personally had the opportunity to 
attend eight or nine of those rallies. In those rallies that I have 
attended, three times there has been federal MPs there from the 
Liberal Party. They were non-existent at the other rallies. And 
in fact they have been non-existent at most of the rallies. And 
the same can be said for the members of the provincial Liberal 
Party. At only two of the rallies which I have attended have they 
been in place, have they stood up and commented. The rest of 
the time they have avoided the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are two particular issues I'd like to deal with on this 
motion, Mr. Speaker, that affect the people — the firearms 
owners of Saskatchewan. And the first is registration. Allan 
Rock states that the need for registration is to control crime, to 
control smuggling, and to prevent family violence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the honest, law-abiding people of 
Saskatchewan, of Canada, are the ones that will register their 
firearms. It's not the criminals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to smuggling, the federal 
government could not stop cigarette smuggling. They gave up 
on it. They said, sorry, we can't do anything about it; we quit. 
 
They can't stop the smuggling of drugs, Mr. Speaker. If they 
could, we wouldn't have any in Canada. But all you have to do 
is ask the police and they'll tell you that there are a lot of drugs,  



February 28, 1995 

 
532 

and the federal government can't stop them. I live along the 
U.S. border, Mr. Speaker, and anybody who wants to smuggle, 
it's not a great deal of difficulty. So the idea that registration 
will stop smuggling, Mr. Speaker, is a fallacy. 
 
And family violence — Mr. Speaker, someone who has that 
urge upon them, that wants to commit violence in a family 
setting, does not stop to consider whether or not the implement 
that they use is registered. They simply grab whatever is handy 
and do whatever deed it is that they wish to do. And the fact 
that a firearm may or may not be registered will have no impact 
on that, any more than registering the baseball bats would have 
an impact on that, Mr. Speaker. So all three — crime, 
smuggling, and violence — are not going to be impacted to any 
great extent by registration. 
 
Then we come to the consideration that the media — mainly 
from eastern Canada — believes that all those who are opposed 
to this particular piece of legislation are somehow, as one 
journalist put it, gun lobby jokers, Mr. Speaker. They believe 
that we're being hysterical about it, and that's confiscation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, under the legislation as it's currently 
outlined, the federal government is already confiscating 
533,000 legally owned and legally registered handguns in this 
country. They've said that anything of a .25 calibre, a .32 
calibre, or a barrel length less than 4.14 will now be prohibited 
and banned. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when all of this became news, Mr. Rock got 
a few phone calls from the Olympic group — the people who 
shoot in the Olympics — because their handguns are .32 
calibre. So Mr. Rock said, well gee, you know, we can't stop the 
lady from Winnipeg who just won the gold medal from 
shooting so we'll make a special exemption for people who are 
in the Olympic program, that they can retain their handguns. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my question has to be: how does anybody 
get into the Olympic program down the road if they're not 
allowed to have those handguns with which to shoot in the first 
place? So that means that we'll have an Olympic shooting team 
for the next Olympics, but after that they're gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one other part of the confiscation of those 
533,000 guns deals with cheaply made. Well some of these .32 
calibres — and my neighbour has one — is over $2,000. 
They're not cheap unless Allan Rock has a different idea of 
what cheap is than most of the people of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe it's very important that the federal 
members of Saskatchewan, each and every one of them, that the 
members of this House, each and every one of them, be held 
accountable both for what they say and for what they do in this 
particular piece of legislation. I think it's very important that the 
public, who is interested. in this issue, be very careful in 
looking at the Hansard of what people said, and in particular, 
Mr. Speaker, on how they vote. Because how they vote is going 
to tell the firearms community who their friends are and who 
are those who are not their friends. 
 

And you might believe that this is just people in the legislature 
that are concerned about this. Well we have received quite a 
large number of letters, cards, phone calls of people who are 
very concerned about this. And I have a letter from one here, 
from my own constituency, Bob and Coleen Bennett of Arcola. 
And their response is: no more gun laws. Enforce the existing 
laws, stop the gun-related plea bargains and quit harassing the 
law-abiding gun owner and high-taxed citizen. It is absurd to 
think that registering guns will stop violence. That is like 
thinking that registering bottles of alcohol will stop drunk 
drivers. 
 
And Mr. and Mrs. Bennett are right. It will have no more effect 
than that. So, Mr. Speaker, I know that I have a time limit on 
this so I would like to move my motion at the present time. But 
I would implore the House to support this motion and to send a 
very firm message to Allan Rock that we in Saskatchewan do 
not support his legislation and we see no useful benefit to it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Rosthern: 
 
 That this Assembly transcend party lines and join 

together in demanding the federal government 
immediately withdraw Bill C-68, Firearms Act, which 
will effectively impose a costly and unnecessary 
national firearms registry that will have no effect on 
controlling violent crimes in Canada, that impinges on 
areas of exclusive provincial jurisdiction, and 
transcends the tradition of property ownership in 
Canada being inviolate of confiscation without 
compensation; and further, that this Assembly urge the 
Minister of Justice to submit a presentation to the 
Standing Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs 
reaffirming the Assembly's united opposition to this 
legislation. 

 
I so move. 
 
(1915) 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased this evening to join with my colleagues in voicing my 
opposition to the proposed gun control legislation being 
considered by the federal government. As Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party, I have made it clear to Minister 
Rock in my correspondence, in every conversation and meeting 
that I've had with him, including my call to him a week ago, 
that I do not support this Bill, that my caucus does not support 
his Bill, that the provincial Liberal candidates do not support 
his Bill, that the policy convention of the Saskatchewan Liberal 
Party does not support his Bill, that members of this Assembly 
do not support his Bill, and that thousands of law-abiding 
citizens in the province of Saskatchewan do not support his 
Bill. 
 
I have been crystal clear with the minister, with the Prime 
Minister, the Saskatchewan minister, the federal caucus Chair 
and all members of the Saskatchewan federal Liberal caucus.  



February 28, 1995 

 
533 

The Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party and her 
provincial caucus are not only opposed to this legislation, but I 
am angry at the apparent unwillingness of the Minister of 
Justice, Allan Rock, to listen with an open mind to the logical 
and rational arguments being made. 
 
Today I join in the debate in this Assembly to urge the federal 
government to abandon its plan to legislate the registration 
system for firearms proposed under Bill C-17. 
 
I oppose the idea and the suggestion that possession of 
certificates and registration of firearms will reduce crime, and I 
do not support the legislation that embodies this idea. Whatever 
good intentions may have led to the introduction of this Bill, 
whatever belief the federal minister may have had that this 
legislation would create a safer society, it simply is not 
supported by fact. Therefore I have urged the minister, on 
numerous occasions that I've had to speak with him, to abandon 
this legislation. 
 
Regrettably the minister does not appear to be hearing what I or 
tens of thousands of others across the country, including 
members of this Assembly, have to say. He may be listening but 
he is most definitely not hearing the message. That is truly 
unfortunate. 
 
It is also unfortunate that politics is such today that any 
politician who reconsiders a position, who evaluates an issue 
and changes his or her mind, is condemned for a lack of 
principle — condemned for being open-minded and willing to 
listen to people and willing to show movement on an issue. 
 
The first time I heard of this legislation was following the 
Ottawa Liberal convention. And I did not hear the debate nor 
did I vote for or against the proposal in Ottawa because I was 
involved with other important discussions at the time. 
 
Upon my return, a member of the media stopped me in the 
rotunda, and I must admit took me by some surprise in asking 
me whether I favoured gun control. Of course there had been no 
legislation put forward at that time and I said what I believed, 
with limited knowledge of the details of the issue. I stated that I 
would be willing to support legislation that would make our 
society a safer place to live. I'm grateful to those who later 
provided information about this issue that helped to clarify what 
is in fact doable and what is not, when it comes to control of 
firearms and its relationship to crime. 
 
Allan Rock's gun law does focus on punishing people who use 
guns to commit crimes. It does focus on the influx of illegal 
weapons into Canada. But what I cannot understand is why the 
federal minister believes that firearms registration will have any 
effect on reducing crime or deterring criminal activity. He 
cannot make the argument because in my opinion there is very 
little evidence to support his claims. 
 
The federal minister continues to argue that somehow the 
suicides and accidental shootings that have taken place in 
Canada will be prevented if guns are registered. 

He said in a Leader-Post interview on January 30, and I quote: 
If firearms are properly stored, there will be fewer tragic deaths. 
Since 1970, 475 children have been blown away through 
accidents with firearms. Safe storage is the answer to that 
plainly, and if registration can help us with that, let's do it. End 
of quote. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker . . . the minister said, if registration can help to 
promote safe storage of guns, then let's do it. 
 
Well what evidence do we have to connect registration with 
safe storage of guns? What evidence do we have that the 19 
children on average who have died every year in a country with 
more than a million times that population would be any safer 
with registered guns than unregistered guns? 
 
I suggest that there is no evidence and that the minister is 
scraping the bottom of the barrel for statistics to support his 
argument. And the statistics he is finding are simply 
inconclusive and should not be used to justify legislation that 
will be both expensive and unnecessary, never mind totally 
ineffective at producing the results the federal minister is 
aiming for. The legislation being proposed by Minister Rock 
focuses on the average, law-abiding gun owner who is no threat 
to society, no more threat than anyone in this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I'm absolutely opposed to the proposals that Justice Minister 
Rock . . . by him, and I believe that he could do the people of 
Canada a great service, greatly restore people's faith, by saying: 
I was wrong; I will withdraw this Bill. But, fellow colleagues, I 
know that the chances of this happening grow less each time the 
minister defends his proposal to cheering crowds of people 
from large cities who have no concept of the role that firearms 
plays in the lives of Saskatchewan people. 
 
The people who have encouraged the minister to bring this 
forward do not understand that this legislation will not have any 
impact on criminals whatsoever. A criminal, determined to 
commit an armed robbery or a murder, will be no more deterred 
by gun registration than he will be by the speed limit if he flees 
the scene of a crime. 
 
Every law-abiding citizen who owns a gun will be asked to 
make personal sacrifice of both money as well as a part of their 
rights and freedoms just to satisfy a misguided urge on the part 
of the federal minister. At the end of the day, a criminal will 
beg, borrow, or steal whatever weapon he needs to break the 
law. An individual prone to violence will reach just as quickly 
for a registered gun as he or she will for an unregistered gun in 
the midst of a heated argument. An individual distressed or 
depressed enough to contemplate suicide will give little thought 
to whether they end their life with a registered or an 
unregistered weapon. 
 
So what is the point, we ask Mr. Rock. I, like many thousands 
to whom I have spoken at gun rallies, simply want to know, 
what is the point of all of this? If the government is concerned 
about crime and safety, then I say use the power that exists  



February 28, 1995 

 
534 

within the Criminal Code to throw the book at criminals who 
use firearms in the commission of crimes. But this legislation 
seeks to overhaul the engine of a system which only has a flat 
tire. It is expensive, unnecessary, and at the end of the day the 
tire will still be flat. As I said earlier, even if every law-abiding 
gun owner registered those guns, I have no evidence to 
convince me that there would be any positive effect on the 
number of crimes committed in Saskatchewan, or the amount of 
violent crime committed, or on the number of gun related 
deaths. 
 
So why would we do this? I agree with former provincial 
minister of Justice Mitchell when I say that the burden of proof 
is on the federal Minister of Justice. If he believes this 
legislation will have some effect, it is his responsibility to offer 
some proof, to demonstrate in some way that the solution he 
proposes actually fixes some problem in a tangible and 
identifiable way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation threatens the rights of law-abiding 
Saskatchewan people. There are the hunters and sportsmen who 
trampled bush near Nipawin in search of a little girl who went 
missing. These are the farmers with the healthy respect for gun 
safety who protect their livestock by using the safe and careful 
marksmanship required in gun clubs, in cadets, and in applying 
the common sense and respect for firearms that has been passed 
down from generation to generation. 
 
The very people who understand the power and responsibility 
that comes with owning a firearm are being sought out, 
tattooed, and branded potential criminals by the Justice 
department of our nation, while the criminals who flaunt the 
law, who defy the rules and regulations, the criminals who see 
weapons as instruments of fear and intimidation, would be no 
less a threat if this legislation were to pass than they are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I join with my colleagues in this Assembly, with 
the petitioners, and with the tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 
citizens, to clearly and unequivocally oppose the changes to Bill 
C-17 which would require the registration of firearms, and I 
urge the federal government to withdraw this legislation. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to be able to enter into this debate tonight on this very 
important subject. 
 
It is a subject of course that has been on my mind and high on 
my agenda for quite some time now. I've attended, over the past 
six or eight months, dozens, dozens of meetings all across 
Saskatchewan. Some of the people who are in this legislature 
tonight were present at those meetings; members of the 
Conservative caucus who were there and who spoke, and from 
time to time a representative of the Liberal Party. I remember 
one night in Carlyle where a Liberal Member of Parliament 
actually got up, Mr. Speaker, and took exception to Allan 
Rock's package and that was quite a moment, and very, very 
significant. 
 
I was very pleased to hear the Leader of the Liberal Party take  

the position that she took tonight. I will tell her that the folks 
out there that I've been meeting with over the last few months 
were not so sure where she stood. They remembered her press 
conference, or her press statement that she referred to in her 
remarks a bit earlier, where she indicated support of the Rock 
package. And I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, that the impression 
among the hunters and the shooters in this province is that that 
is the position of the provincial Liberal Party. 
 
Now I know that following a gun meeting in Humboldt she 
altered that position or made statements to that effect, but the 
fact that she was so silent over the summer, over the fall, and 
over the winter on the subject was noticed by the hunters and by 
the shooters. And it's refreshing . . . or it's a relief that she 
comes out tonight, in no uncertain terms, to support the position 
that all of us on this side of the House, and the Conservative 
Party, have taken with respect to this issue. 
 
This has been a most perplexing debate. Perplexing because the 
federal Minister of Justice has been so inflexible with respect to 
his proposals and has just refused to move and has refused to 
listen to any logical arguments against his package. 
 
Indeed, it doesn't even seem to bother him that he's not able to 
draw the connection which the Leader of the Liberal Party has 
referred to — the connection between gun registration on the 
one hand and the crime rate or safer homes or safer 
communities on the other. He can't draw the connection. He 
doesn't even seriously try to draw the connection. He simply is 
going to barge ahead with this and do it, no matter what. 
 
I made this proposal to him, Mr. Speaker, beginning last 
August, in a letter and subsequently to his face and in public 
meetings that have been reported. 
 
I have said to him, just stop for a moment. We in the West 
believe that you're on the wrong track. You don't know that 
you're on the right track. And I said to him, stop for a moment 
now and let's do an evaluation of all of the gun law that we 
have in this country -- and we have a lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a lot of gun law on the books. Let's do an evaluation 
of that law and see whether it does any good. Let's do an 
evaluation to see whether we're on the right track, because we 
in western Canada do not believe that we're on the right track 
with respect to this question of gun control. 
 
I can tell you on the basis of the tremendous amount of 
consultation I have had on this that the people in this province 
do not believe for a moment that we're on the right track with 
the gun legislation that we already have. Now we've swallowed 
it. As the mover of this motion said, we've swallowed it. We 
swallowed it in the '70s with great reluctance; we swallowed it 
again in 1991 with great reluctance. 
 
We knew at that time that the law wasn't going to make a bit of 
difference to the crime rate in this country. It wasn't going to 
make anybody safer in their homes. It wasn't going to make our 
communities any safer. But that was the will of parliament and  



February 28, 1995 

 
535 

we swallowed our objections and we complied with that law. 
And now we've said, enough; just enough already. Stop. 
 
Before we go any further down this wrong track, let's try and be 
sensible and logical and a bit scientific about this. Let's see 
whether we're on the right track. Now he's rebuffed that. He has 
refused to do that kind of an evaluation, and it's not just my 
request or the government's request or the community's request 
 and he's had lots of those  this suggestion comes from the 
Auditor General of Canada, included in his report in 1994, and 
that was just brushed aside by the federal Minister of Justice. 
 
In essence, Mr. Speaker, in essence this is a sham. This is a 
classic case of a government taking a complex problem, 
purporting to reduce it to some simple proposition — some 
simple proposition — and then attack that proposition, 
pretending thereby to attack the whole problem. So they say we 
got to do something about crime. We got to make our 
community safer and our people more secure. 
 
(1930) 
 
What's the problem? The problem is we don't have enough gun 
control. That's the problem. If we had better gun control we 
wouldn't have so much crime. And that's the reasoning of the 
federal government and their solution is to come with this 
package and to thereby give Canadians the impression that 
they're really doing something about crime, that they're really 
doing something that's going to make people safer in their 
homes and safer in their community. 
 
And it's a sham, Mr. Speaker. The federal government hasn't got 
a scrap of evidence to show that there's any connection at all 
between what they're proposing in their Bill C-68 and the crime 
rate, or the safety of individuals or communities in this country. 
 
Now Rock — he's well-named by the way; he's well-named  
Rock has purported to do a big consultation across the country 
last summer. He was in Saskatchewan for a day and a half, two 
days, something like that; talked to the gun groups; got just 
shellacked during the time he was here. He had the gall to say, 
when that was all over, that he'd done a consultation, and he 
picked up the idea that people resented these laws going into 
the Criminal Code, and he wants to respond to that concern. I 
mean this is really a joke. And so he comes with this Bill, not in 
the Criminal Code but a separate piece of legislation, an Act 
respecting firearms and other weapons, and says: look, have I 
responded to your concerns or have I responded. It's not in the 
Criminal Code. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it may not be in the Criminal Code, but let 
me refer you to section 92 of that Act which provides for the 
offences and the punishment that will follow if you don't 
comply with this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you don't have a licence to possess a weapon, or 
if you haven't registered the weapon, you are, on a first offence, 
liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years. Now  

that's a pretty stiff little penalty. But it gets worse. If by chance 
you have a second offence, not only is your maximum 10 years 
but your minimum is 1 year. You go to jail for at least a year. 
And on a third offence you go to jail for at least 2 years for 
failing to register your weapon — your .22, your .12 gauge 
shotgun which has been in the family for three generations. 
That's the kind of a law that the federal government is 
proposing; not in the Criminal Code. Who cares where it is. 
With this kind of Draconian kind of penalties attached to these 
requirements, it may as well be in the Criminal Code. So Rock's 
consultation has come to nothing at all. 
 
I want to — before my time expires, Mr. Speaker — propose to 
the House an amendment to the motion, which I think will be 
found to be a friendly amendment. I move, seconded by the 
member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 
 That all the words after the word "Canada" be deleted 

and the following be substituted therefor: 
 
 That this Assembly send an all-party delegation to make 

representation to the Standing Committee on Justice and 
Legal Affairs outlining this Assembly's intense 
opposition to the proposed firearms registry; and 
further, following the adoption of this motion that Mr. 
Speaker forward to the federal Minister of Justice a 
copy of this resolution with the relevant transcripts from 
today's proceedings. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
speak for a few moments on this motion, Mr. Speaker, because 
I do believe that there are other members that have a few brief 
remarks as well to make. 
 
I was very interested to hear the remarks from the Leader of the 
Liberal Party because I've just been looking at some of the 
remarks that she had made in the past and I thought it was quite 
wise of her to clarify a few things. 
 
Here I have before me an article in the sixth day of the eighth 
month of '94, Leader-Post, written by Mark Wyatt, who 
reported on her saying that over the past month, Liberal leader 
Lynda Haverstock has gone from welcoming stricter gun 
controls to rejecting any requirement for change. And then in a 
later article, once again Mark Wyatt indicates, and this was on 
the 17th of the fifth month of '94, saying that the Liberal leader 
says she supports tougher laws to prevent gun ownership from 
becoming a way of life in Canada — I think what we should be 
doing is ensuring that there's less and less availability to having 
guns. Well will the real Liberal leader please stand up. I hope 
that you stand by your remarks of today, Madam Leader of the 
Liberal Party. 
 
But the real reason for me to stand up here today, Mr. Speaker, 
is to make a few remarks on behalf of first nations people and  



February 28, 1995 

 
536 

Metis people and Northerners in northern Saskatchewan. In that 
part of the country it still is very much a way of life to have a 
gun around the household, and used readily, and almost on a 
daily — if not a daily, then a weekly — basis. There, it's 
youngsters in that part of our country are quite often taught to 
be providers, and at a young age will go out and learn with a 
parent how to properly use a gun in the way of providing for 
food. And this is done very much as a gardener, in very much of 
a fashion as a gardener is sometimes taught to use a hoe or a 
spade. It's just one of those things that is done naturally, and 
there is no fear of guns whatsoever, and it's regarded as a tool 
which you have to learn to use properly. 
 
The first nations of Saskatchewan have taken a very strong 
stand on this. They have said that it really speaks against their 
treaty rights to allow them to harvest animals, to hunt for food. 
They've also mentioned that in many cases some of the people 
would completely fail a firearms certificate test, not because 
they don't know how to use a gun but because of the testing 
methods that are used . . . completely biased firearms certificate 
test which would be culturally biased, and this would mean that 
they would end up breaking the law. So by passing this law, 
you'd end up making a whole portion of our society . . . in 
turning them into criminals. It's just something that, I think, that 
should be avoided. What'll happen then, Mr. Speaker, is 
because a lot of first nations and Metis people will end up 
breaking the law should this law be passed at the federal level, 
it'll simply add to the burden, the justice burden, of our 
lawmakers and our law keepers and put an intense pressure on 
prisons. And for what? For something that was caused by 
people thinking about only their portion of Canada that they're 
trying to respond to rather than thinking of the entire nation and 
people who make up our great nation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it's very important that this 
message get to Mr. Rock. I want to mention also that the costs 
of this, I think, are rather prohibitive. It's been estimated to cost 
the nation anywhere from 600 million to a billion dollars. On 
this very day, the day after the budget, we saw them pulling out 
the Crow rate which is worth a couple of billion a year and 
they're going to pay the Saskatchewan farmers 1.6 billion. And 
what are they going to do with that money? Looks like they're 
going to use it to register guns. I think the rallying cry around 
Saskatchewan will be very much, Mr. Speaker, is to keep the 
Crow and to let Allan Rock go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will stop with that, because I know that there are 
other people that want to make remarks as well. And I urge 
everybody in this Assembly to vote for this amendment and for 
this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure also to participate this afternoon in the . . . or 
this evening in the debate that we're having. 
 
And in my lifetime as a politician I have not really previously 
experienced the kinds of emotions that this debate has  

triggered, not only in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, but 
wildlife banquets that I go to, and rallies that I go to, and calls 
that I get. 
 
There are a great deal of very upset people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I guess one of the reasons for that is 
because what we're talking about is very fundamental to the 
fabric of Saskatchewan way of life. And I think they resent 
having this way of life being threatened by an outsider who 
does not understand the thinking and the philosophy, the 
reasoning of people in the Prairies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we had further evidence of that in the Crow 
debate for example. We lamented this afternoon the demise of 
the Crow. But I'm going to suggest to members of the House 
that following Mr. Rock's implementation, we're going to have 
a lot of crows in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, simply because 
we won't have any guns left to shoot any of the other birds that 
are around. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the situation is that we are experiencing — as 
the member from Carlton Prince Albert has already indicated — 
a complete flip-flop as far as our own particular stand on . . . 
the Liberal leader is concerned at the provincial level. 
 
Because I too remember Mark Wyatt writing about those 
instances. And I too remember her strategy in trying to say, well 
he was wrong. He has apologized to me. Mark tells me, no, 
that's not the case. He has never made any apology because 
what he wrote was true. That was the Liberal leader's stance 
when she got off the plane following the Liberal convention. 
 
And it behoves very poorly of an individual who wants to 
become the premier of this province to make ad hoc statements 
like that without fully knowing and understanding and 
appreciating the consequences of making statements like that. 
You cannot run off by making mistaken statements like that. So 
I was really amazed at the rationalization that she put forward in 
a very well-written speech, by the way, that you read off there, 
and I think this time you may have been keeping on track what 
your present-day situation is calling for. 
 
You had further evidence of that this afternoon again during the 
Crow debate this afternoon, where yesterday you were saying, 
Madam Leader of the Liberal Party, that it was a fair budget. It 
was a fair budget. All regions were treated similarly. Today 
you're saying, well I did a little bit more research and I find that 
it may not be. Because I made a motion this afternoon that was 
unanimously approved by this House which stated that that 
budget was grossly unfair, and you voted in favour of that kind 
of motion. So it does tend to give a little bit of less credence to 
the position of people when they flip-flop depending on what 
day it is and which way the wind is blowing. 
 
(1945) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to get precisely to the issue at hand here, this 
isn't in my opinion, a big city problem; it's an eastern problem 
although Vancouver may be thrown into that situation as well. 



February 28, 1995 

 
537 

Mr. Speaker, gun control is not synonymous with crime control, 
and I think that's where Mr. Rock's logic breaks down. There is 
no support for that position. There are no statistics that can be 
read that proves that this gun control will actually reduce crime. 
So if it does not reduce crime, why would you have the 
punishment included in the Criminal Code and make it a 
criminal offence not to register your guns? I suggest to you, and 
I suggest to the members of this House, that we're talking 
politics — pure, simple, crass politics. End of story; that's 
where we're at. 
 
We already have gun laws that are tough enough. I think 
everybody will attest to that. Just like in a hockey rink, we've 
got good, tough controls in the rules. All we have to do is 
enforce them. All we have is supply the tools for the police 
officers to make sure that the laws are in fact upheld and that 
there are the resources available for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the FACs (firearms acquisition certificate), I 
know, that we're dealing with now were written and drawn up 
by big city lawyers, by big city psychologists and so on, and so 
we have an FAC that we must have. Well I would submit to 
you, sir, that crimes in this country are not committed only with 
guns, and in fact I think that statistics will bear me out that there 
are probably more people murdered and injured with knives 
than there are with guns. 
 
So I would assume, then, the next logical step that the Liberal 
government in Ottawa would do is not only have an FAC but 
expand that and include the KKAC, which will then include the 
kitchen knife acquisition certificate because they are also 
potentially lethal weapons. And I think that you get my 
message, that this thing is very easily going to get out of control 
when you try to make political points on what is a very, very 
serious issue. 
 
It's a serious issue, Mr. Speaker, because it, I think, tries to 
avoid a fundamental problem that we have in society. I think 
firearms legislation is a very narrow view of the crime problem 
because it ignores the much more serious issues of abuse, of 
poverty, of lack of jobs, of frustrations in the people that exist 
. . . of our people out there that exist in society. And I think that 
if Mr. Rock wants a clear crime policy he would address those 
problems and not use guns as a scapegoat. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, I fundamentally believe that that is 
precisely what is happening here. And I'm very, very 
disappointed in the position originally taken by our provincial 
leader. I'm glad to say, and like the former Justice Minister 
acknowledged as well, that she seems to have her act together 
now and that perhaps we can count on the full support of that 
member and of her party as we try to address Mr. Rock's 
situation. 
 
I've been to a lot of these gun control meetings, or these 
firearms meetings, these firearm rallies. I was in the one in 
Saskatoon by the way. There were 1,250 people out there, and 
the member from Saskatoon Fairview . . . Idylwyld — 
represented the then Minister of Justice who happened to be in  

Vancouver doing his thing there with Mr. Rock. Those people 
were not happy, those 1,250 people that came out in Saskatoon. 
Those people were not happy with the response given by the 
Liberal MPs. 
 
And I have to give them credit; they came in there. They came 
in there and they really took a kicking because those people sent 
a clear message to the Liberal MPs: persuade Mr. Rock to go 
differently. And they got up and they said yes, yes, Mr. Bodnar 
— I don't know if we have to start mentioning names — did 
make the comment that he didn't agree with this, and he didn't 
agree with this, and he didn't agree with that. I got up and I 
challenged him. I said you come to the mike here with me right 
now and tell us what you're going to do about it. It's not good 
enough to get up and say I don't believe in this. Are you going 
to stand up — and when a bottom line is and when the vote 
comes — will you stand up for Saskatchewan people? 
 
He refused. All Liberal MPs refused. You have to pay mouth 
and lip-service to an ideal but are not willing to go to bottom 
line and say, yes I will stand up and I will vote against Mr. 
Rock because the principle is wrong and it's not right for my 
constituents because they are not satisfied with this. 
 
Now I'm not only going to pick on the Liberals. I'm not only 
going to pick on the Liberals because I issue a challenge also to 
the new Minister of Justice and the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government in the provincial government here. I expect 
you to do more than pay lip-service to this issue. It's nice for 
you to get up and say, the Libs in Ottawa are wrong, they don't 
have their hat on right, and they don't really know what they're 
doing. They shouldn't be doing this. Well what are you prepared 
to do about it, rather than talk a good talk. You've got to make 
the walk as well. 
 
And I'm looking forward to working with you as a government 
to walk the walk and make sure that something specifically is 
done to address this problem. And you will have the full 
support of the official opposition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on this 
issue and I speak both as a social democrat and a feminist. And 
before I start my remarks I would like to congratulate the 
Leader of the Third Party for making her statement. I would 
also point out that on this issue of gun control, which sadly 
seems to split along sex lines, we have tonight seen two women 
talking about the impracticality of Allan Rock's proposals. It is 
the clearest statement from a non-political politician I've heard 
yet. 
 
I would like to say, though, that I recognize how difficult it 
must have been for the Leader of the Liberal Party to make that 
statement. I say that because I have publicly stated my 
opposition to Rock's proposals and many of my feminist friends 
have publicly chastised me for saying that. And I know that the  



February 28, 1995 

 
538 

member from Saskatoon Greystone will take a lot of heat for 
the position she's taken and I do congratulate her. I do think it 
was a courageous thing to do. 
 
I think today we're seeing in this legislature a bit of history. This 
afternoon we dealt with the Crow rate and it was a unanimous 
vote. And this evening we will deal with gun control and I think 
it will also be a unanimous vote. I think what we're seeing here 
is Saskatchewan politics coming of age. We are moving beyond 
the easy schisms of left and right and we are now starting to 
analyse legislation on the basis of smart and stupid and how we 
can promote and enhance the Saskatchewan way of life for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
As a feminist, Mr. Speaker, I believe in equality, tolerance, and 
opportunity for women. I do not believe in violence but I do not 
believe that Allan Rock's proposals will curb violence against 
women. The proposals are ineffective and they are, quite 
frankly, a waste of time. We see a paper blizzard in Bill C-68 
— 124 pages, 186 sections  for what? It certainly will not 
make any meaningful changes so that society endorses, 
respects, and protects women and children. 
 
We have to get to the root of the matter and start to deal with 
real causes of violence, and stop engaging in selective distortion 
of statistics, which has been what has characterized this debate 
so far. 
 
I watched Allan Rock when he was in Edmonton. He was 
interviewed on national news and he said at that point, that a 
women is killed by a gun in this country every six days. It didn't 
even take two days before I heard people saying on the street: 
isn't it terrible about guns, because six women a day are killed 
in Canada by guns. All that did was create a sense of moral 
panic and fear. 
 
What is the truth in all of this? The truth is that last year 60 
women were killed by guns. Now I think that's sad that even 
one woman was killed, but 60 women killed by guns, in a 
nation of 26 million people, is not an epidemic of violence by 
guns. 
 
There are more important issues for women — issues like 
deaths by breast cancer; the hopelessness and the bleak life of 
poverty; the beatings of women and the abandonment of 
children — those are issues that we simply have to start to 
address. We shouldn't confuse domestic violence and guns, and 
think that by having gun control we will stop domestic violence. 
A man's best weapon is his fist, and as people in the domestic 
violence counselling process know, and they say, a man only 
has to raise his fist once and the woman knows. 
 
We need to look at the practicality of Rock's proposals and we 
need to call his smokescreen for what it is. He's pretending to 
do something while he's distracting our attention from 
compelling and complex social issues. That's a typical Liberal 
tactic and I deplore it. 
 
He wants us to ignore the weakening of social programs. We  

just saw yesterday in Paul Martin's budget a major dismantling 
of social programs. Starting next year the Canada Assistance 
Plan will no longer be tied to actual program costs. That means 
that women and children will be the victims. Federal money for 
social assistance will be block funded together with health care 
and post-secondary education with an ever-diminishing 
formula. That means it attacks women and children. 
 
The social transfer that Paul Martin talks about is not an 
adequate response. It means a 15.5 per cent reduction over the 
next two years. That is violence — violence of a different sort. 
It's an attack on poor people and primarily it's an attack on poor 
women. If we want effective measures to stop violence, we 
need to demand better and more effective practical measures; 
not gun control that merely adds to bloated bureaucracy, 
offloads costs onto the provinces, and takes valuable time away 
from the police. 
 
We need to do something better to stop violence. We need 
strong and meaningful programs to enforce women's dignity, 
enhance women's dignity, to increase respect for children and 
opportunities for everyone. We need to eliminate poverty and 
overcrowding, desperation and discrimination. This proposal is 
simply a smokescreen to distract us from the necessary work 
that all people, but particularly women, have been doing to 
work for equality and to stop violence against women. 
 
Our social programs need to be modernized. There's no doubt 
about that. They do not need to be gutted and this costly and 
impractical legislation that Allan Rock is proposing is no 
substitute. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. If there are no further speakers on this 
motion, I just want to point out to the members, according to 
the new rule that we have adopted last year, there now is up to a 
10-minute question and answer period, if members wish to take 
advantage of that opportunity. So we will now have up to a 10-
minute question and answer period, if there are any. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would direct 
my question to the member from Saskatoon Fairview, although 
it could be fair way, I'm not sure. 
 
Mr. Member, in your time as the minister of Justice, was the 
government planning any concrete action, any motions . . . not 
motions, any legislation within the House that would have 
impacted on this legislation of Allan Rock's to slow it down or 
to prevent its impact in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We gave a good 
deal of thought to that because the idea of some provincial 
legislation arose quite early on during the meetings that I 
referred to in my remarks. What I was saying at those meetings, 
and what I strongly believe to be the government's position, is 
that we would not under any circumstances, consider such 
legislation ourselves. And while I can no longer speak for the 
government, I believe that to be the government's position  



February 28, 1995 

 
539 

without any question at all on this issue. So that at the end of 
the day in my report, I said that there was simply no action that 
we could take of a legislative nature that would in any way pre-
empt what Rock was trying to do. 
 
(2000) 
 
There was suggestions that in some way or another we use the 
notwithstanding clause in the charter in order to somehow 
insulate Saskatchewan from the effects of this legislation, and 
we looked at that. I took advice from the department on that and 
reported to the government and indeed to this House that you 
can't . . . the notwithstanding clause just isn't available to be 
used in those ways. You can't use a notwithstanding clause to 
exclude federal legislation. You can only do it to provide 
charter protection to a certain extent to your own legislation. 
 
So in summary, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is no legislative 
action that the government can take, at least none that I'm aware 
of. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I direct 
my question to the member from Saskatoon Fairview. Mr. 
Member, I have here a copy of the Canadian constitution and 
under section 92, part 13, it's reading: exclusive powers of 
provincial legislatures. So I have to assume from that that these 
are powers that are granted to the province to deal with. And 
section 13 says "Property and Civil Rights . . . in the Province". 
 
Now, Mr. Member, if you can clarify for me please, are 
firearms property in the province of Saskatchewan; are they 
therefore under provincial jurisdiction? Also items of buildings, 
such as gun club buildings, ranges, are they not also property in 
Saskatchewan, therefore under provincial jurisdiction? And 
when an outside body tries to regulate them, are they not 
impinging on Saskatchewan's constitutional rights? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, that's an excellent question. The 
fact of the matter is of course that rifles are property, just as 
automobiles and buildings and fountain pens and everything 
else that we use, and the federal government has no jurisdiction 
over them at all unless it can bring its actions under one of the 
heads of section 91 of the constitution. 
 
One of the heads of section 91 is the Criminal Law and that has 
been the basis for their gun control legislation over the past 
hundred-or-so years. And that may have been an appropriate 
use of the Criminal Law power a hundred years ago and all of 
the many, many pieces of legislation that we've had since then. 
 
But I believe a very strong argument can be made that they are 
now going way too far. When you look at this Bill C-68, the 
Firearms Act, and see the kind of regulation that it introduces 
into the law of Canada, it seems to me to be getting further and 
further away from crime and closer and closer to property. All 
of which is to say that they may well be moving outside their 
constitutional jurisdiction. And the appropriate remedy then is 
to challenge its constitutionality when it's passed by parliament 
— take it on. 

And I indicated when I was a minister, that the government is 
prepared to consider that. We have to analyse this and we have 
to look at what they finally passed. But that seems to me to be 
the appropriate thing. We didn't want to introduce a whole gun 
control law ourselves. But we want to get at this question, if we 
have grounds for doing so, in the more traditional way. 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, a question for the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. During this debate I went to the library and 
asked for some information and statistics, and one of the things 
that I picked up was Juristat material, I believe it's 14, 15 . . . 
I'm trying to get to the . . . Vol. 14, No. 15, "Homicide in 
Canada". And I'm wondering if this information, knowledge, is 
fully around. But it says on page 10: 
 
 That the use of rifles and shotguns in homicides 

continues to decrease from 30 percent in 1974 to 20 
percent in 1989 to 12 percent in 1993. And other types 
of firearms used to commit homicide in 1993, including 
sawed-off rifles and shotguns, have dropped to about 12 
percent. 

 
And I'm wondering if any of this material . . . if Rock has 
been moving any of the information there, because from 
reading this I would find that it's very difficult to come up 
with any information that suggests he should move ahead 
with gun control. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, the federal Justice minister is 
very creative in the use of statistics, and he has used some of 
the statistics included in the publication by Statistics Canada 
that the hon. member refers to. 
 
The numbers that the member cites are quite correct, Mr. 
Speaker. They are Statistics Canada figures and there's no doubt 
about their accuracy. And Rock just skips over those and 
selectively uses other material which he claims supports his 
case. The fact of the matter is, and implicit in the member's 
question, is that the rate of crime, the rate of . . . the use of 
firearms in crime will not be affected one wit. 
 
At the heart of it, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that most of the 
people who support this Bill — the people in Toronto and 
Vancouver and Montreal — believe that what Rock is trying to 
get at is handguns. They watch their Detroit television and they 
believe they’re getting at handguns. 
 
The fact of the matter is that handguns have been closely 
regulated and have been subject to registration for over 20 
years, and that's what the people think that Rock is all about. It's 
not. What he's after is shotguns and .22s. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the member from Souris-Cannington regarding the different 
states in the United States I believe . . . have gone to the extent 
of allowing individuals to have concealed weapons, and 
whether that has made a significant difference in their crime 
rates, or whether that's increased or decreased it. And I would  



February 28, 1995 

 
540 

like to have the member from Souris-Cannington answer that 
question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Member, a 
number of the states have not gone to a mandatory concealed 
weapons but have allowed members of their citizenry to have 
concealed weapons. Florida has done so and also Oregon. In 
Oregon they had, prior to their legislation, I believe, about 50 
concealed weapons permits. At the end of the year they had 
12,000 concealed weapons permits and the net result on their 
crime statistics, Mr. Speaker, was a drop of 30 per cent of 
violent crime in the state of Oregon. 
 
It wasn't because they took guns away from people that that 
reduction in crime occurred; it was because they allowed people 
to have firearms and the fact that the criminal element didn't 
know who had that firearm prevented and slowed down and 
caused a decrease of about 30 per cent. The same thing has 
happened in Florida. 
 
When you look around the world, Switzerland is a prime 
example. Every male between the age of 18 and 55, I believe it 
is, is in the militia. They have to have a military weapon in their 
home, which is a fully automatic rifle. They have a very low 
incidence of crime there, Mr. Speaker, because they know that 
everybody has the deterrent. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Question period has elapsed. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:10 p.m. until 8:15 p.m. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 
division. 

 
Yeas 

 
Thompson Shillington Anguish 
Johnson Kowalsky Cunningham 
Carson Mitchell Upshall 
Koenker Lorje Renaud 
Murray Serby Flavel 
Cline Wormsbecker Kujawa 
Keeping Jess Langford 
Neudorf Martens D'Autremont 
Britton Haverstock McPherson 

— 27 
Nays 

— Nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act respecting Our Lady 
of the Prairies Foundation 

Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02, An Act to 
amend An Act respecting Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation 
be now read a second time and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 

Bill No. 04 — An Act to amend An Act respecting 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to amend and 

consolidate "An Act respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
being an Act to amend and consolidate An Act to 

incorporate Saskatchewan Co-operative Wheat Producers 
Limited" and to enact certain provisions respecting 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
04, An Act to amend An Act respecting Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, being an Act to amend and consolidate "An Act 
respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, being an Act to amend 
and consolidate An Act to incorporate Saskatchewan Co-
operative Wheat Producers Limited" and to enact certain 
provisions respecting Saskatchewan Wheat Pool now be read a 
second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members' Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:21 p.m. 
 
 


