






















































April 18, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 28, 1995 

 

 
1837 

The Assembly met at l0 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased 
this morning to present petitions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 
amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 
Rights) which will benefit all property owners in 
Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Kelvington, Archerwill, Rose 
Valley, Saskatoon, Minton, Lintlaw, Okla, Porcupine Plain, Mr. 
Speaker. Many places across the entire province, Mr. Speaker, 
that wish to express themselves on this issue. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy this 
morning to present petitions on behalf of the people from 
Medicine Hat, Gull Lake, Hazlet area of the south-west corner 
of the province and area, and I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 
 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan petitioning 

the Assembly to allocate adequate funding toward the 
double-laning of Highway No. l. 

 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 62 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding Saskatchewan Water Corporation: (1) what 

was the cost of sending Bob Wheatley to the effective 
executive program at Waskesiu in 1992; (2) what are the 
names of all Sask Water employees who participated in 
the effective executive program at Waskesiu in 1994; 
(3) what are all costs associated with these employees 
attending this seminar; (4) what are the names of all 
employees who have enrolled in this seminar for the 
current year? 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day 62 ask the government the following question: 
 
 Regarding the Department of Health's recent brochure 

mail-out: (1) what was the total cost of printing the 
brochures; (2) what was the total cost of distributing the 
brochures; (3) what was the total cost of producing the 
brochures; (4) what was the total cost of advertising or 
communications consulting associated with any aspect 
of the production of these brochures? 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to Amend 
and Repeal The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Superannuation Act, 1979. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it's a great, great pleasure for me this morning to 
introduce to you, and through you to my colleagues in the 
Assembly, a very fine group of young men and women sitting 
in the west gallery. I think this has to be one of the largest 
groups I've ever had the pleasure to introduce. Altogether there 
are 128 of them, and these are the provincial school safety 
patrollers who are here for the jamboree which is sponsored by 
the Canadian Automobile Association. 
 
Now this, as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, is group B. Group A 
is presently touring the building, but there wasn't enough room 
to put all of them in the west gallery. 
 
So we all know that these young patrollers take their 
responsibility for the safety of their fellow students very 
seriously, and I'm sure we've all seen them on the streets in 
good weather and in bad. 
 
They are accompanied by 19 chaperons, and I know that they're 
going to have a great day today. So please join me in 
welcoming them here this morning. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 28, 1995 

 
1838 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, Mr. John 
Nilson, who is seated in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. Last 
night the Regina Lakeview New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, had a 
nominating convention with over 400 people in attendance, and 
three excellent candidates. And I'm pleased to advise members 
of the Assembly that the successful candidate and the 
representative for the New Democratic Party in the next election 
will be Mr. Nilson. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to congratulate him 
and to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tribute to Injured Workers 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we observe 
a day of mourning to honour workers killed and injured on the 
job. 
 
As has been traditionally done, we observe this day by flying 
the flags on the Legislative Building at half staff and observing 
a moment of silence in this Chamber. We mark this day of 
mourning on April 28 because it was on this day in 1914 that 
Canada’s first workers' compensation program was introduced 
for injured workers. 
 
To everyone who has lost a loved one in a workplace accident, I 
offer the sympathies of our caucus. To those who have been 
injured I offer the hope that your health is recovered and you 
have been able to return to your work. 
 
I realize however that many injured workers, such as those 
injured in the Shand power site crane collapse accident five 
years ago, must endure not only painful and prolonged 
rehabilitation, but delayed action in having their rightful 
financial compensation resolved. 
 
This is an important day on which we honour those who have 
been killed or injured on the job; but when we also pledge to 
work towards the goal of being a province completely free of 
workplace accidents. 
 
I ask all members to join me in paying tribute to all our 
Saskatchewan workers and especially those who have lost their 
lives while performing their jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seven years ago it was my 
honour to introduce legislation to declare in statute, April 28 to 
be set aside as a day of mourning for workers killed or injured 
on the job, making Saskatchewan the first jurisdiction in 
Canada, and this day now being recognized by governments 
across the nation. 
 

This date was chosen, as has been said, because April 28, 1914 
was the day that Canada's first workers' compensation program 
for injured workers was introduced. On this day, Mr. Speaker, 
we declare our sympathy to families and friends of workers who 
have died or been injured during the previous year. We know 
that we can only recognize the pain of those who have lost a 
loved one. We realize that a workplace accident has created a 
permanent void in their lives. 
 
But we can take this day to renew our pledge to work toward 
the total elimination of workplace fatalities. That is a goal we 
permanently seek. We've made progress in legislation, in 
education, in enforcement, and in improved workplace practice. 
The fact that this day exists means that there remains more to be 
done. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I urge that this Assembly continue its 
tradition of the past seven years, and before orders of the day 
observe a moment of silence in respect for workers and the 
families of Saskatchewan workers who have been killed or 
injured on the job, and to affirm the personal pledges of our 
heart. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would like to recognize the day of 
mourning as well for workers that have been killed or injured in 
the workplace. Tragically, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
public is all too familiar with the problems of work-related 
injuries. 
 
I think there is scarcely a person in the province who is not 
either related to or acquainted with someone who has been 
injured on the job. The agricultural base of our province means 
that we have a lot of people working with a wide range of 
dangerous equipment under tight deadlines and high stress. On 
this day of mourning we should all take time to consider safety 
on the job. 
 
To those who have suffered the loss or injury of loved ones, I 
offer my deepest sympathy and that of my colleagues. To those 
who have been fortunate enough to avoid tragic experiences, 
please take note and exercise caution on the job and in the 
workplace and, as well, in other parts of your life. 
 
Our work environment has steadily improved throughout the 
years. When recognizing these important . . . improvements, 
rather, it is important to also commend employers who through 
their own initiatives and humanity have endeavoured to secure 
the safety of many of our employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important day and I ask all members to 
join me in remembering the workers that have been killed or 
injured across the province and around the world. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 28, 1995 

 
1839 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Self-employment Assistance Program 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week I had the opportunity to attend the graduation of 25 
students from the self-employment assistance program. This 
program is offered by the Canada Employment Centre and 
conducted by Prairie Financial Management. 
 
It is geared towards unemployed people wanting to start their 
own businesses. The graduation this week was the fourth one 
under the program. Previously, Mr. Speaker, 55 adults and 10 
young people have completed the course with an 80 per cent 
success ratio. 
 
Though Saskatchewan has many large and medium-sized 
corporations, it is the small businesses who are the real 
backbone of the economy. 
 
Those who take the course become a vital part of the 
small-business sector, create their own jobs, and often find it 
necessary to employ others. This course complements perfectly 
Saskatchewan measures such as reductions in business tax rates 
and JobStart programs that encourage new businesses. Together 
these efforts are driving the economy and leading to many new 
jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the 25 new entrepreneurs 
and wish them the best of luck. They will play an important part 
in Saskatchewan's recovery. I also wish to thank the Canada 
Employment Centre and Prairie Financial Management for their 
role. 
 
Thank you, 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Sculptors Festival and Trade Show 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although this event 
will not take place for a few months, I want to give some 
advance publicity to a very interesting and worthy international 
event coming up — an event that is actually part of an ongoing 
project just south-east of Weyburn. I refer to the 1995 
International Sculptors Festival and Trade Show. 
 
An organization called Help International, or Health, Education 
and Livelihood Project, and Art Africa Incorporated, under the 
direction of Mr. Rodney Sidloski, has established itself with a 
double purpose  both of them admirable  of creating and 
marketing African soapstone sculpture, and of promoting 
artistic exchanges and communication between African and 
Inuit artists. 
 
Art Africa Incorporated and Help International have already 
sponsored an international sculptors festival in 1994, which 
brought together sculptors from East and West Africa, the 
Denes and Inuvaluit from Canada's far North, and from  

southern Canada as well. 
 
This was a very successful event — so successful in fact that it 
is being repeated and expanded this August. Fifty stone 
sculptors from the High Arctic, from South America, Africa, 
Asia, Europe, and southern Canada, will carve their way 
through 10 tonnes of soapstone and granite. 
 
This is an exciting development on the plains of southern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I invite all members to visit it 
this summer, as visitors, artists, school groups, and the curious, 
are all welcome. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northwest Airlines Flies Into Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm still mad as heck 
about gas prices, but today I have the happy task of saying that 
there will be a new international scheduled air service to 
Saskatchewan inaugurated Monday by Northwest Airlines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I'm pleased to welcome Northwest to 
Saskatchewan. This latest announcement, Mr. Speaker, shows 
that the Partnership for Renewal economic strategy is helping 
to enhance the business environment in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan exporters are constantly travelling to develop 
distant markets and foreign trade delegations regularly come to 
visit Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to that, of course, we've been drawing more and 
more international attention and visitors to conferences and 
international sporting events as well as tourism events and 
attractions, such as the coming Grey Cup '95 festival right here 
in Regina and of course the Big Valley Jamboree, Wanuskewin 
Heritage Park, and the Tyrannosaurus rex fossil find in the 
south-west. Our rapidly expanding film industry is also 
generating its own flow of international travel. 
 
All this means that scheduled global air links are increasingly 
important  more so than ever  to the economic 
development of our province, and I'm very pleased to see a 
major international airline like Northwest making a decision to 
establish service right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
An example of the benefits already being felt from Northwest's 
new service is the announcement today by Prince Albert-based 
Athabaska Airways of an agreement for joint fares with 
Northwest. This is expected to provide a significant boost to 
northern tourism. 
 
The Speaker: — The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 28, 1995 

 
1840 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Balanced Budget Legislation 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the Madam Minister of Finance. 
Madam Minister, the reviews on your balanced budget 
legislation are in and it's two thumbs down. 
 
University of Saskatchewan economics professor called your 
Bill a waste of time. He says your legislation is nothing more 
than a political gesture, Madam Minister. It's clear that your Bill 
is carefully designed to allow you and your government the 
maximum number of ways out of a balanced budget. It protects 
your hide instead of protecting the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, very simply, why did you refuse to put any 
provisions for taxpayer input into tax increases? Do you 
basically disagree with this concept? Or is it your intention to 
once again promise no increases before an election and then 
turn around and implement another massive tax grab, should 
you win. 
 
We've seen this movie before, Madam Minister. Why not put 
some assurances in the Bill so that we don't see this same sad 
ending as we've seen in other legislation that you've done? 
Would you do that today, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I welcome that question. As I've said before, referenda 
are expensive. And if you look at what's happening today in the 
province of Quebec, governments can very easily manipulate 
referenda to their advantage. 
 
But what I say to the members opposite is, why are we debating 
this? This government has already come out with its four-year 
plan for the finances of this province. And what are in there are 
no tax increases. In fact what's in there is tax cuts. So the people 
of this province know what they're going to get for the next four 
years. 
 
But the members opposite say the reviews are in on our 
legislation. And I will say yes, the reviews are in on our 
legislation. And I have a review here by a group hardly known 
to be friends of this government — this is the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce. Their own press release is headed by 
the, quote: Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce welcomes 
balanced budget legislation. They say it is an extremely positive 
step for this province. And I quote, again  I will read it all if 
you want. There is not a negative comment in here. The 
chamber president said: 
 
 Certain checks and balances in this legislation also 

meets with Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
policies. For example, the government cannot change 
accounting methods mid-term, any monies from the sale 
of Crown corporations cannot be used for general  

revenue purposes, and any budget surpluses must go toward 
debt reduction. 

 
They like it and so do the people of Saskatchewan — thumbs 
up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Madam 
Minister, we've heard those kind of hollow promises before 
from you people — pre-election budget types of promises. 
 
The Premier promised everyone that the PST (provincial sales 
tax) would be gone October 21, 1991. Trust me, the Premier 
said. That was his promise to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Associate Minister of Finance said on May 21, 1991, and I 
quote: The NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. Will 
the members please come to order. We can't have the constant 
interruption on both sides. When the minister was answering, 
there was interruption on this side. And now we're having 
interruption when the Leader of the Opposition is up. 
 
I would ask members to please give respect to the members that 
are asking the question and those that are answering. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, the 
Associate Minister of Finance said on May 21, 1991, and I 
quote: The NDP won't raise any personal taxes for four years. 
That was his commitment during the last election campaign, 
Madam Minister. 
 
That's the kind of thing that we can expect from this 
government. That's why people don't believe in your balanced 
budget legislation, Madam Minister. That's why the taxpayers 
of this province want strict controls on the politicians  to 
make sure they adhere to balanced budgets, Madam Minister. 
They don't believe you. They don't believe anybody. And that's 
the reason why, Madam Minister, there has to be assurances in 
legislation. That's why there has to be controls in legislation. 
 
Will you support, Madam Minister, an amendment that will 
entrench taxpayer protection into your piece of legislation? 
We'll bring this forward this afternoon, if you like, to entrench 
taxpayer protection into your Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I've already answered 
that question. But it's so amusing. Obviously the Leader of the 
Opposition has to keep reading his script no matter what I say. I 
say: the chamber likes the legislation; he says: don't worry, 
everybody doesn't like this legislation. 
 
But you've got to have a sense of humour to have the Tories 
here talking about finances. It's so amusing. These guys talk so 
tough and mean and miserable. I mean as the songster says:  



April 28, 1995 

 
1841 

who needs actions when you've got words? But what did they 
actually do when they were in government? They racked up 
huge deficits. 
 
And what . . . and I won't even get into that, I won't even saddle 
the new leader with their legacy. But I'll say this: they're trying 
to tell the people of Saskatchewan that this is not a tough 
government — a government that took this province from the 
brink of financial ruin; a government that when we inherited 
this province could hardly borrow money, and now have 
balanced the books of the province and have had the first 
upgrade in our credit rating of any provincial upgrade in five 
years. We're not tough enough? 
 
We don't talk tough — we don't talk tough. What we do is we 
take the tough choices that have to be made to balance the 
books of this province and to plan for its future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Battlefords Constituency Office 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Board of Internal 
Economy. Mr. Minister, about eight years . . . for the last eight 
years, the member from The Battlefords has been running his 
constituency office from a non-profit corporation run by two 
prominent New Democrats. The member pays the highest rent 
of any MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) — over 
$2,000 a year higher than any other member — even though he 
shares his space with a federal MP (Member of Parliament), 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a result, the non-profit company, PDN Ventures — which 
for those that can't spell is NDP (New Democratic Party) 
backwards — has been able to turn a healthy profit and has 
built up nearly $36,000 in equity to the end of 1993, Mr. 
Speaker. The non-profit company has never stated its corporate 
objective other than a vague promise to donate the money to 
some unnamed charity. As far as we know, Mr. Speaker, not 
one dime has ever been given to charity. 
 
Mr. Minister, clearly this is not an appropriate way to set up 
your office rental agreement. Do you have any plans for dealing 
with this manner in the Board of Internal Economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well the member opposite is a member 
of the Board of Internal Economy and I'd be quite happy if the 
Board of Internal Economy dealt with the situation as to who I 
rent my constituency office from, and how I rent my 
constituency office. 
 
The member opposite and others have been trying to create 
something out of this for approximately a year now. There is no 
violation of any directives of the Board of Internal Economy. 
There's no violation of the rules of the Legislative Assembly. 
 

I'd be more than happy to have this dealt with by any body that 
you would see fit. I would suggest that if you feel it's a pressing 
issue that you should take it forward to the Board of Internal 
Economy and I'd be happy to answer any questions that you 
might have that are specific to my rental arrangement on my 
constituency office. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
getting a Board of Internal Economy meeting scheduled has 
been about the same as you picking a charity, which you 
promised to do way last year. You said you'd have one picked 
by the first of the year — January. It is now the end of April; we 
still haven't had a charity pick. 
 
Mr. Minister, what people don't like is you being able to go into 
an election campaign and act like the sugar daddy of North 
Battleford by making a big donation to a charity, even though 
this is all taxpayers' money. And, Mr. Speaker, people don't feel 
it's appropriate that the member from North Battleford can, just 
before an election, turn over this money that he's been 
stockpiling for eight years and appear to be North Battleford's 
gift. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have found a loophole in the rules by using a 
non-profit corporation. What actions are you planning then  
seeing as you've chosen to answer the question on behalf of the 
government  what are you planning to do to close the 
loophole that allows you to use a non-profit when other 
members of the Assembly obviously can't do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I don't know that your statements 
are accurate. There is very little in the way of who you can and 
who you cannot rent your constituency office from. As long as 
it's not rented from a family member, it's quite legitimate to 
chose who it is. Would you rather that New Democrats would 
do like many Conservatives have done in the past, is to pick 
some of their friends in the real estate business and rent from 
them so they can put it in their pocket as personal profit? I don't 
know what the member is trying to get at. 
 
I think your getting pretty bankrupt of ideas when you accuse 
me of being able to do some sugar-daddy routine prior to an 
election campaign. I want to make it very clear to the member 
opposite that it's not up to me what a non-profit corporation 
does to conduct their business, and you'd be more appropriate to 
address those questions in the Board of Internal Economy and 
ask the landlord, if you want, to appear before the Board of 
Internal Economy. 
 
It's not my decision to make. I'm a tenant in the building. I've 
paid the same rent since 1986; I pay the same rent today. And I 
think that you're trying to make a mountain of political 
controversy where there is nothing there. 
 
If you feel there's something there, take the appropriate action. 
And I'm sure that the landlord, or myself if you want, or both, 
will appear before the Board of Internal Economy. There's been 
a meeting set, I understand, for next week. If you want me to be 
there, I'm more than happy to be there. Those meetings are open  



April 28, 1995 

 
1842 

to the media and so we'll have full disclosure. 
 
I think you're getting very bankrupt of ideas when you're trying 
to smear people's . . . legislature to cover up for your own 
inadequacies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let's go 
through this one more time for the minister's benefit. Let's put 
the fairness quotient to it here. The member pays the highest 
rent in the whole province. The money goes through an arm's-
length company run by two prominent New Democrats. It's 
supposed to be a non-profit company, but it's making huge 
profits. It's supposed to give money to charity, but it hasn't 
given out one dime in eight years. 
 
Now the member stands on his feet, Mr. Speaker, and he gets 
very defensive about that. The simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 
every other member in the legislature was told that they could 
not use a holding company to run their office. That was 
changed years ago. The member continues to have this loophole 
that allows him to do all of these things, and then he says that 
the question is not one that members of the Assembly should 
deal with. 
 
I say to the member, do you believe it's fair that all of those 
things can happen and that you should not have to answer for it, 
Mr. Member. Going into an election campaign, you have tens of 
thousands of dollars put there by the taxpayer which you then 
are going to turn over to the charity of your choice at the 
appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Minister, let's say nothing else ,whether politics . . . but is it 
fair? You believe that that is a fair system for the taxpayers of 
this province to allow you to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Well I'll deal with just one of those 
issues to point out the inaccuracies of what the member alleges, 
Mr. Speaker. The very first thing that he said when he got to his 
feet on the last question is I pay the highest rent of any member. 
 
That is absolutely false. I would ask the members of the press 
gallery, I'd ask the members opposite, to go to the Public 
Accounts of the province or go to the Legislative Assembly 
Office. Because of the controversy that the member opposite 
caused to the media, the Premier has also questioned me in 
regard to whether or not there was any problem with the rental 
of my constituency office. 
 
And I've assured him in writing that there is none. The members 
can check that out as well. In some of the years there are at least 
11 to 13 members that paid more rent than I do. So I'm not 
going to dignify the member opposite by going through the long 
list of other inaccuracies that he brings out. 
 
Again I stress to you that if you want to throw around  

inaccurate information to cover up for your own inadequacies 
for your caucus, I would ask you to call this before the Board of 
Internal Economy and we'll deal with it in a forum where I have 
the opportunity to respond with the accuracy of the true facts 
and not the innuendo and the untruths that you put forward on 
the floor of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd 
like to table a letter dated March 23, 1995 from CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) to contractors 
informing them of various aspects which have to be adhered to 
in order to qualify under the new Crown tendering agreement. 
 
The letter states, and I quote: 
 
 It is CIC's intention to monitor how well the new 

Agreement works during the 1995 construction season, 
and review it for the purpose of making any required 
adjustments. Your comments would be appreciated. 

 
We know you've been asked to make some adjustments already, 
Mr. Minister. Can you tell us in the House today how many 
complaints CIC has or the government has received regarding 
this union tendering policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I can't give you a precise figure. I can 
tell you that they have been few in number from individual 
contractors. Most individual contractors . . . in contradistinction 
to members in this House, most individual contractors are 
prepared to give the policy a season, see how it works, and then 
revisit it with CIC and the Crown corporations thereafter. 
 
I know there are groups who are lobbying noisily against the 
policy, but our impression is the vast majority of contractors are 
prepared to see how it works, and if there are adjustments to be 
made, CIC is more than prepared to do that. We think the policy 
will work well and we think most contractors are prepared to 
give it a chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Minister, I dare say the people of the 
province would like to see that list and I'd ask you to table that 
list today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proposal will come at a definite cost to the 
people of Saskatchewan. There is almost $825 million budgeted 
for Crown construction projects. The Saskatchewan 
Construction Association believes that about 575 million of that 
will fall under this Crown Tendering Agreement. Estimates 
from various groups believe the extra cost for each project will 
be between 15 and 20 per cent more under the tendering 
agreement. This NDP government could waste $115 million on 
this ill-conceived plan. 
 



April 28, 1995 

 
1843 

My question to the Minister: why would anyone in their right 
mind devise an agreement that could cost the people of 
Saskatchewan $115 million more  money that could be used 
to be spent on health care or education or paying off the debt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Liberals in this House use facts with 
wild abandon, I must say. What is an undeniable fact is what 
Liberals when they . . . in those rare occasions when the public 
make the mistake of trusting them with office, what is a fact is 
how Liberals dispense contracts when in office. I'm not going to 
remind the member of what's happening in Ottawa, where the 
Prime Minister's son-in-law has been awarded a very lucrative 
contract, which is scandalous. That's what Liberals do in office. 
 
What New Democrats do in office is attempt to define policies 
which provide a level playing-field in which everybody can play 
equally. That's what we've done. We don't believe when the 
season's over this is going to cost the taxpayer anything. We 
think we'll be able to prove that. 
 
That, however, is for the future. What is clear and evident now 
is that when Liberals get into office they treat it as a licence to 
rifle the treasury. That's not what we've done. We have set out a 
policy which is fair and even and fair to all concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite made 
mention that he didn't have many complaints as far as this 
tendering policy. I'll table several letters today that we received, 
and I know he's received, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Rural municipalities that represent tens of thousands of people 
are concerned about the agreement, and I would like to quote 
from letters sent to Mr. Bill Hyde, vice-president of human 
resources at CIC. 
 
The RM (rural municipality) of Duck Lake states: 
 
 Small . . . contractors are the job creators of our 

province and constant interference in the free-market 
cannot be tolerated. This policy will decrease 
competition for crown work and substantially increase 
costs to the crown. 

 
The RM of Enniskillen states: 
 
 It is not a fair tendering (policy) because tender is Union 

only. 
 
The RM of Mankota states: 
 
 You have asked Saskatchewan residents to sacrifice and 

(they) have. We have for the most part accepted the 
tough decisions that were made. However this policy 
initiative is so discouraging. Why are we now 
embarking on a policy that will inflate costs. 

My question to the minister in charge of CIC: will you commit 
to repealing this agreement before any long-term damage is 
done to the contractors across the province, and ensure that a 
fair, equitable, and fiscally responsible system is restored? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, we believe that this 
policy will prove during the upcoming year that it costs the 
taxpayers nothing; that it provides apprenticeship training for 
Saskatchewan workers; and that it provides work for 
Saskatchewan people, in contradistinction to what happened 
when the former administration were in office, and in 
contradistinction to what happened in that long ago period 
when Liberals were in office in this province. 
 
What happens during those periods is that out-of-province 
contractors do most of the work. Our skilled labour force is 
depleted; they move out of the province. 
 
One of the challenges, Mr. Speaker, in this period of increasing 
prosperity, is to rebuild a skilled workforce. That's one of the 
things we now have to do since you people drove them out of 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll end by saying that there may well be an 
opportunity for the people of this province to decide whether 
they want Liberal tendering policies, whereby the Prime 
Minister's son-in-law gets the contract, or whether they want 
NDP tendering policies, which attempts to rebuild a skilled 
labour force in this province. They're going to get a chance to 
decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — And I want to say to the member 
opposite, I've not yet heard you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. next question. 
 

Treatment for Hepatitis C Victims 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Wednesday in the legislature I raised the case of Vicki Lissel 
whose drug program funding for interferon has been cut off by 
your government. The Minister of Economic Development 
promised to check back on the matter and report back to the 
legislature. I was wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could provide 
that answer today. 
 
Mr. Minister, Vicki Lissel doesn't have a lot of time to waste. 
After her remaining drug supply runs out, she said and I quote: I 
won't be able to fight off anything after that. Death will happen 
a lot quicker. Mr. Minister, do you have an answer for Vicki 
Lissel today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I have not received a report to bring 
to the House from the Department of Health, but I will take 
upon myself to ask the department to hurry up their response 
and we'll get something for you as early as Monday. 
 



April 28, 1995 

 
1844 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, I think you have to recognize the 
urgency of this situation. Vicki Lissel needs an answer today. 
She doesn't need an answer some day down the road. She needs 
an answer from you and your government soon. Today would 
be the commitment that you should be giving. 
 
Mr. Minister, on a broader issue, what is your government 
going to be doing to compensate people like Vicki Lissel who 
contracted hepatitis C through the blood supply? It's over a year 
since we first brought this up. Nothing has been done and 
people like Vicki continue to get sick and continue to get even 
sicker as time goes. Mr. Minister, when are you going to 
address this tragedy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks 
about the broader issue of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan; I might say the broader issue of medicare across 
Canada. And while I will agree with the member opposite and 
agree with the Liberals who bring individual issues to the 
House on medicare, that there are obviously many issues in 
health care under the present changes, under the old program 
before the changes, and will be in the future . . . There's no 
doubt about it. Because when people have difficult health 
issues, whether it's cancer, whether it's HIV (human 
immunodeficiency virus), obviously all the needs will never, 
ever be met. 
 
But what I want to make the point to the member opposite on 
the broad issue of health care, the New Democrats and CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) established and gave 
birth to medicare in this country. And for you to come to this 
House and say that the members opposite in the Tory caucus 
would do a better job, or worse yet, members of the Liberals, 
whose leader at the time medicare was being established, Ross 
Thatcher, said he would fight with every ounce of effort he had 
to keep medicare out of this province . . . have no right to come 
here and claim that they would do a better job of delivering 
health care services in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Minister of Highways’ Travel 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Highways. 
 
Last week I asked this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, where the 
Minister of Highways was over the past few weeks. While 
many communities in Saskatchewan are facing floods and are in 
need of emergency assistance, it seems the minister responsible 
for Highways is more concerned with getting re-elected than 
with taking responsibility for emergency measures required in 
the “Red Sea” zone. 
 
I would like to ask the Minister of Highways just where he was 
last week when the town of Englefeld was almost under water. 
When the residents of that town were faced with almost 
six-foot-deep headwater heading for their town, no one could 
be found that would take the responsibility of cutting the  

highway to allow that water to escape. 
 
Mr. Minister, it required eight huge pumps to pump water for 
24 hours in order to alleviate that situation because the railroad 
company took the initiative and cut the railroad through and put 
three culverts in immediately to relieve the water pressure, 
while the highway was left intact and pumps had to be used to 
divert that water around that highway. Now that's unnecessary. 
 
And if you would have left some . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. If the member has a 
question, I'd like the member to put his question, please. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Why were you out of touch during that 
period of time, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of 
all that the member is right, that the town of Englefeld was 
having problems last weekend. Two things happened: part of 
Schulte Industries head office burned to the ground; and the 
other thing was, at the same time, there were problems with 
potential flooding. 
 
Mr. Jim Carnago, who is the CEO (chief executive officer) at 
Schulte Industries, phoned me on Tuesday morning, I believe it 
was, to congratulate us for two things. One, that the Minister of 
Highways opened up the highway, cut an opening in the 
highway to allow the water out. 
 
The information you have is absolutely false and misleading, 
and I would ask you to apologize to the people of Englefeld 
because Mr. . . . the individual who called to our office 
congratulating us, Mr. Jim Carnago, who was acting on behalf 
of the town during that crisis, both taking care of his industry 
where the head office had burned . . . and also called us. And 
we immediately opened the highway, along with CN (Canadian 
National) opening their tracks. 
 
He congratulated the Minister of Highways for paying attention 
and immediately responding to the needs of the town. Your 
question is misleading, wrong, false, and I would use stronger 
language if I weren't in the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
(1045) 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 
 
The Speaker: — Before Orders of the Day, I think members 
are aware that yesterday I met with the delegation from Jilin 
Province in China and I think it's incumbent upon me to table in 
the legislature the letter that was handed to me. But in order that 
members . . . I will table of course the original members for 
those who are able to read the Chinese language, but I will now 
read the English version of the letter that was handed to me as 
the president of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
 To: The Speaker of the Saskatchewan Legislative  



April 28, 1995 

 
1845 

 Assembly: 
 
 Dear Mr. Speaker: 
 
 Jilin and Saskatchewan have had a twinning relationship 

since 1984. The two sister provinces have made 
progress in personnel exchanges and technical 
cooperation in the economic, trade, science/technology, 
and culture and education sectors. 

 
 Last June a Saskatchewan delegation led by the Hon. Ed 

Tchorzewski visited Jilin and signed the "Fifth Plan of 
Action", and celebrated the 10th anniversary of our 
relationship. 

 
 The year 1995, the beginning of the second decade of 

our relationship, signals a period of even closer 
relationship between our two provinces. This year is not 
only Saskatchewan's 90th Anniversary, it is also the 
50th Anniversary of the anti-fascist movement in China. 

 
 The Jilin People's Congress wishes to move toward 

greater cooperation with Saskatchewan. To this end, the 
Standing Committee of Jilin Province People's Congress 
now wishes to establish a new working relationship with 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. This letter 
invites you to visit Jilin at your convenience to discuss 
the possibility of cooperation between our legislative 
bodies. 

 
 Highest respect. 
 
 Standing Committee, Jilin People's Congress, April 21, 

1995. 
 
For the edification of the members, I did indicate to them that I 
would not be running again, but that I would take it upon 
myself to make sure that the new Speaker would be aware of 
their invitation. I will now table the letter. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I'd like to ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are 10 
students and two chaperons on the interchange of Canadian 
studies. What this is, Mr. Speaker, is that grade 11 students 
from across Canada and the Territories will be meeting at Stony 
Plain, Alberta on a conference this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to therefore introduce, first of all, the 
chaperons, which are Brent Toles and Pat Fergusson. The 
students, Mr. Speaker, are from Kipling, Mankota, Plato, 
Regina, Kronau, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 
 

Mr. Speaker, they're here visiting the legislature. They will be 
meeting with the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden later. So I 
ask all guests . . . all members to please welcome the guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I ask for leave to introduce guests as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I just want to take this opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker, to welcome a former teaching colleague of mine, 
Brent Toles, who is one of the supervisors along with Pat 
Fergusson and the students. Brent and I spent many times 
discussing education matters — and a few political matters on 
occasion. And I want members to welcome Brent to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I'd ask leave to make a 
brief statement concerning the day of mourning. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, as the member from 
Moose Jaw Palliser noted earlier, it's the annual day of 
mourning for workers killed or injured on the job. I want to take 
some time today to remember the 31 workers who lost their 
lives as a result of workplace accidents in the past year — 
workplaces that were registered with the Workers' 
Compensation Board. 
 
These names are: Alvin Holowachuk, Carl Mintkawetz, Bradley 
Belcourt, Leo Soucy, John Sickel, Lloyd Sickel, Wayne 
Harpold, Jack White, Brian Liesch, Bryon Birdsell, Pablito 
Orcajada, James Schneider, Jerry Baiton, Ray Shearer, Glen 
Shiplack, Allan Waterhouse, William Gelowitz, David 
Amberson, Bernard Loef, Samuel Pawluk, Andrew Fedoriuk, 
Wayne Schmidt, Patrick Fisher, Darcy Armstrong, John Gillies, 
Brian Hood, Jakob Weibel, Gerald Rein, Bill Gawrelitza, 
Donald Irvine, and Andrew Robillard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 31 families have gone through the pain of having 
someone go to work and not come home again. Today we 
recognize their loss and remember the workers who have died. 
 
The list is actually longer, Mr. Speaker, but does not include 
those killed on farms, that have chosen not to register with the 
Workers' Compensation Board. In terms of farm fatalities in 
1994, there were 28 farm fatalities in 1994 that would make 
that list even longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also acknowledge, this day of mourning, the heavy price 
which has been paid by workers who have suffered serious  



April 28, 1995 

 
1846 

illness or injuries as the result of hazardous conditions or 
accidents at work. Many of these workers have been left with 
disabilities they will have to cope with for the rest of their lives. 
 
This day of remembrance, it is also a time to rededicate 
ourselves to prevent workplace injuries, illness, and death. We 
have the best legislation in Canada, Mr. Speaker. A great deal 
of effort is going into enforcement, education, and promotion, 
and many workers and employers who are dedicated to the 
cause of health and safety. But we must do more so that every 
year we have fewer and fewer workers to remember on this day 
of mourning. 
 
Following the statements that have been made by other 
members in the House this morning, Mr. Speaker, I would now 
ask that members rise in a moment's silence for those workers 
who have been killed on the job. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 
question no. 66, I move it be converted to motion for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Question 66, motion for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to Maintain Financial Stability and 
Integrity in the Administration of the Finances of the 

Province of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very 
please today to rise in this Assembly to move second reading of 
The Balanced Budget Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this administration has a solid record of sound 
financial management. We have a sound financial plan for the 
future and the determination to see it through. We have 
eliminated the annual deficit and have begun to pay down the 
debt. 
 
As I've emphasized many times before, our financial 
management achievements are not just those of this 
government. Above all they are the proud achievements of the 
people of Saskatchewan. This legislation builds on those 
achievements and demonstrates the government's commitment 
to continue sound financial management in Saskatchewan. 
 
Accordingly this legislation addresses three key fiscal policy 
objectives — long-range financial planning; stability, which is  

so important to Saskatchewan's families and businesses; and the 
government's accountability to the public. Mr. Speaker, this 
legislation builds on our record and it is an integral part of our 
financial plan for the future. 
 
We promised the people of Saskatchewan that we would 
provide more open and accountable government. We are proud 
to have delivered on that promise. We made a commitment to 
eliminate the annual deficit and balance the budget. We are 
proud to have delivered on that commitment. 
 
We said that when the annual deficit had been eliminated we 
would begin to reduce the debt. Saskatchewan people are 
justifiably proud, Mr. Speaker, that we have delivered on that 
promise. In the fiscal year just ended, we reduced the total debt 
of the province by more than $500 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this administration took office in November 
1991, a decade of financial mismanagement had produced a 
financial position for the province that was gravely alarming 
and simply not sustainable. The annual deficit was $842 million 
and rising sharply. The total debt of the province had increased 
by a billion dollars a year on average, throughout the previous 
government's years in office. 
 
The province's credit rating had deteriorated significantly, and 
critical accountability improvements were required in order that 
the legislature and the public could be better informed and 
better able to hold government to account. 
 
Faced with that financial situation when we took office, Mr. 
Speaker, we acted. We acted with a plan, a sound financial 
plan, which we presented to the public and tabled in this 
legislature. We acted with compassion and we acted decisively. 
And because of the courage, determination, and hard work of 
all Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, together we have 
achieved results. The annual deficit has been eliminated and a 
balanced budget achieved. 
 
The annual deficit that had been $842 million has been 
eliminated. And the budget has been balanced not just for the 
last year, not just for this year, but for four years into the future. 
 
The total debt of the province was reduced, and by the end of 
1998-99, the total debt will have been reduced by $1.2 billion. 
The province's credit rating has been stabilized, and indeed, has 
been upgraded. 
 
And we have significantly improved public accountability. 
Beginning immediately in our very first months in office, Mr. 
Speaker, this administration has implemented an important 
series of measures to significantly improve accountability to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our approach emphasized the fundamental principles of 
long-term planning, stability, and accountability. Those are the 
central principles embodied in the legislation here before us 
today. And they are the principles that have characterized this 
government. 



April 28, 1995 

 
1847 

What Saskatchewan people want for the future, Mr. Speaker, is 
the assurance that their government's approach over the months 
and years ahead will be based on exactly these same principles. 
They want a practical and realistic plan. 
 
They want vital public services protected and sustained to 
improve the quality of life in Saskatchewan. They want stability 
in government policy in order that individual families and 
businesses can make their own sound plans and decisions. And 
they want their government to be fully open, honest, and 
accountable, with respect to the province's finances. This 
balanced budget legislation now before the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, addresses those legitimate demands and expectations 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
This legislation imposes significant requirements on the 
government. It requires the presentation of a four-year financial 
plan, the presentation of a debt management plan, the 
achievement of at least a balance in the General Revenue Fund 
over the planning period. 
 
It requires presentation to the legislature of annual update 
reports, annual mid-year financial reports, and a special report if 
a major event or set of circumstances has had a dramatic impact 
on revenue or expenses. Mr. Speaker, these are obligations and 
requirements that are being imposed on the government by law. 
 
This legislation also recognizes that Saskatchewan's public 
finances may be subject to sudden, unanticipated shocks such 
as those which may affect a resource-based economy. No one 
can accurately predict, for example, the price of oil a year in 
advance. No one can accurately predict what is going to happen 
to our crops. It therefore allows the government to avoid the 
need for sudden, sharp, temporary policy shifts which would be 
very destabilizing for families, communities, and businesses. 
 
It allows the government to respond to a major, unanticipated, 
identifiable event or set of circumstances which has had a 
dramatic impact on revenue or expenses by exempting the 
resulting revenue losses or expense increases from their 
requirement to balance over the four-year period. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this legislation contains two further 
distinctive provisions which will help protect the public against 
any future irresponsible government. 
 
First, the Act will prevent the government from manipulating 
accounting practices in order to meet the balance requirement. 
Provincial governments should not be allowed to meet the 
requirement to balance by simply changing its accounting 
practices and thus taking certain expenses off budget. Such 
practices will be prohibited. 
 
Second, the Act will prevent the government from using the 
proceeds from the sale of a Crown corporation in order to 
increase operating expenses. Such proceeds are clearly not 
financially sustainable. No government in Saskatchewan should 
be able to increase operating expenses by simply selling off or  

privatizing a Crown corporation. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's Balanced Budget Act 
is based on the same fundamental principles which have guided 
our approach to financial management from the outset — sound 
financial management; stability and sustainability; full, open 
accountability to the legislature and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Balanced Budget Act now before this 
Assembly builds on our record of sound financial management. 
We have set out a solid financial plan for Saskatchewan's future 
and this legislation is an important element in that integrated 
financial plan. And while these financial goals are important, it 
is essential to recognize that they are not ends in themselves. 
Instead they are means to an end. Means to help ensure that 
working together we are able to achieve the ultimate objectives 
we seek for our province — sound finances, but also a high 
qualify of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be pleased to respond to any questions from 
the opposition when this Bill is in Committee of the Whole, but 
I will urge them then, as I urge them now, set aside your 
partisan political interests and cooperate in passing this 
legislation. 
 
This Bill is about sound financial management and improving 
public accountability. It is about securing Saskatchewan's 
future. I urge that its passage not be delayed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is therefore with great pleasure that I move that 
The Balanced Budget Act now be read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I listened 
with interest to the comments being made by the Minister of 
Finance in presenting second reading regarding her balanced 
budget legislation that she introduced into the Assembly 
yesterday. 
 
And there's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that people across this 
province, and certainly across this land, have indicated that they 
feel it's time government had some restrictions placed on it 
regarding spending in order to protect the taxpayers from 
exorbitant spending that may put governments in a deficit 
position that has to be addressed sooner or later. 
 
And to that extent we can certainly agree with the intent — and 
I say the intent — of the current Bill that is before the 
Assembly. However, Mr. Speaker, I think the words by the 
Finance minister speak very loudly of the reason for the piece 
of legislation. Because some of the comments that she made 
about governments rigging the books or governments juggling 
figures, I think we don't have to look too far back to find out 
exactly where that process was taking place. 
 



April 28, 1995 

 
1848 

Take a look at 1991 — take a look at 1991, the fall of '91 or '92, 
where the government inflated a deficit so that they could look 
better come election time. And I think if you took the time to 
really review the auditor's report you would find that the 
government basically moved debt out of the Crowns into the 
general fund, inflated the deficit, to make it look better. 
 
And they were fortunate, and the minister acknowledged that, 
that certainly resource revenue and agriculture revenue this past 
year actually allowed them to achieve a balanced budget even a 
little quicker, although how did they achieve that? They 
achieved that balanced budget this year on the backs of 
individuals across this province, whether it was the agricultural 
sector . . . and the agricultural sector certainly has paid dearly, 
and unfortunately some people in that agricultural field may 
even pay more dearly come this fall as we see the weather 
conditions that are facing us. Mr. Speaker, for the minister to 
indicate that they haven't increased taxes and managed to 
balance the books, is ludicrous. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that while Crown 
corporations like SaskPower and SaskTelephone and 
SaskEnergy continue to make exorbitant profits, they have also 
continued to tax every one of us across this province for the 
past four years. This past year was the first time we haven't had 
increases. And that is also a noted convenience in the fact that a 
general election is on the way and the government didn't want 
to offend the taxpayers of this province any more than they 
already have. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government can talk about what the 
former government may have done in trying to close the books 
or hide the books — the fact that they needed to open the 
books. I remember . . . and I just went back and did a review of 
an interview that Donald Gass, who was the commissioner of 
the open-the-books commission, just following the last 
provincial election . . . And his comments on an open line were, 
never at any time did it appear that the former government 
attempted to hide the books. The books were wide open for 
anyone who wanted to take the time to review them. 
 
The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that while the 
government talks a good line, the government continues to just 
talk about one issue of expenditures in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They continue to talk about the general 
expenditures in this province; they forget about the total 
expenditures. They forget about the fact that Crown 
corporations are a part of the expenditures and the financial 
accountability of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They forget about the fact that unfunded pension liabilities play 
an important part in the expenditures of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we know within this Legislative Assembly 
that the unfunded portion of the pension plan within this 
province, there are seven or eight members in this Assembly 
who are under that unfunded pension plan who are going to 
receive very lucrative pensions when they retire or are retired by 
the electorate of this province. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I must also point out to the individuals and 
to people across this province that while we were facing 
difficult economic times in the '80s, while we were facing 
conditions of drought that persisted for a number of years rather 
than one or two years, the former government took an unfunded 
pension liability from a $5 billion unfunded position in 1981 to 
a position of $2.8 billion unfunded. 
 
And now what have we seen over the last years? We've seen 
that unfunded portion has now again increased to $3.2, which 
means, Mr. Speaker, that this government continues to take 
from other portions and allows them to grow while at the same 
time looking good in one portion. 
 
So I think it's time this minister and this government finally 
came clear and showed the total picture of debt in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And I go back to the report that was released 
by the auditor just back in November, where the auditor took 
the time to go back and show the progression of debt for the 
last four years. And in his report showed how the debt has 
actually increased over the last four years. 
 
And the fact is if you'd look at the total debt in the province of 
Saskatchewan, taking the general revenue, the Crown 
corporations, and the unfunded pension plans, and lumping 
them all together, there's over $20 billion  some $6 billion 
more than it was in the election year of 1991. 
 
So for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, yes we do need legislation 
that basically holds governments and ministers, like the present 
Minister of Finance, more accountable for their actions. And as 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers have indicated, certainly while they 
agree with the balanced budget legislation, the unfortunate part 
is this legislation does not address the total aspect of balanced 
budgets and what do you really mean by balanced budgets. 
 
This legislation appears to have as many loopholes in it that 
some of the rules within the Board of Internal Economy have, 
as we heard in question period today. 
 
And it's for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, why our opposition will 
bring out and point out to the present minister and point out to 
this government, that there needs to be a little more teeth, as my 
colleague, the member from Kindersley, the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, has indicated. There has to be a little more 
to this legislation that we have here. 
 
And while we continue to debate the legislation and the 
balanced budget legislation, Mr. Speaker, we will also take the 
time to bring forward amendments to address the concerns of 
individuals, and of the business community, and of the 
taxpayers across this province, and of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers' association, that will indeed address the concerns of 
individuals who feel that this legislation still does not have the 
teeth that will be needed to make sure that governments and 
elected representatives and ministers are responsible for 
expenditures in this province regardless of whatever party 
should form the next government  are totally held  



April 28, 1995 

 
1849 

accountable for their actions. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while we say in principle we can agree 
with balanced budget legislation, we can agree that it's time 
governments basically laid out a plan for a term as to what they 
hope to accomplish, and we can also agree that you basically set 
out an understanding of what you may achieve for net income 
to indicate how you'll balance your books, it's also important 
that when a government doesn't take the appropriate measures 
to do work within the avenues that are available to it. 
 
And where it would abuse the loopholes that may be available, 
it's important that we bring forward some firm amendments to 
this piece of legislation that really hold the government 
accountable for the type of legislation that they are bringing 
here today and making a government, any government, 
responsible indeed to the taxpayers so that the government 
represents the people and is the servant — indeed the servant, 
not the master. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, while I've raised these points, 
we have a number of points we want to raise in the future and 
as we get into discussion. And therefore at this time, to allow 
the process to work appropriately and to allow for the 
appropriate term of consultation, I would move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — Before we deal with the motion, I would ask the 
Associate Minister of Finance to introduce the officials who 
have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. Two of the three people who are with me were here 
Wednesday on last . . . part of last week when it was here 
Wednesday. We had the honour of welcoming Bill Jones, the 
new deputy minister of Finance. Seated behind him, Wednesday 
and now, is Larry Spannier, executive director of the Treasury 
Board branch. New today, but certainly no stranger to this 
Assembly  he has been here many, many times  is Gerry 
Kraus, the Provincial Comptroller. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now, Mr. 
Chairman, I have two points of view that I'd like to express to 
the minister. First is my grave disappointment with the Minister 
of Finance not choosing to deliver answers to us about the 
needs for this money and where it's to be spent. My 
disappointment that yesterday when we discussed the very 
important issue, we were not given the answers to the questions 
that the taxpayers are demanding to know about. 
 
And of course I have some other mixed feelings, Mr. Chairman,  

because I'm happy to say that — and I have this mixed emotion, 
because I'm really happy — that after the minister predicted 
yesterday that the world was going to come to the end and that 
the universe would stop because we didn't pass this motion, I'm 
really happy this morning that here we are, all still alive and 
well and ready to ask some more questions. And the world kept 
on turning and the universe didn't come to a stop and the sun 
probably came up in the east above the clouds. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, it's with a great deal of pleasure that I am 
here today to ask the questions that the minister more or less 
predicted we would never have another opportunity to do, 
because the world was definitely going to come to an end, and 
we were definitely going to report to all of the constituents how 
the opposition had destroyed the potential for the province to 
continue to finance itself and continue to pay the bills that were 
necessary in order for people to survive. 
 
Well here we are. It's now Friday and we are still alive and well 
and haven't heard of anybody yet passing away as a result of not 
having gotten this Bill finished yesterday. 
 
So now that we've gotten past that immediate kind of urgency 
of necessarily having to pass it in order to save the world, 
maybe today, because we're past that crisis, maybe, Mr. 
Minister, you won't mind actually getting down to business and 
answering some of the questions that we've asked and some of 
the new ones that have come up as a result of further 
deliberations in the community around us and out in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like the minister to explain to us 
something about the process of the way that the Department of 
Finance handles the monies of this province. We asked 
yesterday, is all the one-twelfth apportionment of money, 
one-twelfth of the budget that we allowed the government 
through interim supply last month for the month of May . . . 
Towards the end of March we passed a Bill in this Assembly, 
allowing the Minister of Finance to spend one-twelfth of the 
money without having a budget passed. And that was to cover 
the bills for the month of May, which isn't yet over but soon 
will be. 
 
Now has all of that one-twelfth apportionment of money been 
spent? Is there any left over? And we believe that you should be 
able to answer that kind of a question. We don't think there's 
any reason why you wouldn't know whether or not the money 
has been spent or has not been spent and how much money is 
involved that is or isn't spent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It has nothing to do with how much 
money we've got and whether or not there's a little bit left in the 
bank account. That's not the issue. The government has money; 
what the government lacks is authorization to spend the money. 
And there's quite a difference. 
 
The previous interim supply authorized the expenditure of 
one-twelfth and no more. Before we can spend any more than 
that one-twelfth, we need the authorization of the legislature. So  



April 28, 1995 

 
1850 

thanks to — if I may be forgiven for using the using word — 
conservative prudent management, we have money to spend. 
We don't have authorization to spend it. And that's what we're 
here for today. 
 
I know the members opposite are undeterred by the difficulties 
they're causing, but you . . . unless this is passed and passed 
relatively quickly, there are going to be important institutions . . 
. and there's going to be a good deal of hardship starting 
Monday when we're unable to make payments which 
institutions and which the public depend upon. Your 
gamesmanship, whatever your goal may be — and I must say, I 
wish you'd enlighten us — whatever your goal in all this may 
be, you're going to cause a good deal of hardship. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, I 
will explain it to you what exactly the point is. The point is 
grievance before supply. Long-standing tradition of democratic 
parliamentary process is that the government and the Minister 
of Finance is required to answer the questions of the taxpayers, 
before that money that the taxpayers puts into the general fund, 
in this case, is allowed to be spent. You are to explain yourself 
to the people. 
 
That's why we have a democratic process that works so well, is 
because we have certain fundamental rules that have been tried 
and tested. And the ones that have worked well in the past are 
the ones that we have kept in the system. And the ones that 
didn't work are the ones of course that we threw out and 
changed and experimented with other things. 
 
Now this is a history of hundreds of years. This is not 
something that I dreamt up yesterday or any other time before 
that. This is a time-tested approach to democratic government 
that has been put into effect throughout the British Empire and 
throughout the world for many generations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, grievance before supply. That means you tell 
us why you're going to spend the money and where. And then 
we say, okay that's fine; you can spend the money in those 
places. 
 
The other point you make is that . . . and it's not correct, sir. 
You make the point that the issue is that you need to have 
permission in order to spend the next two-twelfths. Well the 
issue is not that. The issue is that I asked you a question: how 
much money is left from the last apportionment that we gave 
you permission to spend? How did you spend that? To justify, 
we want to know those answers so that we can see if you are 
justified in asking for the next two-twelfths. 
 
Do you have any legitimate right to getting the next 
two-twelfths? You have to explain to the people of this 
province, to the taxpayers, whether or not it is justified for you 
to come and ask for more money. You haven't told us how you 
spent the last amount we gave you on good faith. We were 
trying to be fair with you. We let you away. No big questions, 
no big hassle. But we said we were going to hold you 
accountable. Now we're holding you accountable. So how much  

is left? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The member's question is legitimate. 
We have spent at this point in time, approximately two-thirds of 
the one-twelfth which was authorized. However, the entire 
one-twelfth will be . . . almost all of the one-twelfth will be 
exhausted at the end of this month. And beginning in May, 
there will be payments which we would normally make in May 
which needs additional authorization. 
 
So at this point in time about two-thirds of it is spent. By the 
end of the month it'll virtually all be gone and cheques which 
would normally go out in May require additional authorization. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well thank you, Minister, and thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. I think we're probably starting to get through to the 
members that it is responsible government to answer questions 
that the opposition puts. So let's get into this a little further so 
that we can resolve these problems. 
 
Now you talk about hardships, and before I get away from that 
area, I want to take you back to that before you get it out of 
your mind on other issues. What exact hardships are going to be 
caused on Monday morning or Tuesday morning, whenever 
May 1 is, if you don't have this two-twelfths’ allocation passed 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Okay, since the member asked, let 
me name a sampling of institutions which will harmed by 
delaying the Bill. 
 
In the area of Education, Training and Employment: University 
of Regina, University of Saskatchewan, Campion College, 
Luther College, St. Thomas More College, St. Peter's College, 
National Institute for the Blind, Emmanuel and St. Chad's, St. 
Andrew's College, Canadian Theological Seminary, Central 
Pentecostal, Lutheran Theological Seminary. 
 
In the Environment and Resource Management area: 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres; 
reforestation activities are actually going to be physically 
delayed. It's not that it's hurting somebody but the reforestation 
activities will be physically delayed. 
 
In the area of Health, we will be hurting district health boards. 
We will be delaying physicians' payments. And members 
opposite, I hope, are listening to this. We will be hampering 
Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre. A number of NGOs 
(non-governmental organizations) — let me pick the Metis 
Addiction Counselling and the Louis Rehabilitation Centre as a 
couple of representative groups. The U of S student health care. 
We're going to be hampering community clinics. 
 
In the area of Municipal Government: rural, urban, and northern 
municipalities will not get their grants under revenue sharing. 
The members may appreciate that it encompasses most of the 
province — rural, urban, and northern. Social housing programs 
and clients under Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will be 
affected. Public library grants to all of Saskatchewan's  



April 28, 1995 

 
1851 

libraries. Provincial grants through the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation. 
 
In the area of Social Services: group homes for abused and 
vulnerable children and youth, payments to them will be 
delayed; to transition houses, which assist abused women; 
sexual assault treatment centres, who assist and work with and 
treat those who've been sexually assaulted; family counselling 
centres and services for teen parents; group homes for mentally 
challenged adults. 
 
Some of these institutions might have some cash flow upon 
which they can carry on; some of them clearly do not. Members 
wanted to know who you're hurting. This is who you're hurting. 
I don't know of a way of making you act in a responsible 
fashion. 
 
I spent 10 years trying to do that in opposition, without success. 
Now spent virtually four years in government without success. I 
don't know any way of making you behave in a responsible 
fashion. I do want to tell you that there's going to be some real 
pain if you don't pass this. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I was really hoping I 
wouldn't have to stand up and do this again. 
 
You know I thought after we had the discussion with the 
Finance minister yesterday that we wouldn't see another New 
Democrat get up in here and chastise us and lecture us about 
holding . . . I mean as if the opposition are the ones that 
determine when interim supply comes to this Assembly, Mr. 
Chairman. What a bunch of garbage. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, if you were so concerned about all 
those people out there, why didn't you tell the House Leader to 
bring it in last week? It's your agenda; you're the one that 
always puts it up. I mean what is this? Is this a charade or 
something? Why do we have interim supply? Why don't you 
just take it off the order paper if you don't want to talk about it. 
What's the point? 
 
You come in and you're going to spend one-sixth of the entire 
year's budget, but you don't want to talk about it, so therefore 
why bring it forward? When you were in opposition, Mr. 
Minister, it was your God-given right to stand in here and ask 
questions infinitum on interim supply and you reminded the 
House of that time and time again. 
 
Why is it New Democrats don't have to answer questions in 
interim supply? Tories and Liberals and whoever else should 
have to answer questions in interim supply, but New Democrats 
don't. If you don't want the exercise, then do away with it. You 
obviously don't believe in it. You don't believe it's necessary. 
Why bother? Why take up the time of the House? 
 
Just to have your Finance minister come walking in here from 
on high and say we're going to spend X millions of dollars and 
that's it — it's done. 
 

That's what you just told the House. If we don't do it your way, 
all these people are going to get hurt. Mr. Minister, you know 
full well that that twelfth that you got last month hasn't all been 
spent. You know it. I don't know how many . . . Answer this 
question then. What's the volume of cheques that go out on 
May 1 and would go out normally on May 1 each and every 
year. Tell me what the volume is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We don't have a precise count, but 
the number of cheques which go out on May 1 would number 
in the tens of thousands. And the amount of money would be at 
a minimum in the tens of millions of dollars. This is no trifling 
matter that you're toying with. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I'm not toying with anything, Minister, and 
you know darn well. You know what the practice of this House 
has been over the last 90 years — 90 years, and you know it. 
 
You asked questions in this House for days on end on interim 
supply. And if you don't want to answer questions on it, that's 
fine. Why don't you just come in from on high and say you 
don't want to answer questions on it and be done with it. 
Change the rules like you've changed the rules around here for 
the last four years. 
 
You haven't hesitated to change the rules for your own benefit 
before; why not change this one? Then you wouldn't have to 
answer any questions in front of anybody. Just go ahead and 
spend it. That's what you'd like. That's what you've indicated. 
That's what your minister's indicated. Why stop now? 
 
You were the one that raised it, Minister. You were the one that 
raised it. What's the volume of cheques that go out at the end of 
the month? Maybe you can tell me that? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The same number. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So some of these organizations get paid on 
the first of the month and some get paid at the end of the 
month. Are there any that get paid in the middle of the month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There are certainly some that are paid 
in the middle of the month and this will vary from month to 
month to some degree. The fact is that will exhaust what we 
have at the end of April. Starting in May, we do not have the 
authorization to spend. 
 
The member talks about bringing this in 10 days before the end 
of the month. In any field of human activity, we always rely 
upon the past. We assume the practices in the past will 
continue. At no time in the past 20 years has interim supply 
taken longer than three days. And it is almost always done in a 
single day. It sometimes stretches into two. At no time has it 
ever taken more than three days. 
 
If we'd have had the faintest warning that this is where you 
people wanted to squander your time, we'd have brought it in a  



April 28, 1995 

 
1852 

lot earlier. There was no indication this was going to take 
longer than three days. And certainly past practice would lead 
us to believe it would take a lot less than three days. 
 
But don't give us this nonsense about bringing it in earlier. You 
people are breaking with past practice; there's nothing that can 
be done. You can go on. But you are going, I think, you are 
going to pay the price in public respect, whatever modest 
amount of it you people have left  there's very little. 
Whatever is left, I think you're going to squander it if this goes 
on past today. I think you've squandered some of it already. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if it'll make the member 
feel better, he can stop the issuance of my pay cheque for a few 
days to help somebody out. I'd gladly do that for the minister if 
things are in a real bind. I mean if he wants to hold my pay 
cheque until the middle of the month, you go right ahead. 
 
But I'm telling you that as an elected person in this province, 
when I ask legitimate questions about the expenditures of this 
province, especially seeing as the budget may not be passed . . . 
that this money may be all that takes this province through an 
election writ to the end of June. 
 
I see yesterday the Premier of the province announcing the 
expenditure of $6 million minimum, outside of anything that 
we've seen, with the promise of more to come. I asked the 
minister some simple questions about Treasury Board process 
because there is a megaproject on the go in downtown Regina 
involving Crown money and a different borrowing practice or a 
different spending practice than we've seen previously in this 
House. And I get no answers. 
 
A matter of fact, the minister, at the end of day yesterday, just 
more or less said, I will not answer another question; it is none 
of your business how the Gaming Corporation spends its 
money. None of your business. Okay? I won't tell you what 
Treasury Board agreed to or didn't agree to, so therefore I'm 
some kind of a . . . 
 
I mean I'm only asking questions that any member of this 
Assembly, when faced with millions of dollars of expenditures, 
when this may be the only financial document available to the 
members of the House if the budget doesn't pass . . . and yet I'm 
foolish. I have no right. 
 
I mean the month before your interim supply went through in 
probably less than an hour because you only asked for 
one-twelfth and there was no danger that that was going to be 
the money that would run the province through an election 
campaign — none whatsoever. So why wouldn't we grant it 
you? It's one-twelfth. There's no ability to move money much. 
This time it's two-twelfths and this could be it. No budget 
passed. 
 
That wouldn't be the first premier had ever walked out of here 
and pulled the pin without having a budget passed, would he? 
You were part of a government in '82 that did that. You went to 
the polls. You said, I'm not going to pass it. So you wouldn't  

. . . that's not unprecedented. 
 
I am faced with special circumstances here, sir, as the Finance 
critic. And I'm asking you legitimate questions about 
expenditures that go to the tens of millions of dollars that aren't 
accounted for in this two-twelfths. You say I'm out of line. I 
don't understand that. 
 
And I'll tell you, I got a few phone calls last night from people 
that were very, very sympathetic to the questions I was asking 
yesterday and thought it made a great deal of sense that those 
questions should be asked on behalf of taxpayers, especially if 
you don't pass your budget. And yet you say those questions 
have no legitimacy and they shouldn't be in this House. That I 
don't understand from the Associate Minister of Finance — I 
don't understand that. 
 
You have given me no assurance that the agencies you named 
do not have money from the previous one-twelfth to at least get 
them through today, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. That's 
what you're alluding to and that's what you're telling this 
Assembly. Are you absolutely firm on that, that those agencies 
don't have money for today, Monday, Tuesday, and 
Wednesday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Of course I'm not. Your question's 
absurd. I do not know what the situation at the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Then why say it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I wonder if the member is going to 
let me finish. I do not think I interrupted you and perhaps you'd 
let me finish before you respond. 
 
I do not know what the situation at the University of 
Saskatchewan is, but I could guess. My guess is they've got 
little cash flow. I do not know what the situation at some of the 
NGOs are, but I can guess. They've got no cash flow and no 
ability to borrow. So some of these institutions will get along 
okay; some will be hurt. 
 
The member talks about stopping his pay cheque. Of course you 
have the resources to carry on. Of course you do. 
 
I ask the member opposite if you think all social service 
recipients also have the resources to carry on? Do all the NGOs 
who live from one cheque to the next have the resources to 
carry on? Are they going to be able to meet pay cheques and 
bills that come in at the beginning of the month? 
 
The member opposite is not the most needy of the groups that 
we deal with. There are many in society far needier than you. 
We could stop your pay cheque. And frankly it wouldn't bother 
my conscience if we stopped it for a few days. Does it trouble 
the member's conscience that we're stopping the cheques from 
other, far needier groups? Does that trouble your conscience at 
all? 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, if you were so bothered, why  



April 28, 1995 

 
1853 

haven't you changed the format to make sure that doesn't 
happen? He says, you know precedent in this House . . . I mean 
the Tory precedent was that you didn't come in till two or three 
days before the end of the month. Well every other thing about 
Tories I have ever heard in this House coming out of that 
member's mouth or anybody else, was wrong. So if you thought 
it was wrong then, why isn't it wrong now? 
 
I mean you didn't hesitate to take away bell ringing in this 
Assembly. It's been here since 1905. But you, the New 
Democrats, took that away. Boom, gone. There's never been 
members’ statements in the House till recently. New Democrats 
did that  bang, change the rules, like that. Used your big 
majority, ram her through. 
 
Okay, you haven't hesitated a bit to change the rules of this 
House from past precedent. If you thought it was going to 
further your political agenda, you do it, sir. You do it. 
 
But all of a sudden we're faced with interim supply. No, we 
don't want that precedent changed. No, sir. Tories and Liberals 
did that in the past. We can hang our hat on that one. We can 
hide behind that. We can go to the NGOs and say, oh these 
awful Tories are holding up your pay cheque. We're just going 
on past practice, past precedent. We wouldn't want to change 
that rule now, would we? That would leave us open to some 
kind of political embarrassment. Oh no, we wouldn't change 
that rule. 
 
Same old stuff from you guys all the time. Pick and choose, 
double standard, here we go. Well it doesn't wash any more, 
Minister. People are getting smarter all the time. It doesn't wash 
any more. You set the agenda. You're the government. If you're 
worried about it, then you do something about it. Don't hide 
except when it's convenient for you to hide. Do something 
about it. 
 
I think it would be proper, if you were going to come in with 
that prepared list, and I presume your officials prepared the list 
for you, that they would also have a list of how many of those 
agencies still have some of the one-twelfth available to them. 
And you would have that and I think you should table that in 
the House so we clearly see who's got money and who doesn't 
have money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — They're not required to report their 
financial situation to us. There's no way we'd know. The 
member knows that. We're only speculating. I said that. 
 
I would speculate that the University of Saskatchewan's got 
some cash flow, although I may be wrong. I would speculate 
that a goodly number of these NGOs have no cash flow, and 
there I don't think I'm wrong. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — So what you're saying is, no, I haven't got any 
lists; I'm not going to give you anything; I speculate. I come in 
here and I make all of these accusations, but I don't have 
anything to back it up with. Just go away; get out of my road; 
let interim supply go through. Don't bother me any more. 

That's a great attitude. You're going into an election campaign, 
sir. This may be it, but the taxpayer isn't supposed to ask you 
any questions. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the minister — it's a 
charade. Maybe we should let him do what he wants to do and 
simply get out of his road. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I move the committee rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — I wonder, before we do that, if the minister has 
another motion that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I thank the chairman for his acute 
observation. I hereby move resolution no. 2: 
 
 That towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1996, the 
sum of $701,474,000 be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move the resolutions 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 
 That Bill No. 63, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1996, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — By leave of the Assembly, and under 
rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 
 



April 28, 1995 

 
1854 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 58 — An Act 
to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular 
amendment to The Income Tax Act deals with the government's 
announcement, budget announcement, to give selected tax cuts 
to various business ventures around the province, and thereby 
promote economic development. 
 
And it's really strange, Mr. Speaker, that after all of this time, 
this particular NDP government has sort of come around to the 
fact that number one, taxation is a hindrance to business and 
jobs. And I remember the Premier's quote back in 1991 where 
he said, taxation is the biggest killer of jobs in our society. And 
he's absolutely right. I guess that's why he's a thousand jobs 
short today from where he was back in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
After the rest of Canada has pulled itself out of recession and is 
busy creating jobs, the economies are growing, this province 
after four . . . nearly four years of NDP government is still a 
thousand jobs short of where they were then. 
 
So there's no question, taxation has a very big effect on activity 
in this province. And you only have to ask people in the west 
side of the province, Swift Current, all the way up to 
Lloydminster, what the effects of taxation have. They're 
absolutely devastating. Chamber of commerce in Swift Current 
estimates that it's $55 million a year that they lose to Medicine 
Hat  or at least that area, Swift Current and area. 
 
And I remember well, Mr. Speaker, the debate in this 
Legislative Assembly back in 1991 when we were dealing with 
the issue of harmonization, and New Democrats for days on 
end, tied the Assembly up. Brought in petitions, saying that 
business — business should not get preferential tax treatment 
from the average individual. That through harmonization, 
because business were able to claim back their portion of the 
sales tax charged for a capital expense or the ongoing needs of 
business, like your gas bill, your power bill, your telephone bill, 
those things, that business should not be able to claim that. That 
that was unfair to the average home owner and the average 
taxpayer who was going to have to bear the full brunt of 
harmonization. 
 
But what's happened, Mr. Speaker, is that reality has come 
home to these people as it has in many ways, and they've 
realized that the dismal job creation record, the amount of 
people on social services, was absolutely killing the province of 
Saskatchewan. That you had to get yourself on an even par with 
those around you. That Alberta and Manitoba, United States, 
and other places do have a very strong effect on a province that 
lives by trade. Trade is absolutely fundamental. Eighty per cent 
of everything we do here, Mr. Speaker, has to go some place 
else for consumption, whether it be food products or 
manufactured products, but we cannot consume and eat and use 
all of the things that we do here. We are an export orientated 
society. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you export, you compete with a whole  

lot of other people. So what we've seen the government do is 
very selectively say, because we know sales tax, we know that 
input costs are a hindrance to you being successful and we need 
the economic smack that you provide because of employment, 
because of tax dollars, because of real estate values, we will 
provide selected usage. And we saw the beginnings of it with 
Sears and others who got selected, preferential treatment, Mr. 
Speaker, by this NDP government — selected, preferential 
treatment. 
 
We have now seen this taken another step forward where 
they've said there's whole sectors now that are going to have 
this special treatment. And we can even stretch it to the point 
where we will go to somebody like Cargill and we'll say, rather 
than you being able to claim these tax credits now over the 
construction phase of your plant, we'll just give it to you 
upfront in cash. Okay, you don't even have to go through the 
paperwork of spending the money; we'll just simply estimate on 
the total value, capital value of your plant, and we'll upfront the 
cash. 
 
Well that's quite a leap, Mr. Speaker, from a bunch in 1991 that 
thought it was absolutely awful if anybody even claimed back 
their power bill as a business expense under harmonization. 
And I heard it from them, time after time in here. They brought 
in a hundred thousand names on petitions, they claimed, of 
people that said it is unfair that business is able to use their 
portion of the PST and get it back, but we can't as 
home-owners. 
 
And now the NDP say, well it's okay if we just use it 
selectively. It's okay if we do it with Cargill or we do it with the 
friends of the Economic Development minister, but we can't do 
it with everybody. 
 
And it's a strange transformation, Mr. Speaker, that takes place 
over the last three and a half years with the so-called social 
democrats of the province of Saskatchewan. You know, the 
defender-of-the-little-guy bunch, the guys that believe that you 
always, you always equalize everything down to the lowest 
common denominator. Those guys — the defenders of 
medicare? 
 
And now we get in legislation that it's all right to pick and 
choose your way through the economy. Did you pick and 
choose your way through the folks who will come here and 
create jobs? 
 
And you even piggyback yourself onto things that other 
administrations did and brought here. And you say, aren't these 
wonderful things now. We're working them and they're saying 
nice things about us, and they're the engines of growth in our 
society. 
 
Our Finance minister trundles off to New York to collect 
money, assure them that our bonds are all right. And who does 
she use an examples? Oh, people like Hitachi and Cargill and 
Crown Life and Millar Western, and the list goes on and on. 
And not only that, Mr. Speaker, these people now receive  



April 28, 1995 

 
1855 

selected tax treatment — selective tax treatment. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the basis of Bill No. 58. It shouldn't 
be an Act to amend The Income Tax Act, it should be called an 
Act to amend the social democratic philosophy of the province 
of Saskatchewan. That's what it should be called — an Act to 
amend the social democratic philosophy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
See, Mr. Speaker, what it points to is there is absolutely no truth 
in political advertising. And members of the House wonder why 
the folks out there are a little bit cynical, you know, a little bit 
cynical. 
 
October 21 the PST is gone. Did it go? No, it didn't go 
anywhere. It just went up, took some more out of your 
pocketbook. That's the only place it went. 
 
Harmonization is dead, unless you happen to be a big company 
and the jobs and the tax dollars that you bring to this province 
are badly needed because your record is in trouble. Then it's all 
right. 
 
I mean that's why there's no truth in advertising. I suspect that's 
why the member from Rosemont isn't running again. He admits, 
he says, I'm a social democrat; I'm a left-wing person; I'm going 
to stay true to my philosophy; I'm not going to run again; I can't 
put up with this junk any more. They say one thing and then 
they change their minds three years later. 
 
Used to be NDPers in this province, Mr. Speaker, were 
consistent if nothing else. They were fairly consistent. But 
nowadays, no, the politics of survival, of maintaining power, 
keeping your friends there, your Jack Messer friends and others, 
are more important than any kind of philosophy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is no truth in political advertising when 
it comes to New Democrats, especially when you get to 
taxation. Taxation, Mr. Speaker, has become a way of life with 
these people. And they will selectively apply it or selectively 
remove it in order to help out wherever they think it's most 
politically expedient. There's no question. 
 
And the proof is in Bill 58; the proof is here. I will cherry-pick 
my way through the economy of this province, because by 
doing that I can have the most political impact on how I am 
perceived by the people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's all sorts of families in this province, and 
these are the people that pay the majority of taxes, that are in 
that 25 to 35, $45,000 range. They don't even begin, Mr. 
Speaker, to qualify. They don't even begin, and never will. 
What they can do is simply pay and pay and pay. And they, Mr. 
Speaker, will never get a chunk of money upfront like Cargill 
got. They will never get a break like the CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) got. They will never get the break 
that Sears got. All they will do is pay and pay and pay. 
 
And I guess the only thing we can hope, Mr. Speaker, the only  

thing we can hope is that these people here, the next time they 
go out and campaign in the province of Saskatchewan, will say 
we aren't New Democrats any more. We've decided to change 
our philosophy. It doesn't work any more; it's ancient history. 
And we can't stand on our ground any more; we've got to come 
out and tell the truth, say exactly what we are. We're closer to a 
Liberal than we are anything else and we'll become Liberals. 
And we'll mix and match like Liberals do and we'll try and be in 
the mushy centre of the spectrum, and we'll sort of do a little 
free enterprising. We'll do a little of this, and we'll be Liberals. 
And they can be just like Chrétien and his friends in Ottawa and 
play to that middle ground, and none of this social democratic 
stuff any more because it simply doesn’t exist — it's 
non-existent. 
 
(1200) 
 
And you can't campaign on it any more. You can't go out and 
sell yourself as the protector of the poor and the guy that's going 
to look after the underdog. Because the proof's in the pudding; 
it's in the legislation. It's there every day. It's who's paying the 
taxes and who isn't. It's as simple as that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I believe people in the 1990s are smart enough to start to 
realize what's going on here. They aren't going to put up with 
the hypocrisy of Bills such as No. 58 much longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the impact of this Bill on the business community 
is, as I have mentioned, significant, especially in some sectors. 
Some sectors are able to use this far more effectively than 
others. We have contacted a lot of people around this province 
— areas like manufacturing, tourism industry, others — to try 
and size up the impact of the changes. 
 
Some responses, as I can appreciate, Mr. Speaker, are positive; 
others aren't so positive, because they see this as one way that 
some people can really take advantage in our society. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, until we understand the full impact of this 
government cherry-picking operation, that this Bill should not 
move forward. And I'm going to move that we adjourn debate 
until all of those questions are answered. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 24 — An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
reviewing this particular piece of legislation, I don't find a lot 
that I think is controversial. In the best interests of the House, I 
think that the proper place to discuss this would be in 
committee, that the officials need to be in in order to get some 
answers with some of this stuff. And therefore I would say that 
I'd be prepared that this Bill go to Committee of the Whole, sir. 



April 28, 1995 

 
1856 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 60 — An Act to 
amend The Department of Health Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
take a few moments just to address a few concerns regarding 
this Bill. I would also indicate that this Bill was fairly recently 
introduced to the House and it would also be appropriate that 
we take a little while longer to review it before it be moved to 
committee. 
 
But according to the Health minister, Bill 60 will allow 
Saskatchewan to benefit economically from our knowledge and 
achievements in the health field. What it does, Mr. Speaker, is 
allows the government to enter into commercial agreements 
related to health technology, expertise, and information. 
 
Apparently this legislation will allow for the division to conduct 
market research and establish partnerships to achieve these 
objectives. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to technology in the 
health care field, Saskatchewan, as we all know it has been the 
focus of attention for quite some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just have to think back a few short years and 
we're quite well aware of the introduction of the computerized 
health care cards for Saskatchewan people. And what we've 
seen since that introduction, we've had several representatives 
come from several countries to our province to study the 
process in order to implement it in their countries. 
 
And it's just a strong indication that the health card has certainly 
been a benefit and can be a benefit, if you will, in maintaining 
and finding ways to create a more efficient and yet caring health 
care system. 
 
And as many of the constituents of mine and people across this 
province have indicated, it would certainly appear that this card 
could be used in a much greater sense, certainly through 
hospital or visits to a doctor, even in their clinics in just 
establishing a method of following up regarding costs of our 
health care system. 
 
The minister stated that in recent months, health officials from 
Wales, South Africa, the Republic of Georgia, and others, have 
visited our province. In addition, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
has received speaking opportunities and invitations from many 
other countries and organizations including the Pan American 
Health Organization in Washington, DC (District of Columbia); 
Bolivia, Taiwan, and Northern Ireland. 
 
As we note, Mr. Speaker, health reform has taken place not 
only across this province, but across this nation, across this 
continent, and worldwide. And certainly this international  

interest in our technology is understandable. And the official 
opposition certainly supports any measure which will enhance 
economic development in this province. And we see this . . . 
we're prepared to support this NDP government in their support 
of . . . basically they're advertising and offering the technology 
and the services we have available to this province and how 
they could be used in other areas, in other nations and other 
countries. 
 
There are however a few questions that need to be clarified in 
regards to Bill 60. The Bill allows the Department to, quote: 
develop health systems and health technology or expertise. Yet 
there is no dollar figure placed at how these initiatives will be 
arrived at. As well, definitions are needed for these terms. 
 
As far as marketing technology systems and marketing health 
systems and technology to persons, other governments, 
international agencies, or commercial or non-profit 
organizations, is this a question of overlap, Mr. Speaker? That's 
something that we will need to address as we proceed further in 
the debate of Bill 60. 
 
Do we not have an Economic Development branch of 
government solely dedicated to marketing Saskatchewan? Is 
this not an avenue that could be used? So are we . . . I guess the 
big question at the end of the day, are we talking about building 
a bigger bureaucracy in Saskatchewan, or a better and more 
efficient bureaucratic system and network, whereby we 
basically use what we already have in place to meet the needs 
and the requests that come to us. 
 
The Bill also states that the department will be allowed to enter 
into any agreements that the minister considers necessary for 
the purposes of exercising any power or function pursuant to 
this section. This, Mr. Speaker, I believe that's a fairly broad 
mandate; one that seems to have no cap unless the Health 
Minister creates one. And it's certainly something that we need 
to take the time to review and address. And as I indicated earlier 
there are other questions as well, Mr. Speaker, that need to be 
pursued in regards to Bill 60. 
 
And since it was just introduced on April 24, and we haven't 
had ample time to do enough or sufficient research to make sure 
that the questions we're raising are the concerns that certainly 
are out there regarding Bill 60, it's therefore appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker, that at this time I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
The Chairperson: — I will ask that the minister introduce the 
officials with him here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
With me today is Mr. Jim Brickwell, senior policy analyst,  



April 28, 1995 

 
1857 

municipal policy and legislative services branch of Municipal 
Government. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your official joining us this afternoon. 
 
In regards to the Act, Bill No. 47, The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act, Mr. Chairman, and to the minister, it's quite 
evident over the past number of years, and I believe even back 
prior to 1991, that there have been or were cut-backs to a 
number of organizations such as even the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, as governments were trying to grapple with the . . . 
or have been trying to grapple with expenditures and the cost of 
supplying services. 
 
And I'm not exactly sure where the Authority stands today; what 
their feelings are regarding funding. I would be surprised if they 
didn't have concerns over the reduction in funding over the past 
number of years. 
 
And I believe when you introduced the Bill, you had indicated 
that for the first time in a long time you've at least been able to 
hold the line rather than reducing the funds. But I would like to 
know, in regard to the fact that we have had over the past 
number of years, an inflationary factor that most people like to 
pursue when they talk about the fact they need increases, as far 
as the funding level that we're offering today and that this Bill is 
making available, the Meewasin Valley Authority, in your 
discussions with them, have they indicated the . . . what have 
they indicated as far as their ability to meet their objectives; 
what are their objectives? 
 
And in regards to expanding or enhancing the Meewasin Valley 
so that it become a more . . . that it becomes a centre that is 
more people oriented and certainly attracts . . . will be able to 
reach and provide the services that they would like to offer. 
And in regard to those observations, Mr. Minister, maybe you 
could indicate to us the Authority's observations and their 
concerns regarding the present level of funding that will be 
approved through this piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I thank you for your question. I had the 
privilege of attending the first board meeting as the minister 
about two weeks ago, and had a good discussion regarding the 
funding issues. And as you know there's always . . . those 
minutes are normally accessible. 
 
And obviously they're relieved that there's no funding reduction. 
I don't think I could characterize it as saying they're thrilled that 
there is no increase, but they're at least satisfied that they can 
live within that. And they'll have to make some adjustments, 
although it should not affect their developmental plan as far as I 
understand. 
 
I think as well there are alternative funding sources that they 
pursue and continue to pursue. One part of this Bill creates the 
opportunity, which they've been asking for, to provide some  

consultation to other jurisdictions who are looking for their 
expertise, their 20 years of expertise, in water management or 
management of the river-bank and so on. And in fact some of 
those requests have come for their expertise. 
 
They do not have the money to provide on an ongoing basis that 
additional support. But they of course would . . . are asking us 
if they could have the ability, through one of the amendments 
here, to negotiate on a small fee for some of the service they 
provide, at least to recover their costs. 
 
And that certainly is an important part of this Bill, because it 
allows them to respond to some of those other requests that are 
coming from, say, North Battleford, and other jurisdictions who 
are looking for their consultation and support. 
 
So I think I could characterize it as saying, they understand the 
situation financially of the province and they've been very 
responsible about maintaining a good program, maintaining 
their developmental program on the river-bank, and I think can 
live within the budget this year. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, you just indicated that you 
attended the board meeting I believe a couple weeks ago, and I 
would be surprised if the board members didn't raise some 
questions or concerns they have as to how they would . . . of 
means or methods whereby they would like to enhance the 
valley, or enhance the Meewasin Valley, so that it is, if you 
will, more accessible to the public and certainly offer services 
that would attract the public. 
 
I think one of the things that any recreation or any service area 
needs is things that would attract individuals — probably like 
walking paths, probably like picnic sites in the area of biking 
paths. And certainly that area along the Saskatchewan River 
through Saskatoon is certainly a beautiful area in the 
summertime. It can become very picturesque. And I'm sure that 
many residents of Saskatoon would appreciate and appreciate 
the fact that it is there, that indeed we do have the Authority in 
existence. 
 
In regards to the funding level as it exists today and the board 
meeting you recently attended, were there any indications that 
there were projects that had to be put on hold because the 
funding levels were maintained at the same level? And were 
there any indications of projects that they would like to do or 
like to accomplish if they can find added revenue available to 
the Meewasin Valley? Were any of those discussions 
undertaken at that time, Mr. Minister, and what were your 
observations in regards to those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I think the atmosphere, the climate 
at the board meeting, was one of understanding and you know, 
we'll proceed as best we can within the constraints that we have. 
I think that they do have a developmental plan, as you know, a 
long-term developmental plan. There is still lots of undeveloped 
river-bank land. And I suppose some of the  



April 28, 1995 

 
1858 

projects might be slowed down a little bit. 
 
At the same time though they're proceeding with the Gabriel 
Dumont Park, part of the developmental plan. They're 
proceeding with the north-east trail system this summer. And 
they're also looking at additional areas of concern by residents 
regarding enhanced safety and some ideas around that. And we 
talked about some ways in which other potential funding 
sources could provide potentially some employment for 
students, for summer students. And we may be able to access 
some other programs for some of those additional costs related 
to trail safety, which is a fairly significant concern that they're 
attempting to address, so that everyone can enjoy the trail and 
the beauty of the river. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you did make a comment just a 
moment ago about the fact that Meewasin Valley Authority has 
asked to be given the ability to seek or source other sources of 
revenue that would allow them to become, if you will, a more 
effective . . . or enhance their ability to provide the services and 
update the types of programing that they would like to make 
available and work in the valley for the sake of residents who 
would choose to visit the Meewasin Valley. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, in the light of . . . and not just in light 
of government budget constraints, it would seem to me, Mr. 
Minister, that any organization at this stage of the game would 
be looking at other avenues whereby they could include outside 
parties, or interested parties or groups, who would like to 
become involved in promoting such a site as the Meewasin 
Valley. And would like to have, if you will, the ability to maybe 
run fund drives or just giving people the ability to maybe donate 
some funds to the Meewasin Valley. 
 
Is there anything in this present Bill? Are you basically 
indicating that we are now opening the door or giving the 
Meewasin Valley Authority the ability to do that, the board to 
open up and contact organizations or to go outside the present 
funding of government and, I believe, the city of Saskatoon and 
the University of Saskatchewan? What we're doing in the Bill 
here, what this Bill is intending to do, is making it an avenue 
available for the board to then pursue other interested groups. 
 
And if you will, Mr. Minister, as well, does this Act allow 
individuals who would like to make donations to the Meewasin 
Valley the ability to, say, make a donation on the basis of 
getting a tax receipt? Or is that available today? Is that 
something that could be pursued? Because I think, Mr. Speaker, 
and Mr. Minister, you would find that there would be many 
individuals, if they knew they had an avenue whereby they 
could donate or contribute to a foundation or an organization 
such as the Meewasin Valley, if there was an avenue open to 
them, they probably would do that. 
 
And the board may find that they may not have to enter into or 
start charging for a lot of the services which, if you start 
charging just for someone to go through the valley or to ride 
through or to use the picnic sites, you might find people would 
take a second look and they may go and use other facilities. 

So what specifically are we entering into and what avenues are 
being pursued to look at other means whereby the Authority can 
derive some revenue, some of the much-needed revenue they 
may need to provide additional services to the taxpayers — and 
not just taxpayers but the personnel, the general public, who 
would utilize the services within the park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well you make some good points and 
raise a number of important questions. I'll try and deal with 
them as I can. 
 
Regarding the question of donations. It's my understanding that 
there exists now a trust fund already . . . a foundation, pardon 
me. And that interested persons already make donations 
because of their commitment to the river-bank and the 
environment and so on. So that is already occurring. 
 
I wanted to make sure I'm clear on this, that the intent of the 
amendment here from the Meewasin Valley's point of view, to 
share their expertise, their services, their 20 years of experience, 
is not because they want to make more money doing that. They 
don't want to necessarily use that as a form of revenue 
generation. 
 
But the requests are coming from other municipalities for their 
expertise, North Battleford for example, or P.A. (Prince Albert), 
and joint work potentially with Moose Jaw and Weyburn and so 
on — wherever there's a river. They're getting requests for their 
expertise and their advice as other jurisdictions look to more 
fully develop their river-banks. And they're more than happy to 
provide that service but they're not able to at this point, by law, 
charge any fee or negotiate on some small return. They're really 
not looking as a revenue generation of any significance of 
capacity. 
 
They're already working as well with many, many other 
organizations. For example, the Wanuskewin Heritage site is 
connected there. They're working with of course the city of 
Saskatoon, and the university provides some funding, as you 
say — they're on the board as well. But they also work with 
recreational boards and various groups with regard to clean-up, 
safety on the track, on the trails, and so on. 
 
So I think that . . . I hope I've answered sufficiently the three 
questions that I thought I heard you ask me. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in your second reading speech, you 
described how the Authority would be entering into agreements 
with agencies outside of the valley area, and I'm wondering if 
you could describe the process and why is it necessary. What is 
hoped to be accomplished? How will these agreements be 
implemented, and how will they affect the quality of life in the 
Meewasin Valley? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — It's my understanding that, as I say, some 
of the municipalities have already approached Meewasin Valley 
Authority and in fact they're providing some of that support 
now, but they really can't afford to do that in the way in which 
it's being requested. 



April 28, 1995 

 
1859 

So they want the ability to individually negotiate with those 
municipalities who are requesting their expertise and experience 
in training. There would be some form of contract established. 
And some of the areas that they could provide services and that 
are being requested for them to provide services would include, 
for example, shore line restoration expertise; interpretation 
design and training; fund-raising expertise, because Meewasin's 
been fairly successful  very successful  there; project 
management; doing environmental audits; special events 
planning, relating to one of your questions; resource and land 
use analysis and mapping, and those kinds of areas that go into 
the development and overall management of a plan to enhance 
the river-bank area. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically what you're saying then, Mr. 
Minister, the type of agreements you're talking of is not 
necessarily agreements as far as funding arrangements to fund 
the Meewasin Valley, but the fact that other groups have come 
to the Meewasin Valley seeking their expertise and advice on 
how you would go about implementing maybe the same type of 
process, I think, as you indicated in The Battlefords, the North 
Battleford area, along the river-bank, and some of the other 
communities — I'm not sure — well Moose Jaw has . . . I think 
they already have an Authority in Moose Jaw. 
 
But basically what you've indicated is this is individuals or 
groups or organizations or communities who have come and are 
looking for some advice as to how they could basically go about 
implementing the same type of program in their community. Is 
that what I understand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, that's exactly correct, yes, based on 
the uniqueness of the different areas and every municipality 
wanting to develop in a way that is the most enhancing for their 
local area, and believe that Meewasin, which has a good 
reputation — as of course does Wakamow and here — but they 
may all be getting these kind of requests. But certainly 
Meewasin is quite willing to share the expertise as initiated and 
requested by the local municipalities. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in your 
observations in your recent meeting with the Authority and just 
. . . I'm not sure whether finances would have come up — I'm 
sure it probably would have — but as far as the report to the 
government, it would seem to me that due to the fact that the 
province puts a substantial sum of funding into the Meewasin 
Valley, you would be interested in noting how the 
administration has been carried out — whether the Authority 
and the board has been able to manage their funding 
appropriately and manage their finances. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could just indicate whether you're . . . 
how satisfied you are with the financing, whether the funds are 
being utilized in the best possible means to provide services for 
the travelling public or the tourist public or the individuals who 
would use the projects or take advantage of the projects and the 
opportunities within the valley. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, were there a number of projects that were at  

a shortfall because of the limitation of funding, where the 
Authority maybe had to cut back and not complete projects and 
were looking for some additional funding that would help them 
complete any projects? I wonder if there are any shortfalls there 
and if there are any projects that had to be cut back on and what 
kind of response you would be making, even in the near future, 
in regards to that type of request that may have arisen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes. They are . . . Meewasin Valley 
Authority is . . . of course they do their financial audit with 
requirements there every year and they file that, which they're 
required to do, because as you know, $740,169 of provincial tax 
money goes through there plus the money that goes through the 
University of Saskatchewan and so on, and the city. So they do 
their financial audit as required. 
 
And with regard to whether projects came up that would be 
delayed or would proceed or so on, they have, you know, short- 
and medium-range, and long-term projects and initiatives in 
that long 20-25 year plan — it's developmental. And you look 
at the whole package much like you run the budget of a 
department, I suppose. 
 
You look at the whole package and you proceed with some 
things, you stay something else, you delay something else, and 
you manage the whole issue. And I think that's what they're 
really doing. And there was no specific request to me that I try 
and access additional funds for them on anything that they felt 
they couldn't manage within the current budget. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, in your second reading speech you 
say deficit financing is over, and although you're not in a 
position to increase the funding for the Wascana Authority, we 
are pleased to be able to maintain the same level of funding as 
was the case last year. And I'm sure the Authority and the board 
were breathing a sigh of relief that at least it wasn't being 
reduced any further. 
 
And so I think what you were trying to do was make yourself 
and colleagues feel a little better about the fact that you were 
able to hold the line. But I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, in view 
of the fact that there have been a number of freezes . . . and I 
don't know if the ability is there to even expand or increase 
funding down the road yet. 
 
I think personally within government we must look at services 
whereby we maintain the healthy living and lifestyles and 
protect health and education and the well-being of individuals 
in our society ahead of just providing recreational areas. And 
certainly maybe the community has to be involved in some of 
those recreational areas, as I indicated earlier. 
 
But I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, would you be willing to 
commit today to restore the statutory funding formula to the 
Meewasin Valley Authority and the other authorities, or where 
do you stand on this plan? Is it something that could be entered 
into within the next four years if there is, as the Minister of  



April 28, 1995 

 
1860 

Finance has indicated, should be a surplus appearing within the 
budget over the next four-year plan. Is that a possibility, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Well I think that, you know, you raise a 
question that I guess I can try and answer like this. Because 
with some of the other reductions in some of the other 
programs, to get the budget under control you'll note that we 
actually haven't decreased the funding in the last three years to 
Meewasin. And that is because we believe that this is money 
well spent and there wasn't any capacity to reduce the funding. 
 
Therefore, I hope that the board would take that as a sign that 
we will enhance it as we're in a position to do so; go back to 
statutory funding as we're able to do that. 
 
And I really can't prejudge at this point what the next year's 
budget will be with regard to Meewasin Valley Authority. But 
clearly we do, as you know, have a four-year budget plan and as 
we get more breathing space, we will allocate money on a 
priority basis as fair as we can. 
 
And I think Meewasin Valley can feel reassured that not having 
had a funding cut three years in a row, that we view this as an 
important, an important resource for the city of Saskatoon and 
area, because it's really, like the others, is really provincial in 
scope. 
 
So I can't answer the question about next year, but we will 
certainly review that always in a positive way. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I have a bit of a concern as to . . . with the expanded Authority; 
what kind of services the parties that you might come into an 
agreement with could be providing. If you could give us some 
sort of an outline as to what kind of services you're talking 
about with other parties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes. Well the nature of the services that 
are being requested by other municipalities of course vary with 
the municipality, but the kinds of services that are being 
requested externally to Meewasin are things like overall 
resource management; interpretation, design and training; fund-
raising expertise, because they've been successful there; 
partnership development expertise, because there's been other 
partners in this project; environmental education; environmental 
audits; resource and land use analysis and mapping; shore line 
restoration expertise; and those kinds of things. Just how to 
develop a developmental plan, the various elements of that, and 
then what Meewasin's experience has been. And not wanting to 
reinvent the wheel, they're coming to them because of the 20 
years experience of running the project. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
kind of parties, other parties, will these agreements be limited 
to? Are they unlimited  any party can come forward and 
make an agreement with Meewasin  or are they going to be 
limited to surrounding municipal governments? 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: — At this point, we're not proposing 
limiting them, but I think the intention really is, is to give them 
the ability to respond to those who are coming now. For 
example, usually municipal governments and rural RMs that are 
coming for their advice, and who wanted to develop their 
river-bank plans. Also it could be, on occasion, other 
authorities, like Wakamow or Tatagwa Parkway in Weyburn. 
And so it's not limited. But typically it may be municipal 
governments, RMs, that's who's coming to them now for some 
of the expertise that they've accumulated. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So it's not 
necessarily municipal groups that would be receiving these 
agreements or this assistance, services, but it could be other 
groups, such as a regional park, or it could be . . . I'm thinking 
of the group that just formed in memory of people who provide 
organ donations. They're doing some work out along the valleys 
north-east of here on Diefenbaker Lake. Would someone like 
that qualify for providing services of fund-raising expertise? 
Would those people qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I think the best thing I can really do is 
confirm what you've said, because you made very good points. 
It is general in nature. It could very well be charitable 
organizations or any form of local examples you mentioned, 
which I suppose are really municipal or local government in 
nature. 
 
So I'm just I guess affirming what you were saying. It could be 
all of those. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — How broad then, Mr. Minister, would, 
say, the service of fund-raising expertise be provided? Would it 
be provided to other organizations that may wish to raise funds 
but aren't directly associated with the river valley at Meewasin 
or some other river valley, some other park structure? Would 
they be provided say to, oh, some church group perhaps that 
wanted to raise funds for some particular reason, could they 
approach Meewasin for some support in providing fund-raising 
expertise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — I just want to, in case I'm not making 
myself clear, just make it . . . keep this into perspective in that 
really the nature of the requests, for example, fund-raising is 
one of the many services but is really to help local 
developments in terms of their developmental plans. And that 
would be established through individual negotiations between 
Meewasin, for their expertise, and the local municipality in 
terms of the kinds of support and advice and what not that they 
require. It's not meant to be a general service to the broader 
public. 
 
Meewasin's really into river and valley developments and 
enhancing projects there. And others are seeing that as a good 
model and a good project, and are asking for some advice as 
they develop theirs in different parts of the province. 
 
So it's not . . . I don't want to give you the impression that this is 
big in magnitude, but right now they don't have the ability to  



April 28, 1995 

 
1861 

negotiate a little contract and charge a small fee for some of the 
service they're providing. They're willing to provide this service 
and to share their expertise, but they can't do it all over the 
province, and that wouldn't probably be the nature of it. 
 
They would, as they had the resources themselves, negotiate 
individually, and I really wouldn't be party to those 
negotiations. But they would negotiate individually based on 
the local needs and I think the number of requests would be 
fairly small. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, Mr. Minister, if Meewasin 
provides a service, do they get a fee for that? Can they charge, 
or are these services provided for free? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — They provide some general information 
now, general advice and so on, but they don't provide any 
services because they really don't have the capacity. And this 
would give them a little bit of . . . this would give them the 
opportunities to do that and charge a small fee through 
negotiation of a contract on that. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What my 
concern in particular with this is, is the ability for Meewasin 
Authority to provide services such as fund-raising expertise to 
any organization in the province, if that was the desire of the 
board. Or to provide, say, with environmental audits, do the 
environmental audits for a particular organization who has an 
environmental concern with a company or the government 
itself, and funnel the money . . . the government could funnel 
the money indirectly through the Meewasin Valley Authority to 
provide assistance. 
 
Right now if you want to push an environmental audit, it's up to 
you to provide that incentive, those funds that are necessary for 
you to push and promote that and do your investigation. 
 
But this would be an avenue, Mr. Minister, by which the 
government could funnel money through the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, because they can turn around and provide at a very 
. . . either free or at no cost, or a very small cost, to some other 
organization without it having to come before this Assembly. 
 
The monies would be authorized to go to the Meewasin Valley 
Authority who then turn around and provide either fund-raising 
expertise or environmental audit expertise to some other 
organization, say, such as SCRAP (Stop Construction Rafferty 
Alameda Project) down at Radville. And I believe that if it is 
used for that, Mr. Minister, it's definitely being used 
inappropriately. 
 
So I think that that type of circumstance has to be monitored 
that it is being done, dealing with the Meewasin Valley 
Authority and its particular niche, its expertise, and not 
branching out broadly across the province to promote particular 
special interests that may arise from time to time throughout the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Yes, these are very specialized expertise  

that we're talking about here, very specialized projects. And the 
point you raised would have no chance of being a concern here. 
 
(1245) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I'd 
like to thank Mr. Brickwell for assisting me, and I move that the 
committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 
providing us with the answers. Thank you very much. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 12:48 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 19  - An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act 
Bill No. 20  - An Act to amend The Co-operatives Act, 1989 
Bill No. 38  - An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes 
Bill No. 39  - An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 
Bill No. 37  - An Act respecting Medical Laboratory 

Technologists 
Bill No. 10  - An Act respecting Private Vocational Schools 
Bill No. 46  - An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
Bill No. 40  - An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act 
Bill No. 41  - An Act respecting Land Surveyors and 

Professional Surveyors 
Bill No. 7    - An Act to amend The Apiaries Act 
Bill No. 25  - An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability 

Act 
Bill No. 45  - An Act respecting Trading in Real Estate, the 

Real Estate Commission and Brokerages, Brokers 
and Salespersons Trading in Real Estate 

Bill No. 33  - An Act respecting the Donation of Food 
Bill No. 53  - An Act respecting Agricultural Operations 
Bill No. 34  - An Act to repeal The Economic Development and 

Tourism Act 



April 28, 1995 

 
1862 

Bill No. 35  - An Act to amend The Department of Economic 
Development Act, 1993 

Bill No. 6    - An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
Bill No. 8    - An Act to repeal The NewGrade Energy Inc. 

Protection Act 
Bill No. 47  - An Act to amend the Meewasin Valley Authority 

Act 
 
His Honour: — In her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 63  - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 1996 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:51 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:53 p.m. 
 
 


