






















































April 3, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 3, 1995 

 

 
1291 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of southern 
Saskatchewan, mostly from the Swift Current area but also 
from Eastend, Cadillac, Abbey, and the areas along No. 1 
Highway. 
 
I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from a federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these on behalf of the constituents of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition 
prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31 — An Act 
to amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(Property Rights) which will benefit all property owners 
in Saskatchewan, and specifically firearms owners, in 
order to halt the federal Liberal government from 
infringing upon the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Allan, Langham, 
Dundurn, and Saskatoon areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. I 
so table. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

urge the government to make necessary changes to the 
New Careers program to allow the Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan recipients who have started the bridging 
program for women to complete their program. 

 

 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to allocate 
adequate funding dedicated toward the double-laning of 
Highway No. 1. 

 
 And of citizens petitioning the Assembly to oppose 

changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Tribute to United Nations Peacekeepers 

 
The Speaker: — Before we proceed to the introduction of 
guests, I would like to outline today's special program for 
Saskatchewan Peacekeepers Recognition Week. 
 
After my opening remarks, I shall invite the Premier, the 
representative of the official opposition, and the Leader of the 
Third Party, to pay tribute to the peacemakers seated in the 
galleries. 
 
I shall then ask the Deputy Premier to introduce them by 
groups. Following this introduction, 18 members of the 
Assembly will again introduce peacekeepers according to the 
United Nations' missions on which they have served. 
 
Before I call upon the Premier, it is my privilege to introduce to 
the Assembly some special guests who are with us this 
afternoon. I would ask them to rise when I introduce them. 
 
Seated behind the bar, directly ahead of me, is the Hon. David 
Collenette, Minister of National Defence of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Hon. Allan Blakeney, former premier of 
Saskatchewan, Honorary Co-Chair of the Saskatchewan 
Committee for the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Dr. Michael Hayden, Saskatchewan 
representative on the Canadian Committee for the Fiftieth 
Anniversary of the United Nations. Dr. Hayden was not able to 
be with us this afternoon, but I did want to introduce him to the 
Assembly. 
 
Major-General Clive Addy, commander of the Land Force 
Western Area in Edmonton, who commands the Canadian 
Army in western Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Major-General Tom deFaye, from National 
Defence Headquarters, Ottawa. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1292 

The Speaker: — Brigadier-General Cliff Walker, of Regina, 
deputy commander of Land Force Western Area. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Captain John Dalzell, from Saskatoon, 
representing the Canadian Navy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Assistant Commissioner Larry Proke, 
commanding F Division, Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Chief Superintendent André Gauthier, officer 
in charge of the Training Academy, Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And the first Saskatchewan winner of the 
Honorary Canadian Peacekeeper of the Year Award, Mr. Jim 
Wagman of Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to introduce some groups; would 
they also please rise when I introduce them. Seated behind the 
bar, I believe on the west side, members of the Saskatchewan 
Canada Remembers Committee and of the United Nations 50th 
Anniversary Committee. Would they please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Seated behind the bar on the east side, 
members of the Family Support Group for Saskatchewan 
Peacekeepers serving overseas. Would they please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Seated on the east side of the Chamber floor, 
cadets from the Navy, Army and Air Force cadets. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Also on the Chamber floor we have a group 
of students from Briercrest School, Moose Jaw. Would they 
please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And the students from St. Theresa School, 
Regina. Could we have them rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would also like to acknowledge 
representatives of veterans organizations and non-governmental  

organizations who are seated on the floor of the Chamber. 
Could all of those people rise please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, I would like to welcome you here to the 
Assembly today on this very special occasion for peacekeepers. 
I would now like to call upon the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, let me join with you, sir, 
in welcoming so many of our distinguished members and guests 
to the Assembly today. 
 
I of course shall not go over the list that you have recited but 
simply to note again with pleasure the attendance of the 
national Minister of Defence, Mr. Collenette; our former 
premier, Mr. Blakeney, in his capacity as the Co-Chair of the 
50th celebration of the United Nations; the many senior officers 
of the Canadian Armed Forces; the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police, for this very, very special occasion and very special 
event. 
 
And particularly to once again warmly congratulate Mr. Jim 
Wagman, who's seated there, on receiving the award as 
Honorary Canadian Peacekeeper of the Year in Saskatchewan, a 
tremendous accomplishment to a person who clearly is very, 
very deserving of it. 
 
I'm pleased to join with all members of this Assembly to pay 
tribute to the Saskatchewan members of the Canadian forces 
and the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) who have 
served with such great distinction in United Nations operations 
overseas. 
 
As has been said earlier, especially in the proceedings in the 
rotunda, this celebration is part of our Canada Remembers 
program, the national program commemorating several many 
events: the end of the Second World War, the ongoing 
contribution of the Canadian forces to national security and 
world peace, and of course the birth of the United Nations. 
 
I want to welcome all 18 missions who are here today — they 
represent well over half of the 33 missions involving the 
Canadian forces over the last 50 years — and a special welcome 
to the veterans of the Korean War who are also here this 
afternoon with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to me the impressive number of Saskatchewan 
men and women in peacekeeping service is a tribute to this 
country's, this province's caring, cooperative, and 
compassionate nature and society. Clearly the tribute that we 
have today for this group of people proves one thing: that a 
small province like ours can make a very big difference, and a 
big difference for the better. 
 
We're all impressed by the calibre of those who serve today in 
the army, navy, air force, and RCMP. They carry on the proud 
tradition of previous generations. I also want to make a special  



April 3, 1995 

 
1293 

note of our Saskatchewan reservists and their important role as 
a vital link for the various dangerous and difficult missions 
overseas. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, as we all know, is the 
proud and enduring home and has a very proud and enduring 
relationship with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Regina 
is the home, we say, of the RCMP — certainly of the national 
training academy which, as has been pointed out, has recently 
been training recruits from the new police force in Haiti and 
doing a wonderful job in very difficult and challenging 
circumstances. 
 
The RCM Police have sent police officers to Namibia, 
Yugoslavia, and Haiti. In fact the assistant commissioner of F 
Division in Saskatchewan, whom we introduced, Assistant 
Commissioner Larry Proke, commanded the force in Namibia. 
This too is a distinguished record for our national and 
provincial police force, of whom we are all very proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for all these reasons and others, the government 
has proclaimed April 2 to April 8 as Saskatchewan 
Peacekeepers Recognition Week. I am pleased to be able to 
provide a certificate of recognition to each of our peacekeepers, 
which will be sent out shortly, to commemorate this occasion. 
 
Also, as has been pointed out by Mr. Collenette, during the 
course of the week many of our peacekeepers are visiting 
schools — and it's great to see the young children here — to 
talk about their experiences. And as we know, a peacekeeping 
display has been set up in the main rotunda. It should be seen 
by as many people as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, let me conclude by 
expressing on behalf of the government and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan our gratitude towards our 
peacekeepers. We thank each and every one of them for their 
courage, their determination, their willingness to give up the 
comforts and safety of home for perilous missions in far away 
and war-torn countries overseas. 
 
In doing so, they have brought a glimmer of hope to many 
thousands of people who lack the basic freedoms and 
opportunities which sometimes Canadians often take too much 
for granted. 
 
They have opened our eyes to the needs of the world. I'm sure I 
speak for all when I say that we are very, very, very proud of 
them all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it therefore gives me a great deal of pleasure and 
pride to move, seconded by the Acting Leader of the 
Opposition, the hon. member from Morse, by leave of the 
Assembly, the following resolution: 
 
 That we, the members of the Legislative Assembly, join 

with the people of Saskatchewan to acknowledge and 
pay tribute to the Saskatchewan peacekeepers for their 
superb accomplishments and sacrifices made in pursuit  

 of international peace. 
 
I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, Hon. Mr. Collenette, Canadian forces, and the RCMP, 
I am proud to stand today in recognition of some of the bravest 
men and women that have ever lived — truly courageous and 
outstanding individuals. 
 
These individuals have made and continue to make sacrifice in 
the name of worldwide peace. Thousands of Canadians have 
participated in 34 peace-restoring, peacekeeping, 
truce-supervisory and observer missions since 1947. 
 
Peacekeepers in the days of the Second World War made a 
tremendous difference. They made a difference in a time of 
all-out conflict when failure would have meant subordination of 
democracy to unspeakable tyranny. That may have been almost 
50 years ago, Mr. Speaker, yet war and bloodshed is as much a 
reality today as it was then and peacekeepers are in the midst of 
it. 
 
Canadian peacekeepers have been active in the Arab-Israeli 
conflict in the Middle East, former Yugoslavia, and many other 
countries in the world where unrest is part of a daily life. 
Former U.S. (United States) president, Harry Truman, said: for 
it is all too obvious that if we do not abolish war on this earth, 
then surely one day war will abolish us from the earth. That, 
Mr. Speaker, was correct. He was right. 
 
We should all be proud of our peacekeepers today and the fact 
that we are the only nation that has been involved in every 
United Nations' peacekeeping mission since the very first 
mission almost 50 years ago. We are indebted to their services, 
their sacrifice, and most importantly to the hundreds who have 
lost their lives attempting to make life better for all of us here. 
 
We must all remember and teach our children the significance 
of those who have worn and those who still honourably wear 
the Queen's uniform and to share pride in them. 
 
I am proud that Saskatchewan has proclaimed April 2 to 8 as 
Saskatchewan Peacekeepers Recognition Week and that we are 
the only province to do so. And it may not be the politically 
correct thing to do these days but it is certainly the right thing to 
do. After all, Mr. Speaker, it is better to keep the peace than to 
have to make peace. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition and of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, I'd like to express our heartfelt gratitude to all of 
the peacekeepers who have helped secure the freedoms we take 
for granted. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



April 3, 1995 

 
1294 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
so very pleased and proud to join with other members in this 
House this afternoon as we recognize and pay tribute to the 
courageous peacekeepers of our country. 
 
On behalf of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan and the 
members of our caucus, I welcome all of our guests here today 
for this most worthy ceremony. I'm particularly pleased to 
welcome this afternoon the federal Minister of Defence, the 
Hon. David Collenette, to this Chamber of our province's role 
. . . for our province's role in marking National Peacekeepers 
Week, and of course, acknowledge the special recognition 
bestowed upon Mr. Jim Wagman earlier today. 
 
As Canadians, we do not know firsthand the experience of 
building our nation through bloodshed and sorrow, but we have 
been very, very fortunate to have our nation develop through 
peaceful solutions to disputes. 
 
While our country may not know the kind of war that pits 
neighbour against neighbour, veterans and peacekeepers most 
certainly do. Over the past 48 years that Canadians have served 
as peacekeepers, they have developed for themselves and for us 
as a people, a reputation — a reputation of being level-headed, 
fairness, and impartiality in trying to resolve disputes and keep 
the peace for other peoples on our globe. 
 
While the end of the cold war has drawn to a close, the focus on 
the east-west conflict has dissipated. And what has emerged in 
its place is the prominence of middle powers such as our 
country of Canada to play a greater role in helping to resolve 
serious disagreements. This shift in the world stage and our role 
within it has necessitated a change in our defence policy that 
emphasizes peacekeeping as a priority, not the preparation for 
warfare, as was the case in the past. 
 
Another result of a lessened threat of war has been the 
conversion or closure of several military bases, and we are 
indeed fortunate in our province of Saskatchewan to have our 
15 Wing base in Moose Jaw preserved. And I want to thank all 
people present, and those who are not, for their role in that 
decision. 
 
Today we acknowledge close to 3,000 Canadian Forces 
members who are currently serving among 16 peacekeeping 
operations. 
 
Historically, Canada has surpassed all other nations in our 
record of participating in every UN (United Nations) 
peacekeeping mission since 1947. While tens of thousands of 
Canadians have participated in the peacekeeping and peace-
restoring missions between 1947 and 1995, few lives have been 
lost, but those few are too many, and they are mourned by us 
all. 
 
To lose one's life in the interest of keeping peace in another 
land for the benefit of people we do not know is a truly selfless  

and noble act. In the words of President John F. Kennedy, and I 
quote: arms alone are not enough to keep the peace; it must be 
kept by people. 
 
To you, the men and women who form the peacekeeping 
strength of our nation and who have brought so much 
recognition and pride, we commend you for your sacrifice, your 
dedication, and your service to your fellow citizens of the world 
who rely on you for help in giving them peace and giving them 
hope for a future that we in a nation such as ours of Canada, 
often take for granted. 
 
Thank you very much, all of you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce to you and through you 
to members of this Legislative Assembly, some very 
distinguished Canadians sitting in the galleries of this Chamber, 
our peacekeepers. 
 
As the Premier and the member from Morse and the Leader of 
the Third Party have already said, we in this Assembly are 
proud of the courage and the dedication of the men and women 
from Saskatchewan who have served in the United Nations 
operations around the world. 
 
I am proud to be able to say that I know some of them 
personally. And we know how they have given up the comforts 
of home to risk life and limb in war-torn parts of the world. 
 
The Canadian Forces and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
have given Canada a worldwide reputation for compassion and 
generosity, and we salute them all today. 
 
I will now introduce them to you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask them 
to rise when they have been introduced. 
 
The first group that I want to introduce has a very special place 
in the hearts and minds of us all. They fought in the bitter, 
stubborn, costly war, the first action under United Nations’ 
auspices — and I refer to the Korean War, 1950 to 1953. Mr. 
Speaker, seated in your gallery are members of the Korean War 
Veterans Association. And I ask them now to rise and to be 
acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I now want to 
proceed by units of the Canadian Forces, and I will ask them 
also to rise after I have named their unit. 
 
The Saskatchewan Dragoons from Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — 10th Field Regiment, Royal 
Canadian Artillery, from Regina and Yorkton. 



April 3, 1995 

 
1295 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The North Saskatchewan Regiment 
from Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Royal Regina Rifles. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The 10th Service Battalion from 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — 16th Medical Company, also from 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Militia Training Detachment, 
Dundurn. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Saskatchewan District 
Headquarters, from Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — 15 Wing Air Command, from 
Canadian Forces Base, Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — 734 Communication Squadron, 
from Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — 737 Communication Squadron, 
from Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Canadian Forces Recruiting 
Centre, from Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, but certainly 
not least, members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police from 
F Division across the province, and Training Academy in 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I  

believe that now members of the Assembly will introduce our 
guests according to the United Nations missions. 
 
Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce to you 
and the members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 
Saskatchewan residents who served in the United Nations truce 
supervision in Palestine during the years 1948 to present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members assembled here today 
to join me in welcoming these individuals who have served 
internationally as peacekeepers, and I ask that they now rise and 
be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege to introduce to you and to the House, personnel from 
our province who have served on the United Nations military 
observation group in India and Pakistan, 1958 to 1979. I would 
ask these people to please rise and be acknowledged by the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — Mr. Speaker, sir, I rise today to introduce to 
you and to the members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 
Saskatchewan residents who served in the United Nations 
peacekeeping mission in the Congo during the years 1960 to 
1964. My family and I were caught up in the turmoil in Nigeria 
almost 30 years ago, so I think I have some understanding of 
what they endured in that climate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members assembled here today 
to join with me in welcoming these men and women who have 
served internationally as peacekeepers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it's my honour to introduce to you 
and all hon. members, personnel from Saskatchewan who 
served in the UN force in Cyprus during the mission which 
lasted from 1965 to 1993. 
 
Canada's 29-year commitment to Cyprus has been our country's 
most extensive contribution to peacekeeping, with a single 
maximum rotation of 576 Canadians. During the mission, 27 
comrades were lost. We have 100 Saskatchewan personnel who 
served in Cyprus with us here today, and I ask that they now 
rise and be acknowledged by all members of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
to you and to the House, personnel from our province who have 
served on the following United Nations mission. It is the UN 
emergency force Middle East, 1973-1979. The UN emergency 
force 2 was created in October 1973 in response to the 
increased unrest in the Middle East. The UN emergency force 
no. 2 was one of Canada's most extensive peacekeeping  



April 3, 1995 

 
1296 

commitments, with 1,145 Canadians having participated by the 
cessation of action in July 1979. 
 
I would ask these 20 people to rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce to you and 
members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of Saskatchewan 
residents who served in the United Nations peacekeeping 
mission in the UN disengagement observation force in the 
Golan Heights. Peacekeepers have served there since 1974 and 
are present there today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members assembled here today 
to join with me in welcoming these individuals who have 
served internationally as peacekeepers. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my privilege to introduce to you and to the House, an individual 
from our province who has served with the United Nations 
interim task force in Lebanon. This force was created in 1978 to 
confirm the withdrawal of Israeli forces from southern 
Lebanon, and Canadians served there from 1978 until January 
31 of this year. I would ask this peacekeeper to rise and be 
acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my 
privilege to introduce to you and to the House, personnel from 
our province who have served in the following U.S. mission: 
the UN Angola verification mission, Mr. Speaker. This mission 
included verification of elections in September of 1992 and 
included 15 officers serving in that capacity. 
 
I would like to ask the peacekeeper here present to rise and be 
acknowledged, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce to you and to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, a group of Saskatchewan residents who served in the 
United Nations peacekeeping mission in the good offices 
mission in Afghanistan and Pakistan from 1988 to 1990. 
 
And I ask that you and all members assembled here today join 
me in welcoming these individuals who have served 
internationally as peacekeepers. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly, 
a group of Saskatchewan residents who served in the United 
Nations peacekeeping mission in Iran and Iraq during the years  

1989 to 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members of the Assembly here 
today to join with me in welcoming these men and women who 
served in the international peacekeeping. I ask that all these 
members please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many 
compliments have been expressed here today for Canadian 
peacekeepers and their efforts over the years, and I'd like to add 
my many thanks as well. 
 
Many of you, Mr. Speaker, probably don't think that I can 
remember back to 1947, but I can assure you I do very well. 
And I would like to pay homage to the peacekeepers, both past 
and present, for your tireless dedication. 
 
I am especially happy to recognize the United Nations transition 
group who served in Namibia from 1989 to 1992. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. I would ask them to rise and be recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure and a honour for me to introduce to you and the 
members of the Assembly, a group of Saskatchewan residents 
who served in the United Nations peacekeeping mission in the 
UN observer group in Central America in 1989 to 1992. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all the members of the Assembly to 
welcome these individuals warmly, and also to thank them for 
their contribution, their sacrifice, and their dedication to their 
country. I would now ask these individuals to stand up and be 
acknowledged, please. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
privileged and I am very proud today to join with my colleagues 
in recognizing thousands of Canadians who have given of 
themselves in order to improve the lives of many. Canadian 
peacekeepers have made, and continue to make, sacrifices for 
the sake of worldwide peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is therefore my pleasure today to introduce those 
peacekeepers representing the protection force in Yugoslavia 
from 1991 to the present. Would you please stand to be 
recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, as the daughter of a soldier, I 
recall very clearly, as a child during the Second World War, 
watching daily as the couriers from the railway telegraph 
services rode the streets of Saskatoon on their bicycles, 
delivering messages to our neighbours and to our home —  



April 3, 1995 

 
1297 

notices of family members wounded, killed, and missing in 
action. 
 
Every day I thank God and the veterans and peacekeepers of 
this province and this country, that the children and 
grandchildren of my generation have been spared the 
experience of growing up in that atmosphere of fear and 
tension. 
 
It is my privilege, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and to the 
House, personnel from our province who have served on the 
United Nations transitional authority in Cambodia from 1992 to 
the present. I would ask that these persons rise and be 
acknowledged. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce to you 
and to the rest of the members of the Assembly, a group of 
Saskatchewan residents who served in the United Nations 
peacekeeping mission in Somalia during the years 1992 to 
1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members assembled here today 
to join with me in welcoming these men and women who 
served internationally as peacekeepers. Would they please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce to you and the House, a Saskatchewan resident who 
has served in the United Nations operations in Mozambique 
from 1992 to the present. This operation was created to monitor 
the cease-fire in the separation and concentration of forces. 
Members also provided security for UN and non-government 
organization activities. 
 
I would ask this peacekeeper to rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag: — It is my privilege to introduce to you and 
members of the Assembly, personnel from our province who 
have served on the UN mission in Haiti since 1992. Many will 
be aware that right here in Regina recently a number of Haitians 
were trained to be RCMP peacekeepers in their own country. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, representing the Haitian mission today, 
we have approximately 10 RCMP personnel. I would ask those 
individuals to please rise and be recognized here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of this Assembly, 
personnel from our province who have served on the United 
Nations assistance mission for Rwanda that was created in 1993 
and is active today. 
 

The mandate of the force is to contribute to the security and 
protection of displaced persons, refugees, and civilians at risk in 
Rwanda, and to provide security and support for the distribution 
of relief supplies and humanitarian relief operations. For this 
we thank you. 
 
I would ask these Saskatchewan persons who have served in 
this capacity to rise and be acknowledged and welcomed this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
moved by the Premier, seconded by the member from Morse, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 
 That we, the members of the Legislative Assembly, join 

with the people of Saskatchewan to acknowledge and 
pay tribute to the Saskatchewan peacekeepers for their 
superb accomplishments and sacrifices made in pursuit 
of international peace. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tribute to United Nations Peacekeepers 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Mr. Speaker, I join today with my colleagues 
in welcoming the Canadian Forces, the RCMP members, and all 
honoured guests here. It is a personal pleasure for me to be here 
today because I have a son who served in part of the naval 
blockade in the Adriatic, just off the shore of the former 
Yugoslavia. 
 
His mother and I are very proud of his contribution to the 
United Nations peacekeeping efforts in that troubled part of the 
world. But as parents, sometimes we worry because of the 
things they have to see and the dangers they have to experience. 
 
Our son was injured in an accident over there and flown back to 
Canada for an operation. And after he was healed up, after 
several months, he went back to that part of the world. 
 
When he was back in Canada, he told me that one of the most 
difficult things that he had to deal with was when he saw the 
lack of appreciation that Canadians have for our country and the 
things we take for granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be part of a country which devotes 
its energies and priorities to peace and to making peace, with 
war only as a last resort. And I find it entirely appropriate today 
that we set aside a week to honour those Canadians who have 
served and are serving not only our country of Canada, but 
everyone in the world. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 3, 1995 

 
1298 

Update on Status of Rafferty, Alameda, and Boundary Dam 
Projects 

 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last session I gave 
the member for Elphinstone a snorkel and a mask and fins to 
aid him in crossing Rafferty, and for his domestic pleasure. This 
was because a year earlier he said, and I quote: you could have 
walked across Rafferty dam probably without even standing on 
your tiptoes and not got your chin wet. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today I'm more than happy to update the 
member and others in the Assembly on the status of Rafferty, 
Alameda, and Boundary dam projects. Heavy snow and rainfall 
recently, coupled with melting temperatures, has resulted in a 
high run-off in the lower Souris and Moose Mountain basins. 
 
According to Mr. Tony Moser from Sask Water, the water level 
in the Alameda dam reservoir has risen 8 metres in the past 
couple of weeks and is presently about one-third full, with 25 
feet of water at the base. As well, the Boundary dam reservoir 
has risen a metre in the past week and it stands at almost 95 per 
cent capacity. He also added, in The Estevan Mercury, that 
Alameda will be used as a reservoir to provide flood protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're proud of these international water projects 
because they protect Canadians and Americans from flood, they 
cool power plants, and facilitate recreation, wildlife, and 
agriculture resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mention these today because they provide 
another good example, among many, of the positive projects 
undertaken by the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Construction Tender 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for SaskTel. Mr. Minister, 
on Friday I asked about a SaskTel tender which was opened last 
week, and the Minister of Justice responded that you would 
review the matter. He also accused me of citing inaccurate 
figures. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you have in fact reviewed this tender, you 
would know that our figures were indeed deadly accurate, and 
that your union preference policy has already cost the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan $30,000 on the very first project. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that your policy is driving up the 
costs, and will you save Saskatchewan taxpayers $30,000 by 
awarding this contract to the low bidder? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would  

be pleased to respond to the member opposite to his question 
and reiterate what I have been saying all along, that this policy 
and this agreement  that has been agreed to by the Crown 
Investments Corporation and the construction industry, CLR 
(Construction Labour Relations Association), and by the unions 
representing the employees  is not breaking new ground. 
 
It is a policy that has existed from time to time in Saskatchewan 
on various projects. It exists across Canada. It exists in other 
provinces. And it is a policy that is intended to get the best 
value for money because the policy is based on lowest qualified 
bidder. 
 
It is a policy to allow for equal competition between all 
construction firms, and it is a policy to ensure that small 
contractors can compete for work in their own community and 
that workers who work on these projects are paid fairly. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that makes it a good policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, prior 
to the SaskTel tender last week, the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association asked SaskTel to clarify a number of issues 
regarding the union-preference tendering policy. Some of the 
answers they received were pretty inadequate, so I was 
wondering if the minister could provide us with some better 
answers today. 
 
And here's one of the SCA's (Saskatchewan Construction 
Association) questions. Is the union allowed to fill a requisition 
for workers from out-of-province locals at the expense of 
existing employees or other Saskatchewan non-residents? 
SaskTel's answer: the issue will be dealt with on a case-by-case 
basis. In other words, yes, in some cases out-of-province union 
members will be hired ahead of non-union Saskatchewan 
workers. 
 
Mr. Minister, why should non-union Saskatchewan workers 
lose jobs to unionized workers from other provinces. How is 
this fair to Saskatchewan workers, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the policy is very 
clear, if the member would consider the rest of the information 
that is available. 
 
One of the advantages of this agreement is that it will maximize 
the number of Saskatchewan tradespeople who are working on 
construction projects which, I might say, was not the case 
during the former administration when they were in government 
here. And it was only too often that we saw on construction 
sites more licence plates from places like Alberta — and this is 
no disrespect to workers from Alberta — than there were 
licence plates from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1299 

Now from time to time, Mr. Speaker, the member should know 
that there may be special cases where some of the technical 
people that are necessary to do a project, particularly in the 
information technology field, where sometimes workers may 
have to come in from outside the province. But the basic 
premisses of the policy, Mr. Speaker, is to assure that the 
maximum number of Saskatchewan workers are working on job 
sites, on construction projects sponsored by the Crown 
corporations which are included in this agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, the 
only technical thing is a union card. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday we have already seen an example of 
how this policy is limiting competition. Now the Regina 
Construction Association is encouraging its members not to bid 
on Crown construction jobs, according to its recent newsletter. 
Last week there were also meetings of the construction 
association in Saskatoon and in Moose Jaw, and members came 
to a similar conclusion. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is already clear this policy is a failure. It is 
limiting competition and driving up costs. It is also grossly 
unfair to non-union workers and to contractors. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that you have made a mistake, get 
rid of this destructive policy, and help out small businesses by 
removing these union hiring quotas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite just refuses to accept what the facts are, 
choosing instead, Mr. Speaker, to spend more time on the 
politics, and that's fair enough in the context of this place, 
which is the Legislative Assembly. 
 
But I want to repeat again that the policy that exists in the 
agreement which has been signed will be of benefit both to 
Saskatchewan contractors and to Saskatchewan employees 
because it will maximize the number of Saskatchewan 
employees working there. 
 
And I want to remember the member opposite because I'm not 
sure what it is that he's fully talking about, that the tender that 
he speaks of has not yet officially been awarded, and therefore 
some of the arguments that he is using, Mr. Speaker, surely 
cannot be used because there is no evidence to support some of 
the things that he is saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Justice. 
 

Mr. Minister, I recently received information that will have a 
serious impact on Saskatchewan's economy. The League of 
Kentucky Sportsman have established a boycott of 
Saskatchewan's hunting, fishing, and outfitting industries. In a 
letter sent to members of parliament, the league announced, and 
I quote: 
 
 Because of the proposed national firearms registration 

legislation currently being considered, we are notifying 
each of our 75,000 members and supporters here in 
Kentucky and asking them not to hunt or fish in Canada 
in 1995. 

 
Mr. Minister, this is becoming a critical situation in 
Saskatchewan. We need to act, and we need to act now. We 
need a government that will protect Saskatchewan's interests 
against the Liberal gun laws. Mr. Minister, other than talking, 
what are you planning on doing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, all parties in the Assembly, led by the 
government, have expressed their opposition to this legislation 
for a variety of reasons, not the least of which is the cost of 
registering guns is all out of proportion to any value. We have 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, we have passed a resolution in the 
Assembly asking the federal government to reconsider the 
matter, and we have passed the resolution setting up an all-party 
committee to approach the federal government. 
 
We've also asked the federal government to have the Standing 
Committee on Justice meet here in Saskatchewan where we can 
present our views directly. We hope the federal government is 
prepared to listen to the public and to come to Saskatchewan, 
and will be acting in that fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it's quite 
evident, Mr. Minister, from your talk that you're as ineffective 
as the previous minister of Justice was in trying to fight these 
Liberal gun laws. You talk, but you do absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, as we speak all major hunting and fishing 
organizations are being contacted throughout the U.S. to enact a 
similar boycott. Mr. Speaker, since the Minister of Justice is not 
prepared to do anything, my question is directed to the Minister 
of Economic Development. 
 
Mr. Minister, American hunters and anglers spend over half a 
billion dollars in Canada, and Saskatchewan gets a not 
insignificant share. As the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan's economic development, would you step 
forward and provide protection for our tourism industry? Will 
you support the Bills that we have brought forward which 
would protect property rights and provide Saskatchewan with 
the power to deal with this situation? Will you do this today 
before we end up with a devastating American boycott because  



April 3, 1995 

 
1300 

of the Liberal gun laws? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I want to say in passing, Mr. Speaker, 
but perhaps not in passing . . . I want to say that we have had a 
record number of inquiries, I am told, by American tourists and 
by prospective American hunters. There's no evidence yet that 
the boycott is having much of a bite. 
 
Nevertheless we are concerned about the legislation. We have 
asked the federal government to change it and we continue to 
do so. And we will continue to do so in conjunction with all 
members of this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Mr. Minister, I don't doubt that it's not 
having an impact yet; it's not hunting season yet. But it will be 
this fall, and that's when it will have a very, very serious impact. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as we suspected, no one on that side of the 
House is prepared to be truly committed in fighting the Liberal 
gun laws. It's all lip service. It's all political manipulation. Our 
Bills will indeed help, Mr. Speaker, and they are supported by 
many third-party organizations. 
 
They have received support from Saskatchewan Reform MP 
(Member of Parliament) Garry Breitkreuz, who says the 
regulations of firearms is a provincial responsibility. And in a 
recent news release he said, and I quote: 
 
 It's the provinces that have the constitutional right to 

administer justice, regulate private property, issue 
licences, and assess user fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the chief constitutional lawyer in 
this province, our very own Premier. Mr. Premier, it's time you 
acted to protect Saskatchewan from the Liberal gun laws. Will 
you see to it that this legislature passes laws which bypass this 
insanity and avoid the American boycott? 
 
Saskatchewan could wind up benefiting, Mr. Premier, if the 
other provinces do not follow suit. It's time to act now, Mr. 
Premier. Stand up for the firearms owners and Saskatchewan 
businesses. Prove this is not just political gamesmanship, and 
support out legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, while perhaps the goal 
of the legislation was laudable, the approach is flawed. All 
constitutional experts who have spoken on the matter agree that 
the Bills are going to be ineffective. 
 
I've said before in the House, there's a relatively simple and 
well-established principle: where federal and provincial 
constitutional areas overlap and legislation conflicts, the federal  

legislation prevails. It's well-established. It's fairly elementary, 
and it means that your Bills would not be very effective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday of 
last week the Merit Contractors Association filed a complaint 
with the Labour Relations Board of Saskatchewan. The 
complaint is based on indications that this government's Crown 
construction tendering agreement breaches provisions of 
provincial legislation a total of eight times, Mr. Speaker  this 
government's own legislation, I underline. The complaint that I 
table today calls for an immediate injunction that would 
suspend the tendering agreement until the list of complaints are 
reviewed. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Labour this afternoon: Will 
you, Mr. Minister, agree to suspend your union preference 
agreement until it is determined whether or not the policy 
breaches existing legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, let me be very direct 
with the member for Greystone, the Leader of the Liberal Party, 
that no, the answer is there will be no suspension of the 
agreement because the agreement was signed duly by the 
Construction Labour Relations Association which is a 
representative of the construction industry. It was signed by the 
trade unions who are involved in this. It has support, by and 
large, to the construction industry, Mr. Speaker. And if this has 
been submitted to different sources for deliberation, then that's 
where it should lie until a disposition of that submission is 
handled. 
 
But we think, Mr. Speaker, this is a fair agreement. It is in the 
interests of both the construction industry, the interests of the 
workers who work on the construction sites, on Crown 
corporation construction sites, and most importantly, it is also 
in the best interests of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There 
are many people throughout the province, especially business 
people, who do not concur with the Deputy Premier this 
afternoon. Apart from being very unfair to Saskatchewan 
workers — non-unionized workers, I might add — this policy is 
very unfair to Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
I table a letter from the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
which points out that any contractor on a project will have to 
pay dues on behalf of non-union employees, Mr. Speaker. The 
unions stand to make millions of dollars on this. And to take an 
example, on a job that requires 75 electricians and 75 plumbers, 
it will cost the contractor almost $5,000 on union dues alone if 
they are using non-union workers. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier: can you explain . . . sir,  



April 3, 1995 

 
1301 

will you in fact inform the people of the province what benefits 
the contractor or the non-union workers will receive from 
paying these dues when they don't belong to a union? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I find it of some 
particular interest that the Leader of the Liberal Party would 
refer to this contract and this arrangement as if it was something 
that was foreign and not very productive when in fact at the 
federal government level there are these kinds of agreements . . 
. have been for many, many years and have proved to be 
beneficial as this one is going to be. 
 
Now one of the places in which dues are contributed is the 
Construction Opportunities Development Council, which we 
have spoken about in this House before. It was established in 
1944. It has had so much merit that even the federal 
government has contributed a hundred thousand dollars towards 
it. It is to provide a better construction industry: more efficient, 
more effective, and more cost-productive. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, surely no one should object to contributing 
to making sure that the work site in which they work and that 
the industry itself is the best it can be and can provide the best 
product for the Saskatchewan taxpayer. It seems to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member opposite should stand up and applaud 
such an arrangement because it is so obvious the benefits in 
which it can accrue to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it will not only cost the taxpayers more to complete 
projects, but it's going to also cost more to administer those 
projects and this policy. 
 
The monitoring of all the areas of the new union preference 
policy is going to do one thing that this government is 
particularly talented at. It's done it in health care. It's done in 
across the piece, Mr. Speaker. It's going to add new layers yet 
again to an already overwhelming bureaucracy created by the 
NDP. And instead of decreasing the size of government and 
getting out of the market-place, this government continues to 
meddle in people's affairs, and it gets bigger and bigger and 
bigger. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier: Mr. Deputy Premier, surely 
you've analysed the added costs of enforcing these policies. 
Will you share with this Assembly the projected cost increase 
that will be paid for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and how 
many more people you'll have to add to employ to do this. Or 
will the unions simply use this extra windfall to police the 
agreement themselves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have had 
many occasions in this session, to the point where it stands out 
and really blazes at you, where the member from Greystone has 
stood in this House and been absolutely incorrect with the  

information she has presented and as a result has had to 
flip-flop several times on the issues. 
 
I want to tell her that some of the provisions in this agreement 
will in fact reduce the cost of construction, a provision which 
provides a no-strike and a no-lockout situation agreed to both 
by the employees and by the construction industry. 
 
In the agreement, there is a reduction in overtime from double 
time to time and a half. There is an elimination of the cost of 
daily cost of living allowances which used to have to be 
provided by the construction industry, for example, for a 
construction that took place in Estevan. Those are major cost 
savings in these particular projects. 
 
And finally, on the question of good management of programs, 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote DBRS (Dominion Bond 
Rating Service) rating agency which said recently: 
 
 The program has demonstrated good program 

expenditure controls and has made a commitment to 
maintain a balanced budget track. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, tells the people of Saskatchewan that this 
government has good project management. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, stands in the face of what the member opposite is 
saying, which is absolutely and totally incorrect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
truth of the matter happens to be that every single time 
small-business people turn around in this province, their bottom 
line has been changed and it's been changed by the government, 
which is not under their control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this policy not only discriminates against small-
business people; it discriminates against workers  those 
workers who choose under their own free will not to join a 
union. And this letter that I tabled this afternoon states the 
tendering policy may break the law. And I quote: 
 
 The Crown CTA (Construction Tendering Agreement) 

supersedes the rights of employees and employers as 
provided in The Trade Union Act, Construction Industry 
Labour Relations Act, and the Canadian charter of 
rights. 

 
My question to the Deputy Premier: how can your government 
implement a policy that blatantly instils an advantage to one 
group over another in our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I think just 
because a letter that the member from Greystone gets says 
something, does not necessarily make it correct. And we have 
seen these examples before. And I want to say again to the 
member from Greystone, if she would stop speaking in her seat 
while an answer is being given, that in fact the letter and the 
premiss of what it said is incorrect. It does not apply to this  



April 3, 1995 

 
1302 

particular agreement. 
 
But if she is so concerned, if she is so concerned about this 
particular issue, will she stand up in the House and say that the 
federal government, where these kind of agreements and 
provisions exist, will also demand that the federal government 
— her friends in Ottawa — will also change this agreement 
which they have? Will she stand up and say that? Will she say 
that Cameco, which has a private sector agreement of this, has 
no right to be able to have that? There's nothing new here, Mr. 
Speaker. It is simply carrying on policies that have existed here 
before. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, for a member to get up in this House 
without stating all of the facts, I think once again shows the 
flaws of the Liberal Party in the House. She forgets that this 
government has reduced the small business corporate income 
tax in Canada by 20 per cent since it was elected, the second 
lowest in Canada, a great asset and a great benefit to the small-
business sector in the province of Saskatchewan; which I might 
also add is growing dramatically because of the election of this 
government in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Business Fee Increases 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
very subdued question period today, Mr. Speaker, and it's 
obvious that the peacekeepers have an influence even here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Economic Development. Mr. Minister, your government has 
been making a number of announcements trying to give the 
impression you are helping small business. Today's order in 
councils contain a number of announcements you forgot to 
make. 
 
A number of significant business fee increases came into effect 
on April Fool's Day, an appropriate day for anyone who has 
been fooled into thinking your government is good for small 
business. There is significant fees under The Business 
Corporations Act, increases; The Non-Profit Corporations Act, 
increases in taxes; The Co-operatives Act; The Credit Union 
Act; The Business Names Registration Act; and The Names of 
Homes Act all have had increases, Mr. Minister. Some business 
fees were more than doubled under the new regulations. 
 
Mr. Minister, why do you need to impose more fee increases on 
Saskatchewan business? And why didn't you announce these 
fee hikes today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the fact that 
the member has received this information through public 
record, because we released it, should come as no surprise that 
we do release information like this on a very regular basis to the 
public. And so I say to you that in fact we did release it, and in  

the way we release almost everything we do in this Assembly. 
 
But for you to say that small business are upset with this 
government, totally flies in the face that literally thousands of 
jobs are being created by small business in this province; that 
many companies see Saskatchewan as a very, very good place 
to do business. 
 
The Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce recently announced 
their new call centre — 500 new jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Cargill has announced that they are building a 
2,000-tonne-a-day crushing plant near Saskatoon. You know 
that the Canadian Cancer Society has chosen Regina for their 
nationwide English call centre. Pelorus is doing their 
navigational production centre here in Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon. 
 
And for you to try to preach gloom and doom about the 
economy of Saskatchewan at this time flies in the face of what 
the reality of Saskatchewan is all about, that is, government, 
business, along with the cooperative and labour movement, 
working together in partnership to create a stronger economy 
and many thousands of jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, those weren't 
the only orders in council released today; in fact the stack was a 
half a foot thick. In addition to hiking business fees, you also 
turned around and gave out a whole bunch of grants to certain 
businesses, just before the end of the fiscal year — $311,000 in 
business grants, Mr. Minister. Obviously you had some money 
to blow before the end of the year, so that's exactly what you 
did. 
 
Mr. Minister, first you raise fees to all business and then you 
turn around and give out grants to a select few. Why don't you 
cut back on both and lower business fees and eliminate the 
business grants? Why don't you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that I smile 
is because the members opposite who ran the debt of this 
province up to $15 billion — this 300,000 that you talk about 
for all small business in the province, that's about one minute's 
interest . . . no, about 2 seconds’ interest on that massive debt 
that you built up for all the businesses in the province. 
 
And when I think back to the hundreds of millions and billions 
of dollars that you used as so-called incentives to attract 
out-of-province businesses, for you to be critical of a few 
hundred thousand dollars for all the businesses in the province, 
I think is almost . . . comes close to being laughable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Here's an example of one of those grants. 
You gave a grant of $30,454 to DMZ Direct Marketing Ltd., to 
develop a Grey Cup merchandising catalogue. DMZ is owned 
by Lowell Monkhouse, former assistant to Mr. Allan Blakeney.  



April 3, 1995 

 
1303 

Lowell Monkhouse's other company — Insight Public Relations 
— also got a $20,000 contract from Executive Council last 
year. 
 
This raises all kinds of questions. First, I thought the Premier 
said there would be no taxpayers' money going to the Grey Cup. 
Second, if the Grey Cup merchandising is selling well, which it 
is, why does the company need a grant to have an individual 
develop a catalogue, and third, how was Lowell Monkhouse 
selected for this grant? 
 
Mr. Minister, why should taxpayers be giving Lowell 
Monkhouse $30,000 to develop a Grey Cup catalogue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, now the members 
opposite have gone from being critical of CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) moving their 500 people and the 
call centre; they criticized Cargill's opening of a major plant; 
now they're opposed to the Grey Cup. 
 
I ask myself, where will it end? Where will it end? As to the 
politics of Mr. Monkhouse, I think I'll let others speak to the 
issue of politics of Mr. Lowell Monkhouse because I'm not sure 
where he's at these days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. May I . . . as the Speaker of the 
legislature, I certainly thank the peacekeepers for being here 
today — you made my job very easy during question period. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Future Skills Partnership Announced 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform the House 
of the commitment and cooperation demonstrated between 
education and industry in addressing training needs of 
Saskatchewan citizens. This morning I was pleased to witness 
the outcome of such a partnership. 
 
Brandt Industries Ltd. of Regina, and Wascana Institute, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
have reached a training agreement to train new employees for 
openings in the Brandt agricultural products division. As a 
result of the tremendous economic growth across the province 
and within Brandt, businesses are expanding and employment 
opportunities in our province are opening up. 
 
But industry representatives such as Brandt are finding that 
workers with the skills they need are not available to fill these 
new positions. At the same time, we have unemployed people 
who need new skills to find employment. It is in response to 
this that the training initiative called Future Skills was 
introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Future Skills is a program offered in partnership  

with individuals, industry, communities, and education 
institutions. Future Skills ensures that training is tied to real, 
long-term jobs. Employers benefit by gaining the skilled 
workforce they need to actively participate in the current 
economic recovery, and individuals gain job skills and training 
recognized by public training institutes that will apply to other 
jobs or go on to further training. 
 
As of March 30, there were 29 approved proposals for training, 
supporting 209 new, long-term, real jobs. A further 66 
proposals are in various stages of development at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Brandt Industries is the beneficiary of 12 
permanent, skilled employees, and we're extremely pleased with 
the partnership that we've developed between SIAST and our 
industry in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
thank the minister for sending over a copy of her remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's very important that our youth and others 
receive training to participate in the economy of Saskatchewan, 
that they be allowed to contribute in a meaningful way to 
Canadian society. And I say Canadian society, Mr. Speaker, 
because I'm not sure how they'll be able to contribute to 
Saskatchewan's society under our new union preference or 
union-only policy, Mr. Speaker, unless they're prepared to join a 
union. 
 
People need the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to receive education 
and training. Unfortunately, many can no longer afford to attend 
our universities because of all the fee increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the new employees at Brandt will be very 
valuable and will contribute significantly to the well-being of 
that company. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I congratulate the 
government on developing a partnership with one of Regina's 
and Saskatchewan's most progressive industries and businesses. 
Brandt Industries has repeatedly won many ABEX (Awards for 
Business Excellence) awards and demonstrated innovations 
such as sprayers, lightweight locomotives, and a wide range of 
new products. 
 
What industries like Brandt find, that they are unable to find 
enough trained workers graduating from existing training 
programs in the province. They have now translated their 
innovative ideas into employment and training opportunities 
that will keep youth in Saskatchewan. 
 
Brandt Industries has become an influential partner in the 
government's programs despite other government policies, 
particularly its Crown tendering regulations which are 
threatening the very presence of industries like Brandt in  



April 3, 1995 

 
1304 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Recess of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Churchill Downs: 
 
 That by leave of the Assembly, that this Assembly do 

now recess to greet our distinguished peacekeepers and 
reconvene at the call of the Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding 
that if this motion is agreed to, that we would stand adjourned 
for about one hour, and that the bells would ring five minutes in 
advance to the reconvening. 
 
The Speaker: — That is correct. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — I call the House to order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 40 — An Act to 
amend The Land Surveys Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say a few 
words today, Mr. Speaker, about Bill No. 40, An Act to amend 
The Land Surveys Act. Apparently the Act, as I have been 
instructed, Mr. Speaker, changes some of the definitions with 
respect to surveying, such as the definition of iron posts. 
 
And I'd have to say that I kind of wonder when I see something 
like that needing to be changed, where we have to have 
somebody figure out what an iron post really means. And I 
guess when my first impression of a Bill is set with a necessity 
to rewrite legislation in order to start off by changing 
definitions like what an iron post really is, tells me two things: 
first of all it tells me the government is really desperate to have 
some legislation to deal with; and the other thing it tells me is 
that we must be going into an election if that's the best we're  

going to do  to try to argue over what the definition of an iron 
post is. 
 
So in reality, we may want to study this a little bit further in 
order to find out just exactly if there is anything really 
important in here. But I guess it allows for further changes to 
definitions, descriptions, and practices to be made through the 
regulations rather than through legislation. Now given both the 
pace of technology and technological changes in this area and 
the technical nature of these matters, this may be appropriate to 
do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess what we're saying here is that in some 
cases being able to deal with legislation through a regulatory 
process has some merit and some benefit, although it would 
seem odd to me, having gone through the regulations that have 
existed in some of the other laws passed by this administration, 
namely, I guess, the labour legislation, The Trade Union Act. 
The Workers' Compensation Act does a lot of regulations. The 
Labour Standards Act has quite a lot of regulations in as well. 
Those areas, we have found the use of regulations to be almost 
a nightmare and carried to the extreme and to the exaggeration 
where society no longer knows exactly what the laws are when 
you do this to too great of an extent. 
 
So I guess my thoughts here, Mr. Speaker, is that we should 
always try to be open-minded to the point that we allow some 
flexibility so that things can change as necessity warrants that. 
But we must not allow ourselves, in the democratic process, to 
open the door so far that we're never, ever able to get control of 
the situation again. 
 
If we have too many of our rules and regulations in life set 
down by regulation where they can't be debated and nobody has 
any input, then in fact we have life going on where the rules 
change day by day, and no citizen in society can ever obey all of 
the laws that we have because nobody ever knows what they 
really are. And I think that that kind of a confusion is not 
necessary in our democratic society. 
 
And so if this is one of the intents, as it appears to be in this 
Bill, my suggestion here is of course that there be a great deal 
of caution and a great deal of discretion in the amount of 
changes that would be allowed through regulatory changes after 
the fact. 
 
The housekeeping changes switches the administration of the 
manual of instructions from surveyors from the Highways 
department to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. We're not quite sure exactly why that would need 
to be done. It just seems to me that there must be some 
explanation, I guess, and we're going to be asking those kind of 
questions in committee. Why you would want to take this 
process out of the network of Highways, where most surveying 
and that sort of thing probably is already done at the present 
time, and now put it into Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation for accountability, really is beyond me to figure out 
why that is without asking a lot of questions. 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1305 

So we're going to be asking those kind of questions in 
committee and wanting to know from the minister in charge just 
exactly what's going on here and what the intent is and what 
valuable purpose there could be to doing this. 
 
Now it also implies here that we are allowing surveyors greater 
flexibility to use satellite surveying in establishing boundaries. 
And of course I guess we are in the 21st century and we do 
have these satellites all floating around the world, and we have 
these big, powerful telescopic cameras and that sort of thing 
that can take pictures of everything. 
 
So I think that, in fairness, seems like a realistic approach to be 
allowing some of that to be done. Again, we would caution 
some discretion in the use of these things because obviously 
there where equipment is used of this nature, there is always a 
chance for some error, some equipment to fail. And we mustn't 
put ourselves in a position where we absolutely 100 per cent 
depend on these kind of techniques without any recourse for the 
general public where things might in fact turn out to be wrong 
or to be misrepresented or something goes haywire, in just 
simple terms. 
 
So we're going to caution the government again in that area to 
be sure that there is some backup systems, to make sure that we 
don't allow a system to get out of hand where machinery and 
telescopes and satellites and computers just take over our lives 
and eliminate all of the jobs in our society, eliminate all of the 
discretionary approaches to how we run our society. 
 
So we're going to ask the government some questions about 
accountability in this area, how we will check the credentials of 
the people that are feeding the information into these 
computers, because as my colleague from Souris-Cannington 
has pointed out, computers will only work as well as the 
information that they receive from the people that put that 
information into the machines. So we have to be very careful 
that we check the credentials of those people and that we have a 
backup system basically to audit the works to make sure that in 
fact it is done properly and fairly for everyone in our society. 
 
For the most part, the changes we feel are positive changes that 
are allowing surveyors more flexibility to keep up with the 
technology while maintaining their independence and 
responsibilities. So we are not going to object at first blush to 
this Bill and to things that it represents, although as I've pointed 
out, Mr. Speaker, we are definitely going to want to ask a lot of 
questions of the minister to be absolutely certain that we are 
doing our job to be responsible and to make sure that we don't 
set up a Bill that will come back to haunt us later by having 
some mistakes because we sort of got a comfortable feeling and 
let it go passing through too quickly, or anything like that. 
 
So we will be examining it. We'll be asking a lot of questions. 
And the government has consulted with the surveyors 
association, we understand, and we have been informed, Mr. 
Speaker, that they are generally in support of this Bill. So we 
will be offering this information about the Bill being a fact of 
life, a reality that is about to come into existence. We will be  

offering that information to the general public in case there are 
other organizations and other peoples involved in our society 
that will want to have an input into this process. 
 
For example, I can think of the surface rights people who might 
want to take a look at such a Bill. Because obviously in the 
petroleum industry a lot of surveying is done to establish where 
the petroleum industry will locate their facilities and do their 
work. That has a great deal of impact on our farmers and 
ranchers and property owners in the province as well as to the 
Crown where these works are done on Crown properties. It's 
extremely important that those folks know what's going on, to 
allow them an opportunity to be able to examine this document 
and what its implications are for the people at large, and 
especially to those people represented in their special interest 
groups. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will be passing that information out to 
them, hoping that they will take the time to check this out to 
make sure that it in fact does all of the good things that it's 
supposed to and doesn't have a hidden agenda, or anything 
sinister like that. 
 
Now we have a few questions for the Committee of the Whole 
but no particular reason to hold up the passage of the second 
reading of this Bill at this point. So we will hope that there will 
not be a great rush into the Committee of the Whole with this 
Bill, so that we will have a little time to talk to the other folks. 
But having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to 
allow this Bill to pass on to the next stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 41 — An Act 
respecting Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are asked today 
to take a look at Bill No. 41, Mr. Speaker, An Act respecting 
Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors. 
 
Now we have been told, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill extensively 
updates the by-laws of the surveyors’ association for the first 
time in 30 years. And obviously if a Bill is 30 years old and 
hasn't been looked at, there is probably some good reason to 
expect that either it's working right and has been perfect, or else 
technological changes in our society would have dictated a need 
to take a look at it. So I guess that's why we're here taking a 
look at it today. 
 
Now most of the changes relate to membership standards, 
education upgrading requirements, discipline provisions, and 
other matters of concern only to the members of the association. 
However we shouldn't take that too lightly, Mr. Speaker, 
because when we talk about upgrading requirements and  



April 3, 1995 

 
1306 

educational standards, and membership standards and that sort 
of thing, it affects not only the members of the association but 
anyone who is trying to get into the association  in other 
words our young people, for the most part, who would probably 
be studying these kinds of things at university and wanting to 
get jobs in this job description area. 
 
So we have to use some discretion when we make laws in terms 
of how we handcuff our young people from being able to get 
into professions, and how we treat them in terms of how much 
of their life they have to spend getting credentials without 
actually going to work at the simplicity of doing a job. 
 
I know from experience with my own family members who are 
graduating on a yearly or bi-yearly basis from universities, and 
trying to get into the job market and trying to integrate 
themselves into society, that they are finding, as I have found in 
my own experience in lifetime, that many times the 
requirements in order to get into the profession are very onerous 
and very demanding and very useless when it comes time to 
actually do and perform the job at hand that has to be done 
when they get the job. An awful lot of the work that they have 
do to prove their ability has been in fact just a waste of time. 
 
And one of my daughters explained to me, Mr. Speaker, one 
day, that basically what you've done in some cases is you've 
bought and paid for a degree. And while it's nice to be able to 
have children that can achieve the marks necessary to go along 
with that, it has some onerous responsibility laid on our 
doorstep as parliamentarians to examine what our motives 
really are. Are we really trying to see to it that young people are 
good at what they have to do in their new jobs. Or are we 
simply trying to stall them off for years and years at a time in 
order to keep them occupied and busy so that they don't put 
pressure on the job market and start to displace those people 
who are trying to covet a job position for themselves with a 
monopoly pay scale, or perhaps just trying to keep limited 
numbers of people working in a certain area. 
 
So we have to watch what the motivations are here, Mr. 
Speaker, and we're going to have to be asking a lot of questions 
of the minister to determine very completely what it is that they 
are trying to accomplish here and to make sure that we are not, 
in fact, hurting our young people trying to get into the 
professions. 
 
(1600) 
 
I'm not really that sure if the standards we are alluding to here 
are an improvement of standards or if they're actually wanting 
to reduce them. So we have to find that out for sure. If we're 
increasing the standards necessary, then I worry quite openly 
about the motivations, and we have to examine that to find out 
if in fact we are making a law that would help young people or 
hinder them. 
 
It also allows apparently for representation of the association's 
council of the public and disciplines related to surveying. Now,  

here, Mr. Speaker, the association's council is apparently 
something that is within the membership, and they obviously 
are looking to make some changes in that area. Those of us who 
are not involved with the surveying business and the industry 
directly would have to ask some questions to make sure that we 
understand exactly what is being requested, and what is going 
to be done, and what the outcome will be in that area. 
 
We have in the area of concerns . . . the Bill was drafted by the 
surveyors’ association itself we understand, and refers almost 
entirely, I guess, to their professional association's own 
constitution, which is probably in order; and no question in my 
mind that they've done a lot of good homework on this and 
most likely have put it together properly. 
 
However as a responsible opposition, it is our duty and 
responsibility to check that out and to make sure of it. And of 
course we will do that through the process of asking questions 
of the minister in committee. So we will be working long and 
hard in the committee process to make certain that the 
constitution that is alluded to is fair and equitable to everyone 
concerned and that the results taken from that constitution, in 
terms of asking for this legislation, will be balanced and will 
serve society to the best possible ability that we, as 
parliamentarians, can do. 
 
Now we will want to go through a few checks and balances in 
the Committee of the Whole, just to make sure that all of the 
bases are covered with respect to wording. But there's no reason 
to delay passage of the reading in order to accomplish that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So having said those few things about the Bill, I have to admit 
that I'm not totally versed with everything that's going to happen 
here, and I guess because we have to be a little more certain of 
that, we would ask the minister's cooperation in preparing for a 
lot of questions on this Bill when we get into committee. We 
won't be holding this Bill up any further though; we will 
suggest that we go on to committee. 
 
And as I said in the last Bill, there may be some outside third-
party interests. I can think of the university people, for example, 
as a prime area where folks might want to be taking a look at 
this. People who are taking these kind of courses that would 
allow them to go into this profession ought to, at the university 
level, be taking a look at what this legislation will do to their 
futures and their ability to have a future in this area. 
 
So again we're going to suggest that we contact folks and let 
them know what's going on, let them have an idea of how this is 
going to affect their lives, so they can deliver any of their 
opinions, and we of course will pass them on to the minister. 
 
Having said that, we will not hold this process up any longer, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1307 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
New Careers Corporation 

Vote 59 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the Minister of Education, 
Employment and Training to please introduce the officials who 
have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, to my right is Merran Proctor, 
who is the CEO (chief executive officer) and president of New 
Careers Corporation; and to my left is Tony Antonini, who is 
the executive director of finance and administration for New 
Careers. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a 
question or two and you can get to me later with the 
information, Madam Minister, if you wish. 
 
The New Careers has a number of facilities that have been used 
for housing and for facilities for doing work in various 
locations in the province, and I was just wondering if the 
corporation has any idea about selling any of them. 
 
And if you wouldn't mind giving me an answer sometime, I'd be 
pleased to accept it. We don't have to do it in the House here 
today but I wouldn't mind knowing if there were some. And if 
there are, the locations and when they're expected to be put on 
the block, if they are. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I will make a commitment to get the 
member that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, welcome today. I'd like to welcome your officials 
also. 
 
Madam Minister, as I look through the budget dealing with 
New Careers Corporation, I see that you have managed to 
gather in a small increase this year. I believe it's about 
$122,000. Well, Madam Minister, is this not almost the same 
amount of money that was dropped from your budget last year? 
I believe there's about a thousand dollars difference in what was 
taken out last year and put back in again this year. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I'm just wondering why you're playing the 
shell game with the money, taking it out last year and sliding it 
back in again this year. Just what's going on with the money 
here? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The $120,000 or so increase is for two 
reasons basically. One, the corporation has never had a 
communications officer, and consequently it has not always 
been possible to communicate all of the various aspects of New 
Careers and what could be available to communities and 
individual businesses. So there is some provisions in this  

budget to hire a communications officer. And secondly, the cost 
of accommodation for trainees has gone up, and this increase is 
to assist with accommodation increases. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
wonder if you could please outline the duties of this 
communications officer, who it is, and what they'll be paid. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don't have her precise job 
description here. We can get you a copy of her job description. 
But most job descriptions for communications personnel that 
work inside government are they're involved in preparing 
communications documents for the public. They're involved in 
preparing press releases for the corporation. They're involved in 
preparing advertisements for the corporation. They'd be 
involved in any kind of statements that staff might be making to 
chamber of commerces or regional economic development 
authorities. 
 
I mean the corporation is changing somewhat, so this person is 
involved in the communications strategy. I don't have her 
precise salary here, but it's less than $36,000 a year, I'm advised 
by my officials. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. 
Hopefully you will provide us with that salary scale. And you 
failed to mention who was filling that position. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The person's name is Allie Irvine. She's 
on a six-month secondment from SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) and she got the job through 
a competition. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. This 
would be an internal competition. Would it be within SPMC or 
the Public Service, or was it tendered in the public? What kind 
of competition are we talking about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It was posted and it was a Public 
Service Crown corporation posting. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — When you're providing the job 
description and the salary, would you also please provide the 
qualifications? 
 
I can hear the minister's head shaking over there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand the woman has a 
journalism degree from Carleton University, but we'll get you 
that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Who was 
previously performing these kind of duties for the New Careers 
Corporation? I've seen a number of pamphlets that have dealt 
with New Careers. Their advertising has been in various 
publications over the years. So how was the communications 
being handled previous to having a communications officer 
hired, Madam Minister? 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1308 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that there was a deputy 
CEO and this person did a lot of that work. As well, some of 
the work was contracted out to various communications places 
to do the annual report, the pamphlets, that kind of thing. And 
now we're moving more of that work in-house. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well okay, Madam Minister. This 
deputy CEO, is that position still there? Is it still being filled? 
Has that position changed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The position was abolished. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
Well perhaps I should ask. Previous to this position being 
abolished, how many executive positions were there, where you 
had at least one deputy CEO? So are there . . . was there one 
deputy CEO at the time? Was there five? How many were 
there? And what is in position now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Before, we had a CEO and a deputy 
CEO; now we just have a CEO. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So throughout the entire corporate 
structure of New Careers, the executive structure, you now have 
one less person working in there as an executive, and in turn 
you have hired a communications officer. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we have done is moved the 
dollars that were allocated for that deputy position out into the 
field. So instead of having a huge head office structure, or a 
larger head office structure, the dollars for that deputy position 
have been moved out into the regional structures across the 
province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, as I look 
through your 1993-94 annual report, I see a corporate structure 
laid out here on page no. 4. It does not list a deputy CEO any 
place. It does list a person reporting to the president as being 
manager, policy program development communications unit. Is 
that the position where this deputy CEO would have fit in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand you're looking at page 4. 
We have a president. We no longer have a vice-president. So 
you're looking at the 1993-94 report; we don't have that position 
any more in the management structure. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, as we go down the 
management structure, having eliminated the vice-president, we 
still had a unit over here though called communications unit. So 
is the president still in charge of that? Is the new 
communications officer? This vice-president that has been 
eliminated — was that the deputy CEO who was looking after 
communications? I wonder if you'd mind explaining your 
corporate structure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We do have a policy program 
development position. That position is vacant and it's being  

advertised. In addition we have a communications officer. 
 
As you may know, the federal government is undergoing some 
major reforms in terms of transfers to the province. New 
Careers Corporation is a training and employment agency for 
persons receiving income assistance. 
 
Because of the changes that we know will be coming from the 
federal government, we're going to have to spend some time 
and effort as a corporation, on policy development in terms of 
the future direction of the corporation depending on what 
happens from the federal perspective. 
 
In addition to that, New Careers Corporation is involved in 
some of the JobStart initiatives for young persons between the 
ages of 17 and 24. We have a communications person who is 
earning less than $36,000 a year involved in that endeavour. 
From a policy perspective the position is vacant, and we're 
going to be hiring someone shortly, as the position is 
advertised. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
Okay, the position is vacant now. When did it become vacant? 
Was that when this deputy CEO left? Or was that the 
vice-president who was filling this position? I'm still not quite 
clear as to who was actually performing the functions, and 
whether you're going to end up with more people or less people. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that this is a position that 
the corporation has, but up until now it has not been filled. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. So 
now we're going to have a new person in the area of policy 
program development and communication; we're going to have 
another person hired to look after communications for the 
corporation; the vice-president's position has been eliminated, 
but the dollars have been transferred down through the chain of 
command, and this would be to the regional managers. 
 
Now this money that has gone to the regional managers, 
Madam Minister, has that been used for programing in that 
area? Has it been used to top up the salaries of the regional 
managers? Has it been used to perhaps hire someone new in 
those areas to assist the regional managers? Or have you made a 
whole new area that these monies have gone to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you is that we have a 
new corporate structure in the corporation. We have an 
executive director of policy and development; we have a CEO; 
we have an executive director of finance and administration. As 
well, we have eliminated the vice-president and the manager of 
work experience programs and we've integrated this. And we 
now have five regional directors — we have a regional director 
in the North, a regional director in the Saskatoon area, a 
regional director in Regina and area, a regional director in the 
south-west, and a regional director in the south-east. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. You  



April 3, 1995 

 
1309 

had 10 positions before. You now have five regional managers 
plus the director for finance who . . . I believe that was not a 
changed position, that was originally there? At least it's off to 
the side in your '93-94 corporate charts. 
 
So, Madam Minister, with the eliminations then of those 
positions, has there been any change in the number of 
employees within the corporation? I don't see anything in the 
estimates dealing with employees that are hired by the 
corporation, so has your employee base increased or decreased 
with these changes in the structures that you have made? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have one additional employee in 
the corporation. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — How many employees does the 
corporation have, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have money for 85 positions; we 
have funding for 85 positions. Last year we had funding for 84 
positions. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Madam Minister, other than the position 
of manager, policy — which you are attempting to fill, I believe 
— are there are other positions that are vacant at the present 
time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We're advertising the five regional 
directors' positions that I talked about. They are presently in the 
process of being advertised. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So those are the only other vacant 
positions within the 85 positions that you have funding for, is 
the five regional managers plus the policy manager? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are only three other vacant 
positions that are in the field, and they'll be advertised as well. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. 
What kind of advertising are you planning on doing for these? 
Will it be an in-house type of thing through PSC (Public 
Service Commission) or the Crown corporations, or will it be 
open tendering to the public? What kind of advertising are you 
proposing to do for these positions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — All of these positions are advertised, 
and the field positions are advertised within the Public Service 
Commission, I understand. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'd like to 
go back to the communications officer that you are bringing 
onto the stream. Now you talk about less than $36,000 for a 
salary. But what other kind of start-up costs are associated with 
this employee? Are there moving costs? Are there office costs 
for setting up an office some place — supplies, equipment? 
What all kinds of costs are associated with the bringing in of a 
communications officer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We can give you all of that  

information. We don't have, you know, what photocopier she 
might have access to or what computer. We'll get you that 
information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You had 
the person who was dealing with communications as deputy 
CEO before. How effective of a job were they doing in that 
position as a communications person? Was New Careers getting 
their message out to the public, because I mentioned that I've 
seen pamphlets from New Careers, I've seen the advertising that 
goes on in the various papers, their annual reports, etc. So how 
would you characterize the job performance for that 
communications person prior to this new one coming on 
stream? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think what we've made the policy 
decision to do is to do a better communications job with the 
private sector. And consequently, the communications person is 
working with the employees inside of New Careers to work 
with the various regional economic development authorities and 
various chambers of commerce, as well as business 
organizations, because we're moving to sustainable jobs. 
 
New Careers Corporation is a training and employment 
corporation. We want to make sure that the jobs that our people 
are receiving are in fact going to be jobs that lead to long-term, 
sustainable jobs. We want to make sure that the people in those 
jobs are being properly trained, so that they will have the skills 
to keep the job that they are being trained for or move on to 
other endeavours. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — I'm sure those are all very laudable 
goals, Madam Minister, but it doesn't answer how effective a 
job the previous incumbent in the communications level was 
doing. I wonder if you could answer that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I'm informed that in the past, New 
Careers Corporation was a very low-key corporation. We didn't 
really advertise it. You might see a New Careers Corporation 
sign on some marina or some golf course. That's not our 
intentions now. We're moving away from short work contracts 
to longer-term, sustainable jobs. And we've done a great deal of 
work, working with the business community the last couple of 
months, to ensure that our clients are getting some of the jobs 
that are becoming available in this province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, perhaps you're 
changing the focus, the entire focus, of New Careers then. Are 
you moving away from what New Careers was originally 
intended and what the budget estimate talks about: 
 
 Supports community projects and provides people 

receiving social assistance with opportunities for 
employment and training by providing funding to 
community organizations and businesses . . . 

 
Now that's what your statement in Estimates deals with. So if 
your clientele are basically not changing, it must be the business 
side then that's changing. 



April 3, 1995 

 
1310 

Previously the New Careers was directing to those things that 
you have mentioned, is works at parks and marinas and small 
construction-type jobs and training to improve people's 
knowledge to go back out into the workforce to get those kind 
of jobs. 
 
So, Madam Minister, are your clientele for New Careers 
changing? Are you changing the focus on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think what we're trying to do is to get 
our clients into sustainable, long-term jobs. I think the other 
thing you should know, it's not unusual for an organization like 
New Careers Corporation to have a communications officer 
whose sole function is to communicate not only inside the 
corporation but outside of the corporation. This is not unusual. 
 
And if the member has a point to make, I wish he'd make it. 
And I'm sure there's many other things he'd like to talk about. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, while you may 
consider it not to be unusual, up until this point New Careers 
has not had a person dedicated to communications. They 
performed other duties which included policy, which included 
program development, as well as communications. And you say 
that position was never filled; it was being dealt with by the 
deputy CEO. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I fail to understand the need to all of a 
sudden hire a communications officer, particularly in the light 
of the fact that we're soon going into an election. It seems that 
this communications officers are a perfect opportunity to hire 
political appointees into places to do work. Now I have no idea 
who Allie Irvine is, whether she's political or not I have no idea, 
but it still seems to be an opportunity to promote certain aspects 
of a corporation. 
 
(1630) 
 
If there was a need for a communications officer, why was that 
need not there last year when you chopped $120,000 out of the 
budget? This year, going into an election year, you decide we 
need a communications officer and you plunk $122,000 back 
into the budget which is basically what you had pulled out last 
year. I don't understand the reason or the need for a 
communications officer this year when it wasn't there last year 
or the year before that or down the road. 
 
So, Madam Minister, you talked about some of these things 
were being contracted out previously; how much money was 
spent on this contracting out and who did the work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We'll get that information. I'd just like 
to make this point, that New Careers Corporation is moving 
towards the notion of long-term, sustainable jobs, not short, 
20-week employment opportunities. So in fact, many 
community organizations are aware of New Careers 
Corporation, but business is not. Business is not aware that 
New Careers Corporation has a role or a partnership role that 
New Careers can play with the various businesses across the  

province. 
 
So we need someone to involve themselves in a communication 
strategy with business. Because what we're trying to do is move 
out of people going into New Careers Corporation, working for 
five months or 20 weeks, and then not having a job at the end 
of that process. So we're working with business to ensure that 
that person has the appropriate training to keep that job when 
the 20-week program is over. 
 
The other thing I should tell you is that when we take a look at 
the clientele in this province, who is and who is not on income 
assistance, a large number of single parent women are on social 
assistance. Now if you look at some of the work that New 
Careers has been involved in in the past, it has tended to be a 
construction company. And there have been many wonderful 
projects done in the province as a result of the labour provided 
by New Careers trainees. 
 
But the fact is that it is women and their children who are the 
long-term beneficiaries of income assistance. So what we're 
trying to do is to ensure that when we're training women, we're 
training them for positions that are sustainable and will in fact 
support them and their children. 
 
Women have not historically been involved in the construction 
industry. Those tend to be non-traditional industries for women, 
and so we're trying to move the corporation into areas of 
endeavour that in fact would be appropriate for women in the 
province of Saskatchewan who are receivers of income 
assistance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Well 
how much are you planning on spending in the upcoming year 
for contracting out of your communications? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We'll provide that information. We 
don't have that kind of detail here. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. You 
were talking about long-term employment rather than a 
20-week employment. How long are you anticipating your new 
focus for New Careers in keeping people on your programs? 
 
Is this another type of thing like Social Services, where once 
you're caught in the net, you're in there for ever? Are you 
planning on providing permanent, long-term positions for 
people? Or is it a training program where people learn a skill 
and then go on to further employment in the private sector or in 
the government sector? 
 
That's what New Careers was originally designed to do, in my 
belief — was to provide a training vehicle to allow people to 
progress on to some other form of employment that they have 
been trained for, but not simply staying within the framework of 
New Careers; that they would go on to be a carpenter some 
place in the private trade or for the government, but not to stay 
within the New Careers Corporation. 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1311 

So is that your new focus, Madam Minister, that once you get 
these people into New Careers, you've got them for ever? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don't think the corporation ever 
focused on that, not even when your administration set up New 
Careers Corporation. That was never the focus, to keep people 
down on social assistance. 
 
Now here's my observation. I became the minister responsible 
for New Careers in the fall of 1992 and what I noticed — 
because we were in a transition — nothing had changed. When 
New Careers Corporation came into existence, they didn't have 
apprenticeship programs. They didn't have people getting 
credentials, publicly recognized skills. They would go and work 
on a construction site. They'd do that for 20 weeks or whatever, 
and then they'd move on. But they didn't have credentials that 
they could take with them. 
 
Now what we are now doing is we're indenturing people so that 
when they leave New Careers Corporation they have some time 
towards an apprenticeship program, and that's important for 
men in the trades. But in addition to that what we're trying to do 
is to link with business to provide work-based training for 
individuals who are on income assistance, but that work-based 
training can also be credentialled. 
 
What I find so incredible about training programs in this 
country, is that government's have tended to give business 
money to train people but the training wasn't publicly 
recognized. It wasn't training that they could take with them on 
to other work sites; it wasn't training that was recognized that 
would allow them to show the employer that they had a skill 
that was transferable. 
 
Now what we're trying to do in the Department of Education, 
Training and Employment, and New Careers Corporation, is to 
make sure that the people we train have a real skill, real training 
that's publicly recognized and will allow them to career ladder 
into other opportunities or will allow them to go on to further 
training. 
 
Now is this an easy thing to do? No it's not, because we are 
moving away from the traditional model of just giving business 
money or just giving public institutions money to train people. 
We're challenging business and institutions to work together in 
partnership to ensure that business gets what it needs, and that 
is highly skilled people. And that the individual — the 
employee — gets what he or she needs, and that is a credential. 
A publicly recognized credential that they can transfer onto 
other opportunities, meaning other employment opportunities or 
other post-secondary opportunities. That is the direction that 
this government's going in. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you 
use the term indentured, it really frightens me. I think back to 
indentured servants where you gave away your life for five or 
ten years to get a trade. Is that what you're advocating here, that 
you will lock these people in for a fixed period of time at a very 
low salary simply to get this certificate that you're talking  

about? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Let me tell you . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Those people who are apprentice carpenters, you're indentured. 
Okay? You're indentured with the apprenticeship board. It's a 
term that they use in the trades. You're indentured as a welder, 
you're indentured as a plumber, a pipefitter, a carpenter, an 
electrician. That's what it means. It means that you're involved 
in an apprenticeship program that will lead you to your 
journeyperson's status. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. This 
certificate or credentials that you're talking about, what weight 
do they carry within the educational system? You say they will 
lead you to be able to progress onwards to secondary education 
perhaps. Well I think back to all of those people who have 
attended universities and have their sheepskin hanging on the 
wall and no job. 
 
Is there going to be any real jobs, Madam Minister, when these 
people have completed these courses? And you've never said 
how long a term you're talking about. The previous programs 
were 20 weeks. You've never stated whether this is 20 weeks, 
21 weeks, 52 weeks, or for ever. 
 
So, Madam Minister, what real benefits at the end of the day are 
going to be available to your client who does receive this 
credential? And what length of term are you talking about to 
achieve that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we're endeavouring to do is 
design a training program that will lead to a real, permanent 
job. If you look at how we have trained people in this country, 
it's the old adage: training for what? 
 
And this is the beauty of this government's training initiatives. 
What we are doing is we're linking people who don't have the 
required skills with business that needs the skilled personnel 
and training institutions that can provide the accreditation or the 
credentials. 
 
We don't think we have to deal with the notion of training for 
what. We know that business is experiencing skilled labour 
shortages. I was at Brandt Industries this morning. They 
advertised all across the province for machinists and a certain 
type of welder. They couldn't find them. They couldn't find the 
skilled labour force that they required. 
 
We know that there are people who are unemployed, who 
maybe spent 10 or 15 years in a particular industry, and they're 
looking to be retrained or to be trained. And so what we've done 
at Brandt Industries, which we're doing in New Careers 
Corporation — which we're doing in JobStart, Future Skills, 
and New Careers — is linking unemployed people with 
business which has a requirement for skilled labour and a 
public training institution or industrially recognized training so 
that the individual who is trained, receives the training, can 
continue on in that job because the employer has trained a 
person and they'll need that person to ensure that they can  



April 3, 1995 

 
1312 

expand and grow. 
 
So I think it's quite a logical thing to do, where we think we've 
dealt with the question of training for what. We can no longer 
afford to train people for jobs that don't exist. We know that 
there are jobs that do exist, but employers are having a difficult 
time finding skilled labour to fill those jobs. 
 
So what we've done is we've matched New Careers Corporation 
with those businesses. We've matched SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) and public 
training institutions with those businesses. And in the mix are 
people who are looking for work so that they can fill those 
positions and get adequately trained. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — So in the example, Madam Minister, of 
Brandt Industries, how long will New Careers provide 
employment subsidies for those clients. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well New Careers, just to be clear, 
New Careers isn't involved. That's under Future Skills, but New 
Careers could be involved in a project like that, and New 
Careers will provide the training and the employees. So what 
New Careers is doing now is screening people properly so that 
we're finding out which people have skills, which people don't 
have skills, and then matching them to the businesses that are 
looking for skilled labour. If we don't have the skilled people, 
then we'll train them. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam, is New Careers becoming 
an employment pool, or is it still a training system? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Both. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well if it's both, then you're running 
competition. You're duplicating the services of Employment 
Canada. And why are you doing that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Employment Canada, you're on 
unemployment insurance. People who come to New Careers 
Corporation tend to be on social assistance or income 
assistance. We are a training and employment agency. We train 
people for jobs that we hope will exist after we've trained them. 
 
So I guess the point I want to make is that we know that there 
are people on social assistance that lack skills, we know that 
there are businesses that are looking for skilled workers, and 
what we're doing is we're matching those businesses who are 
requiring skilled labour with people who are looking for work, 
and we're ensuring that they're adequately trained to take on 
those positions. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well, Madam Minister, perhaps I used 
the wrong term when I said Canada Employment, I should have 
said Canada Manpower who does provide that screening and 
provide lists of jobs to be available to their clientele. And that 
sounds to me like what you're talking about providing. 

Madam Minister, you still have not said how long you will keep 
a person on the training program. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We will provide training up to 20 
weeks. But if we need more flexibility it could be less, or it 
could be more. It depends on the individual circumstance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. That 
doesn't sound a whole lot different than what Sask Works was 
which was 20 weeks is what they would provide up to. So 
you're still providing the same thing, although it took us 
probably 20 minutes to reach that point. So, Madam Minister, 
what was wrong with the Sask Works programs that isn't or is 
not being carried forward into your new program, or what have 
you changed? What was wrong with the Sask Works program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we're doing now is that you 
might receive 3 weeks’ training, 4 weeks’ training, 6 weeks’ 
training, or you may receive 12 weeks’ training. You may 
receive 15 weeks’ training, 20 weeks’ training, or more. Under 
the Sask Works you received 20 weeks’ training. 
 
The other point I want to make is that we're looking at the 
quality of the training now. We want to make sure that people 
are in fact trained and that that training is recognized, so that 
the person who gets that training has something that they can 
take with them. So often in the past we simply trained people 
but that training wasn't necessarily publicly recognized and it 
may not have been appropriate training. 
 
The other thing that we want to make sure is that we're not 
training people for jobs where there are tons of people who are 
trained in that area. So it's a matter of identifying where those 
skilled labour shortages are and making sure that we're training 
people for jobs that exist, not training people for jobs that don't 
exist. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. It 
sounds to me like your New Careers Corporation is going to do 
what's called, determine the winners and losers. That you're 
going to say, this particular type of employment is going to be a 
winner and that particular type of employment is going to be a 
loser because there is either no call for them or the market is 
flooded. 
 
I can remember when I went to university, everybody said, 
you've got to become an engineer because everybody needs 
engineers. Well five years down the road, after I started 
university, there was too many engineers and nobody wanted 
them. 
 
So it's easy today to pick a winner because you're looking at 
today's market but not looking at the market down the road. It's 
very difficult, Madam Minister, to foresee the future, as to what 
is going to happen in the employment areas. And certainly 
when you're looking at a 20-week training course, it's a lot 
easier to pick a winner 20 weeks down the road than it is four 
or five years down the road. 
 



April 3, 1995 

 
1313 

And I see the Minister of Justice is signalling that he surrenders, 
but I'm not sure that he knows what he's surrendering from. 
 
But, Madam Minister, you've never explained to me what was 
wrong with Sask Works program. I'm sure that had you wanted 
to, you could have put in some form of certification, tied it into 
one of the institutions, to provide the person at the end of the 
day with something that said, I learned how to become a 
carpenter or a plumber for 20 weeks, or whatever it might be, or 
a typist, or fixing air-conditioners. 
 
If that's all your new program focus is doing, Madam Minister, 
is giving them a piece of paper at the end of the day, I'm not 
exactly sure why you needed to change the whole program. So 
could you explain to me, Madam Minister, why Sask Works is 
no longer there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I think Sask Works basically was 
training for the sake of training. We have all of these people 
who are on income assistance and they need some skills, so let's 
just train them, with no indication of what in fact would lead to 
an employment opportunity. 
 
It's the whole issue of training for what. It's fine to train people, 
but then what do they do at the end of it, end of that training? I 
meet far too many young people who say, I have training in this 
particular area but there's an over-abundance of people in those 
areas. 
 
On the other hand, I am meeting with employers all the time 
who are having difficulty finding skilled labour — people who 
have skills in a particular area. 
 
I think what is important about this program is that we're not 
just training people for the sake of training them. We're training 
people for jobs that exist so that the public isn't wasting its 
money on training people and then they have the skills but no 
one will hire them. The public is training people for jobs that 
exist, and what this training allows them to do is to get a 
credential which will then allow them to go on to other 
endeavours. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. The 
way you've described the program is that you seem to have to 
have a position open within an industry someplace before you 
will put a client in there to do some training. What if you don't 
have any positions available at the immediate time? Are no 
clients then going to be trained, because you'll say well, we 
haven't got a position for them to go for a long term. We will 
not train anyone. 
 
And who comes forward seeking these positions, not the 
clientele, the businesses that are providing the opportunities? 
Are you simply funnelling government money into employment 
opportunities that would be there if no provincial money was 
available? You know if Brandt Industries is interested in 
expanding their business, it's in their interest to see to it that 
they have the employees and that those employees are trained. 

Now were they going to provide the jobs? If they were going to 
expand they were going to have to provide the jobs. So I'm 
wondering as to the importance of the provincial money going 
into there; has it meant more jobs? Have you increased that 
employment by whatever funds you are putting into the 
program, or were those jobs going to be there and Brandt was 
going to pick up the full cost themselves? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we can discuss Brandt when we 
get to the Department of Education, Training and Employment. 
We're on New Careers Corporation. 
 
I think in terms of New Careers Corporation, we know that 
there are businesses that are looking for skilled people. And we 
know that those businesses are having a difficult time finding 
people in this province with those skills. So you know, we can 
let businesses not expand because they can't find skilled labour, 
or we can have people come from across the country to work in 
Saskatchewan. But I think we're of the view that we want to 
ensure that Saskatchewan people with a little bit of training can 
get Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
So the notion is to link up empty positions that require some 
skilled people with people who are unemployed and train them. 
And I think that's a pretty reasonable thing to do. 
 
And I have to tell you that the public thinks it's a reasonable 
thing to do as well. So many times we meet, you know, parents 
of young people that don't know what to do, don't know which 
direction to go in. But we now have skilled labour shortages in 
the province, which is, in a sense . . . I mean it really tells us 
something about our economy — it's booming. 
 
What our challenge now is, to ensure we have Saskatchewan 
people taking those positions. And if with a little bit of training 
we can ensure that Saskatchewan young people, Saskatchewan 
citizens, Saskatchewan people who are unemployed or 
underemployed get those jobs, I think that this province will be 
better off for it. Because people will be engaged in meaningful, 
productive work and employers will be able to expand the 
economy. 
 
I don't understand why the Conservative Party would have any 
difficulty with that notion. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


