






















































March 9, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 9, 1995 

 

 
751 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today from constituents in the south-west corner of the 
province. The prayer is as follows: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to oppose changes to present 
legislation regarding firearm ownership, and instead 
urge the federal government to deal with the criminal 
use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on abusers. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, many of these are from the Glentworth, 
Assiniboia, and Limerick area of the province. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd be happy today 
to present petitions on behalf of the people from the Gull Lake 
and Swift Current area, along the No. 1 Highway. I'll read the 
prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 
changes to present legislation regarding firearm 
ownership, and instead urge the federal government to 
deal with the criminal use of firearms by imposing 
stiffer penalties on abusers, and urge the federal 
government to recognize that gun control and crime 
control are not synonymous. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions come from the Carievale, Gainsborough, 
Storthoaks, Bellegarde area of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

retain the Val Marie highway depot. 
 
 And of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to oppose changes to federal legislation 
regarding firearm ownership. 

 
 And petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 

Assembly to allocate adequate funding dedicated toward 
the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure today 
to introduce to you some very special guests seated in your 
gallery. Earlier this morning we had the opportunity to attend 
the announcement of an exciting project for Saskatchewan, the 
making of an IMAX film right here in Saskatchewan, in large 
part in the south-west part of the province, down at Eastend. 
 
I would just take a moment, and if the people I introduce would 
just stand up. First of all, Jane Armstrong, the president of 
CineNova Productions from Toronto; Doug MacFarlane, line 
producer, CineNova, from Toronto; Kevin DeWalt — I'm not 
sure Kevin is with us — president of Minds Eye Pictures. Kevin 
may have had to go to another meeting. Rob King, VP (vice-
president) of creative affairs of Minds Eye; Ken Krawczyk, VP 
of production, Minds Eye Pictures, from Regina. 
 
Dick DeRyk, chairman of the Saskatchewan Tourism Authority; 
and Neil Sawatzky, the chief operating officer, Saskatchewan 
Tourism; Her Worship Terry Haggert, the mayor of the town of 
Eastend; Bruce Lewis, chairman of the Eastend Tourism 
Authority; and Brian Van Sandt, vice-chairman of the Eastend 
Tourism Authority; Larry Stork, who's also with the Tourism 
Authority; Elaine Stork as well who is with us today; Darryl 
McCallum, who is tourism programs, Department of Economic 
Development, who has worked hard on this project for us; Roy 
Anderson, president of Anderson Fast, as well as Zach Douglas, 
president of Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 
 
I'm sure all members will join with me in welcoming this group 
who have put together a very, very exciting IMAX production 
format for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to join with 
the government members and the Government House Leader in 
welcoming the people from the Eastend corner of 
Saskatchewan, just south of home. 



March 9, 1995 

 
752 

Scotty the dinosaur of course, has put Eastend on the map and 
we're expecting great and wonderful things all along from 
Scotty and from the people from Eastend. And it doesn't 
surprise me that they would make a film out there about this 
great event and the great people that live down there. 
 
Welcome to the Assembly and good luck, folks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Penner: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don't 
have as long a list of people to introduce as the House Leader 
had, but I think I have probably more important people to 
introduce than the House Leader had. 
 
In the gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the third row at this far end, sits 
Grandma Jo and our grandson, Paul Randall John Hildebrandt. 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, he's only been here 15 minutes 
and he's already sound asleep. 
 
So I ask the Assembly to please welcome my wife and our 
grandson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's my 
pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, sir, and to the 
members of the Assembly, a group of entrepreneurs from 
Saskatchewan and from around Saskatchewan, from the 
Outfitters Association of Saskatchewan who have come here to 
observe proceedings this afternoon, and also to attend some 
meetings to address some of their concerns. And I would ask all 
members of the legislature to welcome them here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like, to you and 
through you to the members of the Assembly, to introduce one 
other very important guest that we have in the gallery sitting 
with the people from CineNova and from Minds Eye 
production. He is the executive director of the SaskFILM. It is 
Mark Prasuhn, who is instrumental in putting this project that 
we have today before us. So thank you, Mark, and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join the 
House Leader in welcoming the delegation that's here, and in 
particular one of the members from my constituency, Mr. 
DeRyk, to the Assembly. Dick has been a long-time friend and 
colleague of mine. We both served together on the city council 
in Yorkton. Dick also has a couple of businesses in 
Saskatchewan, a very successful businessman. I also want to 
say that he is, as the House Leader indicated, the chairman of 
the new Saskatchewan Tourism Authority. 
 
But most of all I know Dick for his great skills as a gourmet 
cook and baker. For those of you who may wish to order in the  

next little while, he makes some of the best sour cream 
saskatoon pie in Saskatchewan. So I welcome Dick to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you today a group of SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) students who are 
taking English as a second language program here in Regina. 
There are seven students seated in the Speaker's gallery. I want 
to say a big welcome to them and tell them that my colleague, 
the member for Qu'Appelle Lumsden, will be meeting with 
them shortly after question period. 
 
Welcome to the Assembly, and I'm sure all members will join 
with me in welcoming you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Farm Safety Videos 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
would like to congratulate the Saskatchewan Safety Council for 
releasing three new farm safety videos for Saskatchewan farm 
children. The release of these videos is timely because this 
week has been designated Farm Safety Week across Canada. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to mention that the videos 
feature a Saskatchewan hockey hero from Kelvington; I am 
referring to Wendel Clark of the Quebec Nordiques. The videos 
also include several members of the Saskatchewan 4-H clubs. 
 
There's a great need for these videos because in the last 12 
years, 62 people under the age of 20 were killed in farm 
accidents in Saskatchewan. Many others are permanently 
disabled. About 25 per cent of the accident victims are children. 
 
Each video targets a specific age group. "Farm Safety Tips for 
Kids" is aimed at the kindergarten to grade 3 age group. The 
second video, "Kids Tips on Farm Safety," is intended for grade 
3 to 6 and includes conversations with two boys who both lost 
limbs in farm accidents. And the third video, "Farm Safety — 
Do It Right," is hosted by Wendel Clark who points out that for 
children to achieve their goals, they have to play it safe. This 
video is aimed at children in grade 6 and over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these videos will certainly help prevent accidents 
and injuries from taking place amongst children on the farm. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Raiders Team with City Police 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, today I would like to 
recognize the Prince Albert Raiders hockey team. But the praise 
I am about to give them isn't because of their consistent, superb  



March 9, 1995 

 
753 

performance on the ice but a different kind of team effort. The 
players have teamed up with the Prince Albert City Police and 
are visiting schools in Prince Albert to help educate young 
students about the dangers of using drugs and alcohol. 
Recently, two Raiders, Darren Wright and Neil Johnston, 
visited students at Arthur Pechey School. What they had to say 
to the students about using drugs and alcohol was a message 
that definitely got across to these young people who are also 
hockey fans. The Raiders told the students that to be successful 
in hockey or any profession you need to have short-term goals 
and long-term goals. And to succeed in achieving those goals, 
don't use drugs or alcohol. Fifteen Raider players are also part 
of this anti-drug squad, and they all take turns visiting schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert have always supported 
the hockey players for their excellence in hockey, but now it's 
the Raiders who have brought a new message to the community 
other than hockey. This message will have a lasting impression 
on our youth. To be successful, keep your head up; steer clear 
of drugs and alcohol. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Snowmobile Safety Committee 
 
Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 
Minister of Highways announced the formation of the 
Saskatchewan snowmobile safety committee. This committee 
was formed in response to the alarming and unacceptably high 
number of fatalities suffered in snowmobile accidents this 
winter. 
 
Like other members, I am glad to see this committee formed. 
Like all of us, I regret its necessity. Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to see representation from a wide range of 
stakeholders and from most areas of the province. This is a 
provincial concern demanding provincial attention. Members 
from the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association, the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council — already mentioned today — 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and other stakeholders 
are involved. 
 
I was glad to see the appointment of Mr. Reg Reeves from 
Lloydminster to the minister's committee. Mr. Reeves is a safety 
coordinator of the snowmobile association and an active 
member of our community. He will bring to the committee's 
work the knowledgeable perspective of his association, and he 
will also bring his awareness of the specific concerns of the 
citizens of west-central Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all hope that the number of accidents this 
winter is simply a one-time departure from the normal. If not, I 
know that Mr. Reeves and other members of the committee will 
come up with viable suggestions that will return snowmobiling 
to the safe and popular recreation and work activity it was 
designed to be. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Saskatchewan Arts Board 
 
Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I was 
privileged, along with about 15 other MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) on both the government and opposition 
sides of the House, to attend the Arts Board reception. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Arts Board has been in 
existence since 1948 and is a prototypical model for similar arts 
boards around the world. We were very pleased to hear about 
their programs and to discuss the paper recently released by the 
Minister of Municipal Government, called Responding to the 
Community: Proposal for Cultural Development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Arts Board provides direct grant funding of 
almost $2 million to artists in this province, dealing with visual, 
performing, and literary arts. They also have a permanent arts 
collection that is recognized as one of the best in Canada. I'm 
sure all members on both sides of the House join me in 
commending and appreciating the economic and creative 
contribution that artists make to the Saskatchewan quality of 
life. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Procrastination Week 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
may or may not know this is National Procrastination Week. 
And I really meant to make this statement last year, but didn't 
get around to it; and Monday seemed like rushing into it. 
Actually just for a fleeting moment I thought I'd make it today, 
but there is one more day in the week, Mr. Speaker, so maybe 
I'll just wait. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just like to remind the member from 
Humboldt what Shakespeare thought of those who 
procrastinated in Hamlet. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Outfitters’ Licence Fees 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question this afternoon is to the Minister of Environment and 
Resource Management. 
 
Mr. Minister, all is not well in your world. Outfitters joining us 
today have many questions that they would like you to answer. 
One deals with several new fees and increases that you have 
imposed upon them today . . . in this year. 
 
For instance, last year an outfitter could have purchased an 
outfitter's licence for $75. Now this year, 1995, an outfitter has 
to pay $75 per client. And there's a limit of 25 clients per 
outfitter. So most outfitters now will be paying $1,875 by 
March 31. That's quite a hike from $75 a year. 



March 9, 1995 

 
754 

Mr. Minister, what is the reason for this drastic hike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
member opposite for the question. 
 
Before any fees were increased, the department did a lot of 
research and they asked the outfitters exactly what their 
opinions were. They also went to other jurisdictions to examine 
the fees that are charged in other jurisdictions. 
 
After a lot of consultation, and we believe a lot of agreement 
with the outfitters, we did raise the fees, but they were 
justifiable and the outfitters were well aware of them, and most 
instances they actually agree with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Madam Minister, I think there are a lot of 
outfitters right now that would vehemently disagree with your 
last statement, Madam Minister. 
 
That memorandum of understanding that you indirectly referred 
to, that was signed last year between your government and the 
outfitters of Saskatchewan, I'm going to quote a section: 
collaborate in the development of new programs and services 
related to the outfitting industry; collaborate in the 
identification of marketing, promotion, and developmental 
opportunities for the outfitting industry. Unquote. 
 
So, Madam Minister, in addition to the hiking of fees, you've 
arbitrarily — and I say that, arbitrarily — changed boundaries 
and cut back hunting seasons to the point where many of these 
outfitters are going to have a very, very difficult time simply 
surviving. 
 
So how do these fee increases, boundary changes, and 
threatening outfitters' businesses fit into that so-called 
agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As in most 
occasions, there is a 99 per cent fiction and 1 per cent fact in 
those comments. So let me set the record straight for the 
members opposite and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are wildlife management zones in Saskatchewan. And 
when they were set up along the forest fringe, they had both the 
agricultural and the forest in them, and they were difficult to 
manage and there was a lot of problems associated with it. So 
there was a proposal brought forward to adjust the boundaries. 
 
The boundaries adjustment has the support of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), the RMs 
(rural municipality), the wildlife federation, and also the 
outfitters association. The outfitters association agreed with the 
proposal to change the boundaries providing that they will not  

lose any operating licences and that there will be adjustments to 
their prime hunting period. 
 
The department has agreed to that. They're working with those 
outfitters, and there will be a resolution. And unfortunately, 
your attack on the situation is not justified and it is in most 
cases erroneous 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
this is not my attack. You say, 99 per cent fiction. Let me assure 
you that those outfitters sitting up in the Speaker's gallery . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the member knows 
he cannot involve the people sitting in the galleries in the 
debate on the floor. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Are not figments of our imagination. Madam 
Minister, there are 200 or so members in that outfitters' 
association of Saskatchewan. There are 1,700 outfitters in 
Saskatchewan — let's put this in perspective — and because of 
your boundary changes, some outfitters will have their seasons 
cut back, cut back to the point of threatening their business. 
 
For instance zone 48, for example, is going to be restricted to 
two weeks of hunting this year as opposed to the seven weeks 
that they had last year. They're worried about the tourism effects 
of the American dollar coming in — $5,000 on average per 
American hunter coming in. They're worried about that because 
they've already made their arrangements for fall hunting. That's 
all arranged. 
 
Now they're going to be socked with an $1,875 extra fee. Who 
picks that up? They don't know their times. Everything has 
changed. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Does the member have a 
question? I want the member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Speaker. 
Here's my question to you, Madam Minister: will you commit 
today to review those boundary changes and to meet these 
figments of your imagination today. They've come here to have 
a meeting with you and the real minister. 
 
Will you make that commitment, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me set the 
record straight. There are 612 licensed operators in the province 
— 65 operate in the zone that's under review and 12 of those 
will be impacted. 
 
The outfitters will continue to have operating areas. The 
outfitters will have hunting seasons in the prime hunting season 
and the department is committed to work with the impacted  



March 9, 1995 

 
755 

outfitters to further adjust or lengthen the hunting seasons as we 
have already made a commitment. Yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Would you mind answering my question, 
Madam Minister. Will you meet with these outfitters today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: — Yes, certainly I will. The department 
officials will be here, and they will meet with them, and they 
will relay to them the message I have relayed to you today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CIBC Call Centre Agreement 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, when you made the CIBC (Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce) announcement the other day, 
there were a lot of details left out. Today we learned that one of 
the terms of the deal for the CIBC Call Centre in Halifax is that 
CIBC is going to get all the banking business from the new 
casinos being built in Halifax as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, has CIBC been given a similar deal in 
Saskatchewan, and have you promised CIBC that more of your 
government's banking business will be directed their way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the members opposite, as it relates to the casino corporation, 
that no commitment has been made to banking to anyone. In 
fact the board decided at its February meeting that they would 
actually go to tender for the banking. And that process is just 
getting under way at this point in time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, 1-800 numbers 
represent a tax-free island of economic activity in 
Saskatchewan. This will amount to about a $700,000 break for 
Sears over three years. Mr. Minister, how much of a tax break 
can CIBC expect to receive as a result of this exemption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's interesting the 
member is complaining about job creation in the province after 
the many boondoggles, the many boondoggles that they had in 
their life in government, in the nine years. And I'm not going to 
get into the list of GigaText and High R Doors and all of those 
many tens of millions of dollars that they blew and threw away 
in an attempt — I might add, a very flawed attempt — to create 
jobs. 
 
The remission of 1-800 taxes, the E&H (education and health) 
on 1-800 taxes, if they would have read the budget, not this year 
but a year ago, they would know that this is general application 
for anyone who would do this kind of a process in the province. 
This is not a special deal for CIBC. Anyone is eligible for it in 
this industry. 
 

And what we are saying is that we are doing other things on the 
tax front, lowering taxes where we can, to help companies to set 
up business. For the life of me, when one of the biggest issues 
in the province is trying to get taxes nudged lower now that we 
have balanced the budget, for you people to be opposed to 
lowering taxes for business, it flies in the face of what every 
business person wants, and I think leads me to believe that this 
is why you will stay a rump of a Conservative Party for the 
years to come because you don't understand what the issues are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, there are a lot 
of people in Saskatchewan who would like to have that tax 
island for themselves, Mr. Minister, and particularly the 
community that I live in, in Swift Current. They would love to 
have that opportunity for that tax-free island. And do they get 
it? They come to you every day and ask you for it. 
 
SaskTel will be providing CIBC with a volume discount. 
Apparently that sort of discount has to be approved and made 
public by CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission). This hasn't happened and 
you have refused to disclose the terms of that discount. 
 
Mr. Minister, what kind of a rate discount will CIBC be 
receiving and what will be the total value of this discount? Will 
you answer the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would say to the members 
opposite that obviously the creation of jobs in the province, 
here again which is top-of-mind issue for the vast majority of 
people in the province, is irrelevant for the Conservative 
members who sit in the opposition benches. 
 
What we're talking about here is 500 full-time job equivalents, 
$15 million payroll for the city of Regina. When one calculates 
that out, that's an average of $30,000 per full-time job. And 
what the members complain about is whether or not tax changes 
we made, not in this budget but two years ago, are legitimate or 
not. 
 
I say to you, how can you expect business people in this 
province to take you seriously — to take you seriously — when 
you go back and not debate this budget but budget changes that 
were made two years ago, as a result of getting the Sears Call 
Centre where there was a one-off tax arrangement for 1-800 
numbers, then implemented in the budget two years ago. Today 
you stand up and criticize the creation of 500 jobs by a very 
major corporation and one we're proud to have in the city of 
Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Surgery Waiting-lists 

 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
odour of this government's approach to the health care system is 
just beginning to seep through the cracks in the system.  



March 9, 1995 

 
756 

Hospital closures, staff lay-offs, waiting-lists, the demand for 
private clinics, deficits at local board levels — all of these 
things tell us that there is a decay happening beneath the 
surface. 
 
Today I wish to table page 18 of a document that shows the 
waiting-list of orthopedic surgeons in Regina who have 
requested operating time for 1,430 operations that 
Saskatchewan people need. The administrators have, with the 
help of an eraser, Mr. Speaker, rubbed out 921 of the needed 
1,430 operations. Two out of every three people on the waiting-
list just disappeared. The corrected waiting-list tells doctors that 
only 509 operations will be possible. 
 
Obviously my question is for the Minister of Health: Mr. 
Minister, so what has happened to the other 921 people who 
need surgery? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to review the 
information that the member lays before the House today, page 
18 from some document. I want to review that information, and 
I will give her a very specific response to the information she 
lays here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me say this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. If the minister has taken notice 
of the question, he can't then also answer. He either takes . . . 
Order, order. Order. The minister said that he would look at the 
document and bring back a very specific answer. That indicates 
to me that he's taking notice. Next question. Next question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact it is 
entitled: “Regina Health Board, Department of Surgery”, which 
is what he will now have tabled in this House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the corrected waiting-lists for surgery are a perfect 
example of what is happening under the guise of health care 
reform by this NDP (New Democratic Party) government. It no 
longer matters at all how many people have been told that they 
need joint replacement. 
 
What matters in the NDP wellness model is how many artificial 
joints are available under the new budgets. So the waiting-list is 
no longer about people waiting for new joints, but the waiting-
list is about how many artificial joints we have waiting for 
people. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health: you say that savings will 
be realized soon, in a year or so, someday after an election. But 
how many more — and I quote, Mr. Minister — how many 
more corrections, corrections will be made to the waiting-lists? 
How many more people in need of medical treatment will be 
simply rubbed off the list with your bureaucratic erasers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it surprises I think 
everybody in this House and everybody across the province that 
this member, who represents the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, 
would stand up here today and these past few days, talking  

about our ability to provide health care in the province, when 
her federal counterparts have delivered the most serious blow to 
health care that's ever been delivered across Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would refer the member to a study of 
waiting-lists conducted nationally across Canada in 1994. Mr. 
Speaker, this study conducted by the Fraser Institute — not a 
particular friend of this government — indicates that in Canada, 
Saskatchewan now has the second-best overall time for waiting 
in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What 
we're talking about today, Mr. Speaker, is what this particular 
government has done to health care in Saskatchewan, not 
supposedly what will happen a year or so down the road as a 
result of the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why the waiting-lists are what they are 
is because your bureaucrats are simply erasing the reality of 
what is really going on in the province of Saskatchewan. Shame 
on you if you don't know this. 
 
Read the Regina Health Board department of surgery numbers, 
Mr. Minister. Doctors and nurses and surgeons in this province 
are frustrated, and they're exhausted. And you talk about health 
care reform. It's nothing but a façade of people with briefcases 
and calculators going to people in this province and saying in 
their meetings, gosh, convince the front-line workers that 
they're imagining the problems in health care. 
 
Here's an example from the latest operating schedule . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Would the 
member put her question, please. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — March 13, 1995. I'd like the minister 
respond. It talks about the orthopedic waiting-list has been 
corrected. Mr. Minister, this is your question: can you explain 
to the people who suddenly find themselves not on the waiting-
list what it means to be now part of what's called the corrected 
waiting-list? In other words, they no longer exist. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member would 
be well served and the House would be well served if she 
would just calm down and stop the ranting and the raving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member, before raising it here and 
attacking the administration of the Regina District Health 
Board, I wonder if she has raised this issue with the Regina 
District Health Board. I suspect not, but rather wants to play 
politics. Now I'm sure the Regina District Board will want to 
make some comment on this. 
 
Now I want to again point out to the member who, on a daily 
basis these days, is railing on this government about our 
activities in health, about how we have striven in the last two 
and three years to in fact preserve medicare for the people of  



March 9, 1995 

 
757 

Saskatchewan and preserve it for our families into the future. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we've come a great and long ways in that 
regard. 
 
In terms of the specific issue of waiting-lists, we have been 
working with our districts. We have been involved in studies. 
We are, even as we speak, looking at processes to assist in the 
waiting-list issue which is primarily an issue having to do with 
orthopedic surgeries and cataracts — those two, Mr. Speaker  
and all other surgeries and all other specialities, again I repeat, 
our record is second-best in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Phoenix Advertising 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. On February 13, I asked 
the Minister of Justice why his department chose not to further 
investigate or charge Phoenix Advertising for their involvement 
in the kickback scheme to a government MLA. 
 
The minister said, and I quote: 
 
 I can attempt to learn what decisions have been made in 

the department and communicate those to the member 
and I will do that. 

 
My question to the Minister of Justice: Mr. Minister, have you 
determined whether your department has made a decision, and 
will you communicate that decision to this member? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the matter is being 
investigated. I do not have that report. And I will share it with 
you when it arrives. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, we are eagerly awaiting that report because we 
find it curious that the Crown prosecutor would make a 
statement such as the one he did on February 3. He said that 
sometimes it's not in the public interest to prosecute both the 
giver and the receiver of a kickback. He said, and I quote: in 
some cases people are acting on instructions and many feel 
intimidated for one reason or another. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, who was giving the instructions that the 
Crown prosecutor refers to. In fact a lot of people around this 
province are wondering that very fact. 
 
Mr. Minister, would it not be appropriate to appoint an 
independent prosecutor to look into this matter? It would seem 
to be a reasonable thing to do. Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — No, Mr. Speaker, I won't. And I say 
to the member from Moosomin, you're treading on dangerous 
territory if you're suggesting that there is political interference 
with the prosecutors in this province. I just want to point that  

out to you. You're treading on dangerous territory. 
 
Through three different governments — the Blakeney 
government, and I think I want to say the Devine government, 
and the current government — the prosecutors have been 
independent. That has served this province very well. It 
continues to be the policy. Decisions as to whether or not a 
prosecution should take place do not and have not for a lengthy 
period of time taken place in the minister's office. That's made 
by the prosecutors. That policy continues. 
 
When I have a written report from the prosecutors, it will be 
made available to the House. But I do not have it at this point in 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, appointing a special prosecutor in 
cases like this is actually nothing new. In fact your colleague, 
the former minister of Justice, fully supports this idea. 
 
In fact he made an interesting statement when a former manager 
of the Cabri Credit Union was charged with accepting a 
kickback. The paper said at that time, and I quote: The NDP 
Justice critic said the public has a hard time understanding why 
the former manager of the Cabri Credit Union, who was 
convicted last year of accepting payments from a prominent law 
firm, will be the only person charged in connection with what 
happened. The article goes on to say that the critic called the 
appointment of a senior lawyer outside the Justice department 
for an opinion as to whether any further charges should be laid. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are just echoing the comments made by the 
former minister of Justice, when he was Justice critic. But in 
this case, the situation involves a former Cabinet minister and a 
prominent advertising agency of your government. 
 
Will you take the advice of your predecessor and appoint 
independent counsel, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I think there is really no 
need to cast aspersions on the independence of the prosecutors 
in this province — they do operate independently; they have 
operated independently. I think members can rest assured that 
that process, which has served this province so well, will 
continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, a further 
question. The former attorney general was quite explicit on this 
issue and there was no room for misinterpretation. 
 
He is quoted saying: it would seem that if the credit union 
manager was found guilty of the offence of accepting a secret 
commission, it should also be an offence to offer a secret 
commission. He says, quote: what is at stake here is the 
question of whether the law is being applied fairly. 
 



March 9, 1995 

 
758 

Is this an example of one law for the rich and another for the 
poor? Mr. Minister, this same question applies to the 
investigation of Phoenix Advertising and possibly to the Sask 
Trust collapse where not one lawyer has been charged. 
 
Mr. Minister, is the law indeed being applied fairly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I would only point out what appears 
to be obvious from the member's question. I'm not going from 
memory — I'm assuming the facts which the member has 
related are accurate. But if a special prosecutor was named, 
presumably, since no charges were laid, that prosecutor 
confirmed the decision made by the Crown prosecutors in the 
department, confirming once again the reliability of the system. 
 
The system of having independent prosecutors whose 
independence is respected, whose opinions on charges is 
respected, has served this province very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Minister, I think what we're raising today is the fact that there 
have been instances in the past where members have actually 
talked about the law being applied fairly and equally. 
 
And we're asking you if indeed we are seeing fairness at this 
time in regards to the question we've raised. Mr. Minister, can 
you respond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Yes. I repeat, the decision was made 
by the prosecutors — they are independent and have been 
independent through several governments. It has served this 
province well and continues to serve this province well, and I 
do caution the member against casting aspersions on the 
independence of the prosecutors. I think that's what you're 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

IMAX Film — Scotty T-Rex 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the 
privilege to take part in an exciting announcement at the 
Science Centre here in Regina. I'm pleased to tell the Assembly 
that south-western Saskatchewan, in the discovery last year of 
the skeleton of a 65-million-year-old Tyrannosaurus rex will be 
featured in an IMAX film to be shown around the world. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the discovery of Scotty, as the T-
Rex has been dubbed, has generated a lot of interest. There 
were more than 6,000 visitors last year to the site where the 
skeleton was found in the Frenchman River valley near the 
community of Eastend. We expect this new film to generate 
even more tourist activity in that area next year. 

Mr. Speaker, the film will do much more than boost 
Saskatchewan tourism industry. We expect direct and indirect 
benefits from the film and from its production. That's why 
several government and private partners formed a consortium to 
invest in the film. The investment, the Saskatchewan portion, 
amounts to $2 million, roughly one-quarter of the total cost 
which is about $8.5 million. The production crew for the film 
intends to spend between four to six weeks in the Eastend area 
this summer, and it's estimated this will mean a $2 million 
injection into that local economy. 
 
Saskatchewan's growing film industry will also benefit. Minds 
Eye pictures from Regina in co-production and many talented 
Saskatchewan people will work on the production. Besides 
getting the work, some will also gain valuable experience in the 
IMAX technique. The film itself will generate direct profits for 
its investors, and as you know, Mr. Speaker, dinosaurs have 
been very, very popular for theme movies in recent years. We 
expect this popularity to continue and as a result and will result 
in big crowds for the film in IMAX theatres around the world. 
 
(1415) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also profits to be made from 
merchandising. Things that are being discussed include 
computer games, books, video cassettes, and CD-ROMs 
(compact disc read-only memory). Mr. Speaker, some of the 
revenues that will be generated will go directly to the film, and 
also from the merchandising will go back into the community at 
Eastend. It will be used to underwrite some of the tourism 
activities that are planned for that area of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, one of the spin-offs from 
the film should be increased tourism for south-western 
Saskatchewan. We also expect the film to generate interest in 
the province's general tourism from international audiences. We 
hope that that will result in more investment in our film 
industry and in all other parts of the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this IMAX project is something all of us in 
Saskatchewan can be proud of. The benefits for our economy 
will be numerous, and the film itself promises to be very 
entertaining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members of the Assembly are 
proud of this endeavour and welcome IMAX and CineNova to 
the province and will look forward to viewing the première next 
year at our own Kramer IMAX Theatre here in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to stand up and respond to the 
minister's statement. And I am pleased because first of all it 
shows what the people of this province and the film industry 
can do if the government just simply keeps its nose out of it. 
And that is I think certainly commendable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think when it comes to dinosaurs there's a little  



March 9, 1995 

 
759 

bit of boy and girl left in all of us, Mr. Speaker, when we think 
back to our youth and the mystery and the mystique and the 
intrigue that all of us had with these monsters of the past. 
 
And for us, Mr. Speaker, to be able to in a sense exploit this 
fascination that humankind has had with these prehistoric 
monsters in terms of Jurassic Park and other issues such as 
that, I think that the province is going to gain, the film industry 
is going to gain, and certainly the people of south-western 
Saskatchewan are going to gain. 
 
The community of Eastend . . . I very religiously every year go 
down to Eastend and put my $50 into their tills as I go deer 
hunting and antelope hunting in that area. And I know that this 
is . . . and having talked to the people last fall, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that they are very, very excited about the potential that 
this discovery can have in their community and indeed all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on a very rare occasion I want to get up and 
join hands with the Minister of Economic Development from 
this government and with the people in the cinema industry and 
say, a job well done. I'm certainly looking forward to the 
première of this performance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I've 
had the great privilege of having visited the IMAX theatre in 
Regina, and the quality of the productions have been superb. It 
is exciting indeed that there will be a film made about the 
beautiful south-west part of our province and the extraordinary 
T-Rex discovery. 
 
The Liberal caucus is delighted with the project. It'll not only 
promote the talents of those in our film industry but will market 
Saskatchewan to the rest of the world. I and my colleagues 
congratulate all who were involved with this undertaking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. A ministerial statement, I 
assume. 
 

Saskatchewan Energy Strategy 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I wish today to release the Saskatchewan Energy Strategy, a 
copy of which I have asked the page to pass on to the Leader of 
the Opposition and the Leader of the Third Party. 
 
As members of the Legislative Assembly know, the energy 
sector is experiencing a major upswing in activity in 
Saskatchewan. This suggests that current approaches and 
policies relating to resource development are working. But at 
times like this, it just makes sense to take stock of where you 
are and identify approaches that will serve the province well in 
the future. 
 

This is what we have done in developing the Saskatchewan 
Energy Strategy. The energy strategy provides a guide for 
future government policies and programs concerning 
conventional and non-conventional resource development, 
energy conservation, and energy utilities. 
 
We have identified approaches that will foster economic 
development while protecting the environment and serving the 
province's own internal energy demands. They have been 
developed in consultation with the energy sector to ensure that 
they are based on a solid understanding of the industry and our 
energy needs. 
 
My department began work approximately a year and a half ago 
as part of a commitment under the Partnership for Renewal. 
And we have outlined future directions and initiatives under the 
strategy in a technical report and in summary form. 
 
The strategy covers three main areas. First, the development of 
our energy resources. Second, how we use our energy 
resources. And third, issues related to our electrical and natural 
gas utilities. 
 
Regarding energy resource development, Saskatchewan has an 
abundance of conventional energy resources, both for use here 
in Saskatchewan and for export markets. We plan to pursue a 
number of activities that will enhance the ability of the 
conventional energy industry, particularly the oil and natural 
gas sector, to increase production. 
 
The province plans to work with industry to facilitate 
improvements in oil and natural gas reservoir management and 
to create more exploration opportunities. New technologies will 
offer opportunities for increasing production. We will also be 
exploring opportunities to encourage the development and 
commercialization of innovative technological approaches to 
increase oil production. 
 
Development of technology can have a major impact. For 
example, the horizontal well technology developed over the 
past decade now accounts for one-third of all the production in 
our province. 
 
Another promising new technology is the use of carbon dioxide 
to increase the amount of oil that can be recovered. Not only 
would this increase production, it would actually dispose of 
carbon dioxide, and this would make a positive contribution to 
reducing Saskatchewan's greenhouse gas emissions. My 
department is acting as a facilitator in commercializing this 
technology in Saskatchewan's south-east oil fields. 
 
The oil and gas industry is already an important source of jobs 
and revenue in the Saskatchewan economy. With appropriate 
measures to support innovation, this sector has the potential to 
do much more. 
 
In the area of energy utilization, Saskatchewan's energy strategy 
concentrates on conserving our conventional resources and 
developing alternative renewable resources. To encourage  



March 9, 1995 

 
760 

conservation initiatives, we will be developing information on 
energy conservation for the education system and for 
consumers. 
 
In conjunction with the private sector, we will pursue an energy 
audit of government-owned facilities and carry out retrofitting. 
SaskPower, as announced, will pursue a three-megawatt wind 
power demonstration project. And we are proceeding with our 
commitment to contribute to a reduction in greenhouse gas 
emissions through support for and participation in the voluntary 
challenge program and national registry under the national 
action program on climate change. 
 
The third area covered, Mr. Speaker, is the energy strategy 
related to Crown energy utilities, SaskPower and SaskEnergy. 
Saskatchewan's utilities have served and can continue to serve 
this province effectively by ensuring security of supply and 
providing revenues back into public programs. 
 
Throughout North America there's a trend towards greater 
competition in the energy utility sector. Natural gas utilities 
purchase gas from a broad range of suppliers, and natural gas 
consumers can choose to purchase from their local utility or 
another gas supplier. Similar trends are emerging for electrical 
utilities. These trends must be monitored carefully to ensure 
that we respond appropriately to the new business opportunities 
and challenges that they present. 
 
The strategy lays out a first set of initiatives to address the 
challenges and opportunities within the energy sector. It 
establishes a direction that I believe will place Saskatchewan in 
a positive position. Through a balanced and planned approach, 
we can sustain economic renewal and develop our energy 
resources for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan in the 
future. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
respond to the minister's announcement with respect to the 
energy strategy, and we did get into some of that the other day. 
The energy strategy reminds me a little bit of the wellness 
strategy. It's somewhat difficult, Mr. Speaker, to put your finger 
on what he really means. Let me give you three or four 
examples, and why I think he could perhaps beef up his 
strategy. 
 
He talks about the development of energy resources. And he 
doesn't talk a great deal about gas drilling and royalty structures. 
He doesn't talk about heavy oil and medium crude, and how in 
fact they have been improved in terms of the revenues that are 
coming forward, something like $500 million this year. He 
doesn't happen to mention upgraders. He didn't mention in the 
use of natural gas, the fertilizer plants, which I believe are 
contributing about $90 million a year to the province. And it's a 
big user of natural gas. 
 
And he forgot to mention, Mr. Speaker, co-generation, because 
the ministers of Energy from the NDP side have been working 
at co-generation but have frankly haven't done very well and 
they're quite a disappointment to the public. He also forgot to  

mention the technological advancements associated with 
refining and upgrading in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So not only do we have the first and the second, but the two 
newest upgraders for technological advancement in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And it's really quite interesting that 
he didn't mention nuclear research and nuclear energy and 
CANDUs (Canadian deuterium uranium) and the Atomic 
Energy corporation of Saskatchewan at all in his presentation. 
Now he indicates to me that they're somewhere in this book, 
which might be nice, but he wasn't proud enough to mention it 
in his public remarks. 
 
And I would like to think that, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that 
this is a comprehensive energy strategy, the minister could have 
got into it in a little bit of detail, with respect to something like 
uranium, something like co-generation, something like 
upgraders which are fairly clear, and particularly nuclear 
technology, which in fact Saskatchewan has got some of the 
very best. And we're cooperating now with AECL (Atomic 
Energy of Canada Ltd.) which happens to have moved to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So given the fact that it's a little bit like the wellness model, he 
just touched on fuzzy stuff, but he just neglected to mention the 
real meat and potatoes which in fact, Mr. Speaker, were there 
before he even arrived. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Penner: — Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Penner: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and to the members of the Assembly a friend of mine who sits 
in the west gallery over there, John Wall, from Swift Current. 
He's a constituent of mine, and he works very hard in the 
community. He is here to attend some credit union meetings 
during his few days here, and he also wanted to watch question 
period. Please welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
other guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would simply like just to 
welcome a number of people who have joined us in your 
gallery. These are individuals who belong to the Saskatchewan 
Society of Medical Laboratory Technologists, and they join us 
in the House today to see the second reading of the Act that will 
affect their profession. And I would want to welcome them here 
this afternoon. 
 



March 9, 1995 

 
761 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Medical 
Profession Act, 1981 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No 40 — An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Land Surveys Act now be introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act respecting Land Surveyors and 
Professional Surveyors 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to table in the 
Assembly, according to provisions of subsections 1 and 4 of 
section 30 of The Ombudsman and Children's Advocate Act, 
the 22nd annual report of the provincial Ombudsman. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Municipal 
Employees' Superannuation Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal employees' superannuation plan 
provides pension benefits to municipal employees, school board 
employees, and designated police officers and fire-fighters. 
Over 700 employers and over 7,400 employees participate in 
the plan. 
 
A nine-member commission oversees the plan's operations. The  

commission represents major employers and interest groups 
participating in the plan such as the Association of School 
Business Officials, the Rural Municipal Administrators' 
Association, and urban employees. 
 
Amendments to The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act 
are being pursued to improve benefits for plan members and to 
improve the administration of the plan. 
 
(1430) 
 
With the passing of this Bill, the name of the pension plan will 
change to the municipal employees' pension plan. The term 
pension is more current and easier to understand than is the 
word superannuation. 
 
A member's eligibility for retirement will no longer be affected 
by a lapse in employment of less than two years. This will 
benefit employees who leave their employ for a short period of 
time for such things as parenting purposes or to return to 
school. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Bill enhances the normal form of 
pension provided to members who, upon retirement, do not 
have a spouse. These members will be provided a fifteen-year 
guarantee of the normal form of pension. The cost of this 
improvement will be offset by the current surplus in the pension 
fund. 
 
As well, members who have money and pensionable service in 
the former plan will have the opportunity to use the money in 
their former plan account to purchase whatever service that 
money will buy under the current plan. This opportunity will be 
available until December 31, 1995 and will be attractive to 
members who prefer the pension benefit under the new plan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, with the passing of this Bill, the plan will 
have the ability to provide a faster pay-out of the pension to 
terminally ill members upon their retirement. 
 
As well, where upon the death of a retired member there is no 
spousal benefit to be paid, the plan will pay the commuted 
value of all future payments remaining in the guaranteed period 
to the named beneficiary of the estate. This will facilitate a 
quicker wind-down of a deceased member's estate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the pension plan are prudent. 
They are intended to meet the changing needs of plan members 
by improving the administration of the plan and by providing 
benefits that address those needs without jeopardizing the 
financial well-being of the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there seem 
to be a number of areas that we certainly should take some time 
to address regarding the pension plan. 
 



March 9, 1995 

 
762 

I would gather from the comments that the minister has made 
that there have been a number of inquiries as to the 
opportunities to enhance or to improve on the plan. And the 
minister did talk about improved benefits and more efficient 
administration. 
 
And some of the questions that I think will need to be asked is 
what was the minister specifically referring to when she talked 
about improved benefits. And no doubt any member of any 
pension plan anywhere would certainly agree with the fact that 
a more efficient administrative procedure would be proper, 
because at the end of the day, what you're looking at is a plan 
that will indeed provide for you and provide substantive 
pension benefits when you retire, versus a plan that has a 
reduced ability because of the administrative costs. 
 
The minister talked about a lump-sum payment and substantial 
changes and costs to the payment out and how some of these 
payments will be paid out to beneficiaries or to people with 
terminal illnesses. 
 
And I know that there are individuals who, due to no fault of 
their own, retire and unfortunately within a few short months 
they end up with a terminal illness and really don't have the 
ability to benefit fully from their pension plans; and have felt 
that they've contributed for so many years and feel that it's 
important that that pension plan be at least forwarded to spouse 
or some beneficiary. And so if I gather correctly, some 
provisions are made in this Bill to address some of those 
concerns. 
 
And we look forward to debating this with the minister at a 
future date, to indeed bring forward a number of the questions 
that we had raised. However, at this time I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 37 — An Act respecting Medical Laboratory 

Technologists 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very 
pleased to stand today in the House to move second reading of 
The Medical Laboratory Technologists Act. Mr. Speaker, 
medical laboratory technologists are a vital component of our 
health system and have been represented by the Saskatchewan 
Society of Medical Laboratory Technologists for several years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the support of its 1,200 members, the society 
approached government in 1992 for legislation to regulate this 
profession for the very first time in our province. We have been 
working closely with the society for the past three years on 
legislation to govern medical laboratory technologists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act before the House, the new Act, is 
consistent with newer health profession legislation in this 
province and I would just like to highlight some of the 
provisions of this Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Act provides the society with the power to 
make by-laws. However, consistent with other regulated 
professions, by-laws that could affect the public will continue 
to require the approval of the Minister of Health. 
 
The Act outlines the society's responsibilities with respect to 
investigation and disciplinary hearings. The Act ensures that 
complaints of incompetence or misconduct are acted upon in an 
effective manner. It establishes investigation and discipline 
committees which have the authority to investigate complaints, 
apply to the court for subpoenas, and levy a variety of 
disciplinary penalties, including fines up to $2,000. 
 
As is standard with other professional legislation, the medical 
laboratory technologist will be able to appeal disciplinary 
decisions to the Court of Queen's Bench. Mr. Speaker, a 
number of provisions have been built into the Act to make the 
professional accountable to the public. For example, up to two 
public representatives may be appointed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to sit on the council of the society. 
 
Discipline hearings will not be held behind closed doors and a 
public representative will be on the discipline committee, and in 
addition, the person who laid a complaint against a medical 
laboratory technologist will be entitled to attend the disciplinary 
hearing and will be informed of the outcome of the complaint. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further, the society will also be required to submit 
an annual report on its activities with Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the registration requirements for members are 
consistent with current employer standards in Saskatchewan 
and other provinces. The titles “medical laboratory 
technologist” and “registered medical laboratory technologist” 
are consistent with other provincial title reservations and will be 
restricted to registered members. 
 
The Saskatchewan Society of Medical Laboratory 
Technologists has been consulted on the Act and fully supports 
it. 
 
The College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, the 
Saskatchewan Society of Clinical Chemists, and other 
professional associations have also been consulted and are 
supportive. 
 
The Act adheres to the standard format for professional 
legislation and contains no provisions which have a policy 
influence on existing programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude simply by extending my 
congratulations to members of the Saskatchewan association, 
who I know have worked long and hard to see this legislation 
come before this House, and I'm sure are anticipating its quick 
passage. And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, the only issue the 
legislation may not settle is the pronunciation: is it laboratory 
or is it laboratory. 
 



March 9, 1995 

 
763 

Mr. Speaker, with that I am very pleased to move second 
reading of this Bill, An Act respecting Medical Laboratory 
Technologists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
just like to make a few observations and then adjourn debate. 
 
The minister perhaps should call it the med lab tech, because 
most of the time, as I've been involved in hospitals and health 
care, lab technicians are probably the overall name that most of 
them live by. 
 
However I want to say too that for each of these organizations 
and professions, as they become recognized in the province of 
Saskatchewan, they gain their own set of standards, they gain an 
opportunity to deal within their own association with discipline 
and all of the things related to it. And I agree with those kinds 
of fundamental associations having those powers. 
 
They then provide a way that they can establish an increase of 
the skills required to pass the examinations; they do all of the 
things that a professional organization should do. 
 
They also have the responsibility then of being accountable to 
the public. And I believe that that is also something that is good 
for these people. 
 
In all of the professional organizations that have come to 
government over the years, I have been extremely supportive of 
those people who have come. And particularly the majority of 
time when they do their own construction of the legislation. 
And with assistance from the Department of Justice, it provides 
a way of coordinating the language and doing all of the things 
required to make their association a legitimate organization in 
the province. 
 
And I want to congratulate the people who have been involved. 
It takes a lot of specific work, and many times in an 
organization there isn't a combination of people who have the 
desire, number one, to see something like this happen, and they 
haven't the legal expertise within their framework or within 
their membership to make this happen. And so when all of 
these forces come together and this happens, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that it is a good thing for that association. 
 
And we will just be looking at a number of things to review 
with the organization, some of the things that maybe we should 
take a look at. And because of that, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
adjourning debate right now. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend Certain Health Statutes 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's 
my pleasure also today to be moving second reading of The 
Health Statutes (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 1995. 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will help streamline our 
existing health-related legislation. Towards this end the 
amendments have one common purpose. They consolidate 
authority under The Department of Health Act for costs of 
insured medical and hospital services that must be recovered by 
the department where those costs were incurred as a result of 
negligence on the part of someone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two things have made these amendments 
necessary in this session. One, the introduction of no-fault 
insurance, and two, the introduction of new population-based 
funding arrangements as part of the health renewal process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Act simply allows Saskatchewan 
Health to continue to recover negligence-related medical and 
hospital costs in this new insurance and new health funding 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act came into effect on January 1 of this year, it 
introduced no-fault accident insurance. This means that 
personal injury benefits for rehabilitation, income loss, and 
permanent injury, will now be paid by SGI regardless of who 
was at fault in the accident. 
 
Prior to no-fault insurance, Saskatchewan Health could directly 
recover medical and hospital costs caused by automobile 
accidents where those costs were due to negligence on the part 
of someone else. Under no-fault insurance, this is no longer 
possible. 
 
Consequently SGI, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, has 
agreed to reimburse Saskatchewan Health for these costs. 
Agreements of this kind are provided for in The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Amendment Act, section 2(13) to be 
specific. And based on past experience, these costs are expected 
to be around $4.5 million annually. 
 
(1445) 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there is also now a piece of the puzzle 
missing with respect to general insurance claims, that is, claims 
unrelated to automobiles where the health costs incurred are 
due to someone else's negligence. A similar hole needs to be 
filled respecting situations where non-residents are responsible 
for automobile accidents in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so the proposed amendments to The Department of Health 
Act will address this so that Saskatchewan Health can continue 
to recover negligence-related medical and hospital costs in 
these instances. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, section 32.2 of The Saskatchewan 
Medical Care Insurance Act gives the Minister of Health the 
right to recover costs respecting third-party liability medical 
claims. However, current provisions limit this right to payments 
made for medical services on a fee-for-service basis, that is, 
payments made in the conventional way under The 
Saskatchewan Medical Insurance Act. 



March 9, 1995 

 
764 

Mr. Speaker, in the process of health renewal, we have been 
pursuing many innovations. One of those innovations has meant 
looking at new ways of paying for the health services that we 
receive, and a number of projects are under way across our 
province to explore the feasibility of new approaches such as 
population-based funding to medical doctors. 
 
In these instances, payments for medical services are no longer 
made on a fee-for-service basis. Accordingly, provision must be 
made within The Department of Health Act for recovery of 
costs with respect to third-party liability medical claims where 
new funding arrangements such as these are in place. Mr. 
Speaker, the proposed amendment would accomplish this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments address a closely related 
problem with The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act as it is 
currently structured. Section 26 of this Act gives the minister 
the right to recover costs respecting third-party liability hospital 
claims. However, this right again only applies where payment 
for hospital services is made under The Saskatchewan 
Hospitalization Act. 
 
The amendment we're proposing allows for recovery of hospital 
costs where payments have been made under The Health 
Districts Act in keeping with the new global funding 
arrangement for hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, the proposed amendments will 
provide authority under one piece of legislation for medical and 
hospital costs to be recovered in all situations where these costs 
are the result of negligence on the part of someone else. 
Accordingly, section 32.2 of The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act and section 26 of The Saskatchewan 
Hospitalization Act will have outlived their usefulness and will 
be repealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this briefly then is the purpose of the proposed 
amendments and I now move second reading of The Health 
Statutes (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 1995. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 
comments made by the minister, he outlined some of the 
implications from other actions taken by the government and 
under some of the responses that other agencies and 
departments have to make. We notice that SGI is responsible 
for what the minister said would probably be a 4.5 million 
increase in costs to the health care services because insurance 
would not be covering the liability of that. So what is foregone 
in one is paid for by another. And that's apparently what the 
minister was bringing forward today. 
 
And under these kinds of circumstances, we were discussing as 
to who pays when there's no-fault insurance. Who pays? What 
we're finding out today is the taxpayer's going to pay in a 
different way because before, SGI put their money from 
insurance. On a basis of insurance, they put their money in to 
offset the costs where these kinds of issues developed. And we 
have seen this happen, or other agencies have seen this happen 
in other provinces and they've seen it happen here as well. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of interesting things that 
are going to be caused, implications that are going to be raised. 
The member who's the critic will take a look at the minister's 
statement, review some of them with various groups to see 
whether in fact there are other things that are going to be 
affected because of the implications of this Bill. 
 
And I notice that there's going to be some questions that are 
going to have to be answered about the new way that fees are 
going to be taken out, the new way it's going to be applied to 
and how they're going to pay for the services; and the 
requirements for medical care that are delivered to a hospital or 
health care facility on the basis that it was negligence on 
someone's part. 
 
Then we're going to have a number of questions as to how this 
impacts into that health care district board and how it's going to 
be paid and all of the things related to that. 
 
So there are significant things in this Bill. It's not a very long 
Bill, but there are very significant issues in a fiscal way as it 
relates to health district boards that are going to be addressed. 
And we're going to be looking forward to that. I'm going to 
adjourn debate at this point. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 25 — An 
Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability Act be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will 
be making just a few brief comments on this particular Bill. It 
seems that both the feeder loans and breeder loans associations 
in the province have been requesting that the government make 
changes to the legislation that governs how they operate. 
 
And the minister has taken the opportunity to consult with 
various members, including the cattle feeders and the 
Saskatchewan stock growers to come up with changes that will 
be made in the way that sales are made, payments on the 
principal and the interest on the particular loans, how they are 
made. And it also clarifies the regulations, the terms and 
conditions of loans, so that associations have a clear provision 
for default. 
 
And on the whole, I would say that it is a positive Bill that deals 
with problems that don't occur very often, but when they do 
occur can be fairly traumatic for the people involved. There's a 
couple of situations right now, in fact three that I'm aware of, 
with feeder loans associations in the province that have had a 
third party . . . potential third-party fraud committed upon them,  



March 9, 1995 

 
765 

that are now being investigated and are going through some 
hoops to try and straighten out their affairs. 
 
And there are a few things associated with those situations, Mr. 
Speaker, that may potentially raise questions to this particular 
Act and some of the solutions that the minister has arrived at 
that may require some revision. These things are happening 
very quickly and as we speak, and we are watching them very 
closely. 
 
So as those things unfold, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be good 
for all members of the House to be cognizant of them — they're 
very large ticket items, hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
 
Therefore, I think it would be appropriate if we adjourn debate 
on this Bill once again to see how a couple of those situations 
unfold themselves, so that when we apply a fix to problems in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, we aren't having to come back with 
amendments immediately after bringing in the legislation. 
 
And I think the minister would agree that because of the 
seriousness of those particular incidents that are out there, we 
would want to understand clearly what the implications are 
before bringing in new legislation. So with that I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 6 — An Act 
to amend The Crop Insurance Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 6 makes 
some fundamental changes in the way that Crop Insurance and 
its application to its client base will operate in the province. 
 
What is happening here is that the Minister of Agriculture is 
asking for the power to basically bypass the board of directors 
in making certain funding arrangements, some within Crop 
Insurance and some with third-party applications. 
 
The minister is claiming that because it will involve monies that 
are appropriated by the Legislative Assembly that it has more 
accountability to the way that the Crop Insurance Corporation 
runs itself. And I find some difficulty with this concept, Mr. 
Speaker, because as we know, right now the board of Crop 
Insurance has to apply to the Minister of Finance for funding 
and that's usually done through an order in council special 
warrant if there's an overrun at the end of the year. 
 
And as all members of the House know, when order in councils 
are passed, they become public items a week later and it's very 
easy to track what orders in council come through, and track the 
flow of money. 
 
What the minister is suggesting here is that these funds will  

simply flow out of the agricultural budget, which is voted on 
here in the Assembly, which is a fairly large amount of money, 
Mr. Speaker — I believe this year it's over $200 million. And 
I'm not sure that the accountability that the minister talks about 
will be enhanced, because he will be able to move large sums of 
money around at any given time during a budget year. And we 
in the opposition, or indeed the client base of Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation, won't necessarily have ongoing 
knowledge of those movements of funds or for what they're for, 
or program changes, or that sort of thing. 
 
And I guess it would beg the question that, are the government 
trying to maintain some type of a fiction here of the usefulness 
of the board of directors of the Crown? If the minister is 
controlling all of the funds and he can direct funds anywhere 
that he wishes from within the Department of Agriculture, then 
why would you have the cost of a 12-person board of directors 
who you pay per diems to? 
 
And unless you're simply maintaining patronage positions for 
NDP supporters around the province, why would you need this 
Crown corporation at all? Does it beg the question that the Crop 
Insurance is going to be wound up and folded back into the 
Department of Agriculture? 
 
And I don't think that's the type of thing that should happen 
until the client base, the policyholders of Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation, would have the opportunity to have an 
all-around debate, at least some type of public consultation as to 
what's going to happen to their insurance agency. 
 
And if this is being done for this particular Crown, why is it not 
being done for other Crowns then? Because it's been a pretty 
basic argument of the auditor, Mr. Speaker, over the last couple 
of years saying that the budgets of Crown corporations should 
come to the House to be appropriated before the Crown simply 
goes out and does what it wants to do. 
 
And the argument from the government has always been that 
there has to be that separation in the House from the Crown 
corporation; the Crown has a board of directors, it's responsible 
to CIC; that there's a number of ministers that are responsible; 
and that the budgets, particularly the capital expenditure budget 
to the Crown corporations, shouldn't be dealt with in this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
So if Crop Insurance all of a sudden can have this application 
made to it, what difference is there with SaskTel or SaskPower 
or SaskEnergy or SGI or any of the other Crown corporations, 
some of which budget-wise aren't nearly as big a Crown as 
Crop Insurance is? 
 
So it begs a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker, and I don't think we 
in the official opposition particularly are anxious to give up our 
ability to track the flow of funds into the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation, particularly given what this government 
has done in the past with breaking binding contracts, or 
supposedly binding contracts, with agricultural producers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 



March 9, 1995 

 
766 

We've all seen what happened to the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) funds, how they have been directed at the 
government's whim in order to satisfy its appetite for a balanced 
budget in an election year. We've seen what happened to GRIP 
funds that were let flow back to the Liberal government in 
Ottawa without any quid pro quo at all. 
 
(1500) 
 
And the Liberal government in Ottawa turns around and puts 
the shaft to western Canadian farmers after taking $317 million 
which this government could have guaranteed going into the 
hands of western Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, there's a lot of questions that have to be 
answered on this Bill. And we are actively seeking input from 
agricultural producers and groups around this province who 
have a very strong and vested interest in allowing the Minister 
of Agriculture, particularly one who holds views that seem to 
run counter to a lot of producers in this province today, both on 
the issue of GRIP and on the Crow . . . And we will seek those 
views out and bring them back to this Legislative Assembly 
when there is further debate on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for that reason, I would adjourn debate on Bill No. 6. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 7 — An Act 
to amend The Apiaries Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 7 is a 
continuation of a series of initiatives that have been taken in 
Saskatchewan over a number of years to protect the bee 
industry. This involves both honey bees and leafcutter bees, 
which are used in the production of alfalfa seed. 
 
This is of particular interest to me because my farming 
operation has been involved with leafcutter bees for 25 years. It 
is one of the oldest leafcutter bee operations in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And anything that would hinder the success of 
the industry is something I would take a great deal of interest in. 
 
What we are doing in this particular Bill is moving to further 
protect the industry here by closing the borders from other 
Canadian provinces. And the minister feels that this will further 
protect the industry. And I tend to agree with him because you 
not only can have disease come across the 49th parallel but it 
certainly can come from both Manitoba and Alberta, as we've 
experienced in leafcutters, where we had chalkbrood starting to 
become a problem here, and all people in the industry have had 
to be very diligent to try and keep chalkbrood at a very low rate 
or have it eradicated in the leafcutter population. 
 
And the people in the honey-bee business, many of whom  

operate in the same fields as we do, who operate in the north-
east in a very significant way in the honey industry, have been 
facing the Varroa mite, the tracheal mite situation, and other 
parasitic insects that might impinge on the well-being of our 
bee industry. We have sent letters out to the Saskatchewan Bee 
Keepers Association, the Saskatchewan Fruit Growers 
Association, the Saskatchewan Alfalfa Seed Producers 
Association regarding the impact of this. Do they think it's 
viable? 
 
Is there effective policing available to ensure that the Manitoba 
and Alberta boundaries particularly can be sealed as the 
minister would wish, that the penalties that are being proposed 
in the Bill are the right ones, that we indeed are doing, I guess, 
what is proper in this situation; we're not simply putting a band-
aid on. And to date, Mr. Speaker, those particular associations 
have not had the opportunity to respond. And as the critic for 
the official opposition, I think it's incumbent upon me to wait 
for those responses before allowing this Bill to go to committee. 
So for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 22 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Renaud that Bill No. 22 — An Act to 
establish the Transportation Partnerships Corporation and 
to enact a Consequential Amendment be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure 
to rise today on this particular issue because this is an issue 
which is going to have a great impact across this province. If 
there's one issue in this province, Mr. Speaker, outside of 
agriculture that affects everyone, it's certainly our highways. 
 
If we want to go any place within the province of 
Saskatchewan, you have to travel on our road system because 
we're such a spread-out area. Our population is almost 
uniformly spread across the southern half of this province, and 
the way we communicate, Mr. Speaker, is through that highway 
system. 
 
What the government is proposing with this highway system is 
that it will now be constructed by a Crown corporation. 
 
Since the inception of the province, Mr. Speaker, we've had a 
department that has looked after our roads and our highways. 
But that is no longer good enough, Mr. Speaker. Now, now we 
have to have a Crown corporation. Our road system has to 
become a member of that much vaunted group — the family of 
Crown corporations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this Act, this Bill, was originally being 
proposed because the provincial government was going to go 
into partnership with the federal government through the federal 
infrastructure program to build some of the highways. They 
were going to build a highway for my colleague, the  



March 9, 1995 

 
767 

member from Maple Creek, in twinning the No. 1 Highway. 
And that was a very worthwhile project, Mr. Speaker — a very 
worthwhile project. 
 
But I'm not sure and most of the people of Saskatchewan are 
not sure why that had to be done through a Crown corporation. 
Surely it could have been done also through the Department of 
Highways as they have built every other road in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But perhaps there's a reason for this, Mr. Speaker, why it was 
essential that this be done through a Crown corporation. You 
see one of the things within the regulations within the 
empowerment of the Department of Highways is section 13, 
and section 13 of that Act states: that highway construction 
tenders must be awarded to the lowest bidder; and that the only 
exception to that, Mr. Speaker, has to have the approval of the 
cabinet. 
 
So if the Department of Highways wanted to build the highway, 
No. 1 Highway, for my colleague, the member from Maple 
Creek, but they didn't want to award it to the lowest contractor, 
lowest tender, then they would have to justify why they were 
not giving that contract to that person. And then it would be 
clearly a political decision, Mr. Speaker, and the government of 
the day would suffer the political consequences of making that 
kind of a decision. 
 
Saskatchewan's not the only province that has brought in . . . or 
is bringing in this kind of legislation. British Columbia has also 
done this. British Columbia has put in place the B.C. 
Transportation Financing Authority. So they have a Crown 
corporation also now that can go out and make deals with the 
federal government, or whomever else they want, to build 
highways. 
 
But what's happened in British Columbia since that took place? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there has been a very significant increase in 
the cost of highway building. The Vancouver Board of Trade 
says in one instance the labour costs increased by 73 million — 
73 million, Mr. Speaker — because they went to a union-only 
policy of hiring for construction labourers. That's why, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is proposing to put in place this new 
family corporation, this new Crown corporation, to be in the 
family with all the other new ones that they have formed in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that $73 million increase in labour costs alone 
amounted to 37.6 per cent in one project alone, Mr. Speaker. 
And it's totally unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, that the taxpayers' of 
this province should have to accept this kind of increase in the 
costs of the Department of Highways simply to provide for 
union labour. 
 
We've also debated in this House, Mr. Speaker, a regulation or a 
policy that is being brought into place by the government 
dealing with Crown corporations, and I'm not sure if they 
thought of the transportation Crown corporation first before 
they thought of the regulations that they're bringing in for union  

preferences, or if they thought of the union-preference policy 
first and said, now how can we fit this into all of the 
government? 
 
I wouldn't be at all surprised if they thought that they've got to 
get their union people in there working so that they can get 
money to support the NDP Party, so how can we do that? Well 
we'll make another Crown corporation and we can just slide 
them right in. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House don't 
believe that's fair. I'm sure that the highway construction 
workers don't believe it's fair when they bid on a tender being 
proposed by this new Crown Transportation Corporation and 
they find out that the company can have the first guy on the job 
from his regular company, but the second man is going to come 
from the union hall some place that they've never heard of, and 
the third guy can be the local guy who's been working for the 
construction company for the last 25 years. But the next nine 
are all going to be out of the union hall. And the nine guys that 
they had working there are going to have to sit at home, Mr. 
Speaker, either on unemployment insurance or on welfare. 
 
There isn't going to be fairness in this, Mr. Speaker, none 
whatsoever. And what you're going to end up at the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, is all those construction companies — and 
the unionists and people like the member from Moose Jaw are 
probably applaud this — is that they're going to be unionized. 
Because you go to work for a Crown corporation, you will be 
unionized before that contract is completed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This corporation was put into place, as I mentioned earlier, as a 
framework for the federal and provincial governments to work 
together on the infrastructure money. And perhaps the 
government had a legitimate reason for wanting to do that. But, 
Mr. Speaker, that all ended last December. The federal 
government backed out of this totally. They said no, no money 
for this, to build highways in the province of Saskatchewan 
with the provincial government. 
 
And that shouldn't be surprising, Mr. Speaker. Because after all, 
we're talking about the same government that backed out of the 
Crow. The same Liberal government, Mr. Speaker, that have 
backed out of the highways agreement with Saskatchewan, have 
now backed out of the Crow agreement with farmers. So it 
shouldn't have surprised anyone that the Liberal government in 
Ottawa was prepared to do that. 
 
But what is surprising, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP 
Government of Saskatchewan is going to carry on with this 
corporation even though there will be no federal input into it — 
no federal money  which was the justification for building 
this Crown corporation in the first place. That justification is 
gone. 
 
The minister hasn't come up with any new reasons why he 
should be allowed to go ahead with this, Mr. Speaker. But what 
the heck. I mean we've got the legislation all drawn up; we've 
got the board of directors all picked. We might as well just put  



March 9, 1995 

 
768 

it in anyway. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those are not good enough reasons. Well the 
board of directors may be good NDP partisans, but there's no 
reason to form a new Crown corporation just to give them 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other reason that the government was saying that they 
needed this was not just to make deals with the federal 
government, but just in case — I mean they didn't know of 
anybody for sure who would want to do this — but just in case 
somebody from the private sector, who wasn't paying enough 
taxes yet, wanted to give some taxes to build highways, wanted 
to contribute to the Department of Highways road construction 
through this Crown corporation. Just in case they wanted to do 
something like that, well we've got to have somebody in here 
that can handle that situation. We have to have that Crown 
corporation. 
 
You know, perhaps maybe Millar Western up there at Meadow 
Lake would like to help build some of the highways in the 
Meadow Lake area. Well we've got to have a Crown 
corporation in place so that they can give some of their hard-
earned money that they haven't already contributed to the 
government in taxes and build some of the province's roads. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven't seen a lot of evidence of anyone 
coming forward to do this. And I would be very surprised if 
very many people did, unless — unless, Mr. Speaker — there 
was something of benefit to them out of it, other than altruistic 
motives of making sure that everybody in their community had 
a nice new road to drive on. 
 
But perhaps what the government is aiming at on this when they 
talk about private sector investment is perhaps they're talking 
about putting in toll-roads. Now that's certainly not new in 
some jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. And it wouldn't even surprise 
me, Mr. Speaker, if this government were prepared to go ahead 
with it because they have them in British Columbia. The 
Coquihalla-Coquitlam Highway, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is a 
toll-road. You pay to drive on that road. And it certainly 
wouldn't surprise me if the Minister of Finance saw this as 
another means, another means to get money out of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1515) 
 
Can you imagine this, Mr. Speaker? We'll put up a toll-gate on 
No. 1 Highway at Manitoba, and we'll put up another toll-gate 
on No. 1 Highway on the Alberta border. And we'll charge all 
those eastern people who want to drive from Ontario to British 
Columbia to go through our province, because they always 
seem to claim that there's nothing to see along No. 1 Highway 
anyway, and they're in a rush to get through, so we might as 
well collect a little money from them on their way through. 
 
Now that I can see this government doing, Mr. Speaker. That's 
the type of things that they would be prepared to do. If they're 
prepared to raise the fees for outfitters from $75 a year to $75 a  

quota client on a minimum of 25, they're prepared to put toll-
roads into Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just wonder though, Mr. Speaker, how prepared they would be 
to split the revenues with a private company who was to invest 
into the road system of Saskatchewan. 
 
There's one avenue, Mr. Speaker, that the government could 
perform a useful service with this Crown corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. And that would be to get involved into the rail system 
of Saskatchewan, the short-line rail system. We're going to lose 
a lot of branch lines in this province in the near future, Mr. 
Speaker, and there would be an avenue for this Crown 
corporation to actually provide some benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan — join together with the farmers, join together 
with the grain companies, and support the rail system that we 
have in place in Saskatchewan. Now that would be a benefit. 
 
That would have some real value because it keeps that rail 
system in place to move our most important commodity: our 
grains. And it would also take the pressure off the highway 
system, which affects the Department of Highways' budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now that would have some value to this province because when 
you look around this province, Mr. Speaker, you certainly don't 
see a lot of good highways. The roads have significantly 
deteriorated in the last few years. The fact is, when the member 
from Rosetown was the minister for Highways, his plan was to 
dig them all up and turn them into gravel. Well they cancelled 
that program, but they certainly never did anything else after 
that, Mr. Speaker. There's been very few roads that have had 
any construction work done on them. And the one road that I 
know of, Mr. Speaker, that did receive some construction work 
— Highway 33 from city limits of Regina down to Kronau, Mr. 
Speaker, was already a good road. It was already a good road 
but perhaps the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden had some 
influence with the Highways minister of the day and managed 
to convince him that that road needed to be built up. 
 
I wouldn't argue that there was a bridge on that particular 
stretch, which is about 30 kilometres, Mr. Speaker — one 
bridge and a curve that needed some work on them. But outside 
of that, Mr. Speaker, that road was in a lot better shape than a 
good many of the highways around this province. 
 
I even asked the minister, Mr. Speaker, to build up a road in the 
member from Weyburn's constituency because it was in such 
poor shape. But no, we have to build the ones around Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. And I don't think that this new Crown corporation, 
Mr. Speaker, will be any different, no different whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, originally the government had proposed putting 
$50 million into this Crown corporation. That $50 million was 
to match the money that the federal government was going to 
put in. But the federal government has already pulled out. 
 
So what's happening with the $50 million, Mr. Speaker? Is it  



March 9, 1995 

 
769 

still there? Has it grown? Has it shrunk? What is it? And does it 
really matter, Mr. Speaker, does it really matter? If it's just 
going to be the monies that were allocated by the Department of 
Highways for road construction, well if it was $50 million, 
we're probably going to get $40 million worth of work out of it, 
Mr. Speaker, once we roll in the added costs of having a union-
only policy. It's going to decrease the amount of roads that we 
get built in this province, Mr. Speaker, not increase them. 
 
This is one more Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, along with a 
number of other new ones that have sprung up here in the last 
little while  the new tourism agency, the new trade agency, 
the new health boards. There's another area, Mr. Speaker, where 
the government's new regulation on union preference is going 
to have a big impact if they ever want to do any construction. 
 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, and the Gaming 
Commission, Mr. Speaker. When anybody goes to build one of 
these four or five new fancy casinos that are going to be placed 
around the province, Mr. Speaker, and the new Gaming 
Commission is part of it, are they going to have to follow the 
government's new labour policy — union only? 
 
And what happens with all these Crown corporations, the new 
Transportation Corporation, Mr. Speaker? Who's going to 
examine their books? Certainly it's outside of the realm of the 
Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. It's outside of the realm of the 
legislature. Because they're a third party, they're down the road. 
 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) keeps spinning these 
things off like little spider webs, Mr. Speaker, to entrap people 
and to snare the people's money. It's simply another expansion, 
Mr. Speaker, of the family of Crown corporations. 
 
You know they've just become like a clan, Mr. Speaker, the 
Crown corporation clan. I'm not sure which one they are, the 
Hatfields or the McCoys, Mr. Speaker, but they're sure against 
anybody who's not of their clan. If you're non-union, the feud is 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new Crown corporation will serve little if any 
value. Because the Crown corporations do not play by the same 
rules, Mr. Speaker, as the department, the line departments. 
They can just hire and fire people as they see fit, but as long, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to construction, that they're union. 
 
As we discussed earlier, Mr. Speaker, the first person can be 
from the regular . . . from the construction company's regular 
employees and the third one can. But the second one and the 
next nine . . . eight, Mr. Speaker, have to be from the union hall. 
 
And I know my friend from Moose Jaw Wakamow supports 
this idea. He believes this is well and good that the taxpayers of 
this province should carry this extra burden so that his friends 
can have a job, Mr. Speaker. But the taxpayers of this province 
don't find that acceptable. 
 
This new transportation Crown corporation is just going to  

make it that much easier, Mr. Speaker, for the government to do 
business with its friends through another Crown corporation. 
 
And it shouldn't surprise us. When we look at the experience 
that British Columbia has had in this area, they've done exactly 
the same thing, Mr. Speaker — created a Crown corporation to 
do highway construction, and the costs have simply sky-
rocketed because of their union-only contracting policies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know it kind of makes you laugh, Mr. Speaker, or shake 
your head in wonderment, after the government's experience 
with the Melfort pipeline system, that they would be prepared to 
go ahead and encourage more union construction policies. 
 
They must have some of the best crops up in that Melfort area 
because that whole pipeline system is a sprinkler. They get 
underground irrigation and don't even have to pay for it, Mr. 
Speaker. We, all of us as taxpayers, pay for that, Mr. Speaker, 
but the people of Melfort benefit because of the union-only 
construction project that they had there that leaks like a sieve, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can't support the idea of another Crown 
corporation to build highways. And in the light of the 
government's new policy of union preference that they have just 
announced this week in the House, or the tail-end of last week, 
Mr. Speaker, we have to wonder whether or not the road 
contractors can support this type of a new deal; this type of a 
new Crown corporation that's going to force union contracts 
onto them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the road contractors need to be consulted with. And 
certainly the government has never mentioned ever consulting 
with them on this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to draw members' attention to the 
Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan where it says: 
 
 That a Member who has moved for and obtained the 

adjournment of a debate should not be thereby 
precluded from moving an amendment to the motion, 
other than a second motion to adjourn the said debate. 

 
The member has already adjourned debate, I believe, previously 
to this. Order, order. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I don't 
believe that I have adjourned debate on this. 
 
The Speaker: — Give me a moment; I will check with . . . 
 
Order. The member from Moose Jaw Palliser has been going on 
quite a bit today, and maybe just tone 'er down a bit. Order, 
order. 
 



March 9, 1995 

 
770 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . They're being very uncomplimentary today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with a great deal of interest, as I'm sure 
all members of the House did, to the comments that my 
colleague from Souris-Cannington was making in regards to 
this particular piece of legislation. And I think the point that he 
made are extremely valid given what we've seen transpire in the 
last few days from this government, some of the issues 
surrounding union-preference tendering as far as Crown 
corporations. 
 
And it certainly . . . it puzzles me, Mr. Speaker, given that the 
Minister of Economic Development stands on his feet quite 
regularly in here and tells about the need to create jobs and to 
create a business-like climate in this province, and the fact that 
the Premier obviously has moved on to the megaproject mode 
these days with some of his old enemies from the multinational 
corporations. I think it's incumbent upon us, Mr. Speaker, to 
delve into this subject a lot more. 
 
And I heartily concur with the remarks made by the member 
from Souris-Cannington. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move to adjourn debate on this particular item. 
 
The Speaker: — I was a little bit ahead of myself. The member 
from Souris-Cannington did raise a point of order and I did not 
answer to the point of order. For the records, and Hansard 
would clearly show that on February 27, Monday evening, 
around four minutes after 7, the member from Souris-
Cannington did move adjournment of Bill No. 22. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1530) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair: — I would ask the minister to please introduce the 
officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 
me today I have Dr. Hartley Furtan on my right, who is the 
deputy minister; Dale Sigurdson and Terry Scott, who are 
assistant deputy ministers; behind me, Jack Zepp and Ross 
Johnson. Jack is the acting director of administrative services, 
and Ross Johnson is the manager of budget and operations, 
administration services. And behind them yet are Doug 
Matthies, who's the acting general manager of Crop Insurance; 
and Norm Ballagh, who is the manager of ACS (Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for introducing your officials to us today. I see some  

familiar faces over there, people that are not unknown to 
members of the opposition. And we'd like to commend the 
Department of Agriculture officials who, through the year, carry 
on with business of what we like to think is still the number one 
industry in this province, even though others might argue 
otherwise. 
 
It's an occupation and a way of life that is very near and dear to 
me, as it is for many members of the Assembly, as it is to the 
minister, I am sure, because when you get 3, 4, 5 generations 
into this business you develop a certain attachment for pieces of 
land and traditions and the ways that you do things. 
 
And the reason I say these things, Minister, is that in the last 
few years and indeed within the last few weeks, that entire 
equation is potentially going to change in ways that it may take 
several generations to sort out. I know in my own 
circumstances, my seeding program for 1995 went in the trash 
basket the other day because all of the assumptions that I had 
made as to probably what was the best thing to do 
agronomically in some cases, what rotation was the proper 
thing to follow, what herbicide and pesticide regime that I was 
going to try and finance for the coming growing season, all 
started to look a little bit different after the federal budget. 
 
It's one of those things that is so uncertain to you that you have 
to think long and deep about how you're going to handle things. 
And certainly today if you are a landowner or a land renter there 
are further implications as to what you should think about in the 
future. I don't have the opportunity, Mr. Minister, to influence 
that future as directly as you do in the next short while. 
 
You've been the Minister of Agriculture in this province, I 
think, for approximately two and a half years now — maybe 
closer to three — and have seen a lot of the change occur and 
have been at the centre of negotiations over a period of time 
where we have seen the lead-up to what has occurred. And you 
will have a lot of negotiations on behalf of people like me to 
carry forward well into the next couple of years if you happen 
to be in that spot, or certainly someone will have to after the 
next election campaign because this situation is going to have to 
be sorted out. 
 
This province is both blessed and, at times, people would say 
not blessed by having more than 50 per cent of the agricultural 
land in the country, and it's a big responsibility to have to deal 
with that and to deal with the very diverse situations that we 
have here. 
 
The other day in the estimates of your colleague from Melfort, 
the Municipal Affairs minister, I asked some questions that 
have been posed to me by people in the agricultural community; 
that was primarily dealing with SARM and others who have 
raised very poignant questions about the Crow issue and some 
of the other funding issues that are going along in tandem with 
it, with what is happening to NISA (net income stabilization 
account) program, what has happened to the GRIP program and 
others. 



March 9, 1995 

 
771 

And she intimated to me that there was a group of ministers and 
their officials, which had been designated by government, with 
the Highways minister as the lead, that there was people from 
Highways, Ag and Food, Finance, Municipal Government, 
under the direction of the deputy to the Premier, Frank 
Bogdasavich, who were dealing with the government's 
approach to these negotiations and how the Crow implications 
would unfold for us. 
 
And the next day my colleague from Morse and my colleague 
from Maple Creek were questioning the Highways minister, the 
supposed lead minister in this little exercise, about what he was 
doing to lead and how it was unfolding. And he seemed to be a 
little amazed at his elevation to the head of that pack, so I think 
we need a little more clarification for the folks out there before 
we get down into sort of your line-by-line numbers here about 
exactly what the government's approach is going to be to this 
question, and the assurances that we can feel that people are 
going to properly represented as you put Saskatchewan's 
position forward as the province with the most to lose probably 
in this whole exercise of changing the method of payment, rail 
line rationalization, the impact that that will have on rural 
Saskatchewan, our highways system, municipal government; 
and ultimately the taxpayer of this province, if agriculture 
becomes unsustainable as we know it because of these far-
ranging implications. 
 
So I'd like for you today to tell me what your role is, who of 
your officials is into this strategy group, and what you see in the 
next month or so that they will be undertaking vis-a-vis specific 
Saskatchewan concerns and vis-a-vis the federal government, 
and outline that for me so that when people contact me or 
anyone else, that we have some assurance that people are being 
diligent on their behalf in the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman; 
that's a very appropriate question. I just now came from a 
meeting of said committee that the member opposite speaks of. 
The member opposite is dead right in his analysis of the impact 
of this federal budget on Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly we in Saskatchewan know the problems with debt and 
deficit and certainly we've made some gut-wrenching cuts to a 
whole number of programs including some agricultural 
programs. We still believe that agriculture is the backbone of 
this province and the number one industry and we intend to 
continue to support it. 
 
I think in the long run that will create the jobs that will create 
the wealth. It will allow us have our social programs. 
Interestingly, many other governments don't take that approach. 
As we've seen in Australia and New Zealand, when they begin 
to cut, they take agriculture right off the top. 
 
And certainly the federal government has made dramatic cuts to 
the agricultural budget, beginning even before this budget, and 
somewhat I think masked from farmers realizing how much 
federal support has dropped to agriculture. 

Payments are certainly lower this year because there was more 
income from the market-place, and that is fair game. But what 
we need to realize as farmers in this province is that the federal 
program changes and the federal commitment to agriculture has 
dropped, and dropped again another 30 per cent in this budget 
in safety net funding. 
 
So that means that when the grain prices go down again and a 
disaster strikes . . . And I don't say if, because all farmers in this 
province know that grain prices go up and grain prices go 
down, and cattle prices go up and down, and hog prices, and so 
on. But the next time that there is a disaster, particularly in the 
grains and oilseeds sector and even in the livestock sector with 
the changes in programing, that there will not be very 
substantial federal support there. 
 
So that has dropped dramatically in the last couple of years, and 
it's impacted most heavily on the grains and oilseeds sector, 
which of course impacts on western Canada and as the member 
points out, mostly on Saskatchewan because we have half the 
arable acres or so in the country. 
 
So we've had our disproportionate share of federal cuts in 
agriculture. And western Canada, and Saskatchewan in 
particular, have had more than everybody else in the country, 
which we don't feel is fair. And certainly the Crow benefit we 
view as very unfair, that this is a historical benefit; it is part of a 
national transportation policy. It's part of why this country was 
built from sea to sea, that we had a railway that held this 
country together. And we've had that taken away from us. 
 
We can't move our province over to the ocean, and we're a land-
locked province. And we viewed the Crow benefit much as 
other people would view things like aboriginal treaty rights or 
French language and culture rights. It was part of our bargain to 
be in Confederation. 
 
And we pioneered this place, we gave a lot of land to the 
railways. We brought people in and created the jobs and created 
the foreign currency that built this country. And we don't feel it 
was fair that that was not only reduced in proportion to other 
cuts but was eliminated, and eliminated with a very inadequate, 
a very inadequate buy-out provision. 
 
So the member asked what we're doing. We're meeting, as I 
said, just come from a meeting of cabinet ministers and officials 
who are working, trying to figure out what the impacts are and 
what the strategies are to get the federal government to reverse 
this decision and to be fair to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are a number of things that we feel we need to continue 
to do, and we'll be meeting with farm groups and SARM and 
SUMA, who has shown a lot of interest because — and not 
surprisingly -- because the impacts will not only be on farmers, 
they will be on all of Saskatchewan. And particularly they'll be 
on rural communities, and some rural communities will have a 
big-time impact from this. 
 
What we think is that we need to continue to put the pressure  



March 9, 1995 

 
772 

on Ottawa, along with farm groups. If we can't get more than 
1.6 billion today, we want to be sure that we continue to keep 
the pressure on and that when the results that occur do occur, 
that they will, if not this year, in future years have some money 
there to mitigate the effect of the Crow change. 
 
We have never been opposed to change and adjustment. 
Farmers in this country are not very far away from the time 
when they were breaking prairie grass and chopping down trees 
with axes and breaking land with horses and grub hoes. And 
we've seen a lot of change and we've adapted and changed and 
been battered about by world forces, and will continue to do 
that. 
 
Our strategy has been to help adapt farmers to diversify and add 
value. And we've had a lot of success. We've been . . . I think 
we can demonstrate we've been more successful than the 
neighbouring provinces in the last number of years. 
 
(1545) 
 
But taking away an historical benefit in one fell swoop means 
that adjustment will be much too fast, much too dramatic, that I 
think sometimes the Finance minister from Quebec and the 99 
Ontario MPs (Member of Parliament) do not understand what 
adjustment means. 
 
In many cases adjustment means that some grain farmer, a 
family farm will go through bankruptcy and go through the hell 
of losing their land and losing their occupation and move on. 
And somebody else will come in and buy up the land at a 
cheaper price and maybe raise cows. And that adjustment 
sounds great when you put it in terms of economics. When you 
put it in terms of the human costs, it's certainly much greater. 
So we continue to fight for more money. 
 
I think there's also a very strong agreement amongst farm 
groups and farmers that I've talked to that if there are 
efficiencies created in the system from this, that they need to be 
real efficiencies and real cost savings, not just transfer of costs. 
We need to look at the cost of grain from the farm bin to the 
ship and we need to be sure that that total cost goes now, not 
just transferred from a cost from the royalties over to farmers 
and to RMs and to provincial governments as we build the 
roads and truck the grain. So they need to be real costs. 
 
And secondly, we need some assurance that those costs will be 
passed on to the producers. Producers out in my area do not 
believe that if you privatize CN (Canadian National) and let CN 
and CP (Canadian Pacific) have free reign and deregulate them, 
that if they should happen to find some savings, that it's going 
to end up in farmers' pockets. I think many farmers are, to say 
the least, a little sceptical that that's going to work. 
 
So those are some of the areas that we think we can work with 
farm groups. As the member says, negotiate. It's not quite a 
negotiation position when the federal government has the 
money and the jurisdiction, and all we can do is voice the 
concerns and voice the problems that we have, and voice the  

need. And we've done that very dramatically. 
 
There are other areas. There are $300 million for adjustment. 
Saskatchewan has the majority of the branch lines. We are the 
ones that are going to get hurt worse with the adjustment, so 
we're certainly going to be demanding of the federal 
government that we get our fair share of that little bit of 
adjustment money, as little as it is. And you take 300 million 
over five years, there's going to be precious little money to try 
to adjust for the dramatic impact on farmers and communities. 
But at least we want to, if we can, increase that amount at least, 
be sure that Saskatchewan gets our share. 
 
So those are what we're working for, and we'll work with farm 
groups to try to get the federal government to mitigate this and 
to find solutions to what we do in the future in Saskatchewan in 
order to survive, because we will survive in spite of the federal 
Liberal budget. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for those 
reassurances. I specifically would like to know, and I think most 
farmers in this province and their families would like to know, 
who particularly is doing this strategy for them. And I'm 
wondering if you can tell me from your department who you've 
designated to be the lead people that will be sitting with you on 
the committee so that we clearly understand who we're dealing 
with here as these things unfold. 
 
I don't think there's a producer out there today, whatever his 
philosophical view was on the Crow, that knows now that his 
can is tied directly to some of the things that you and your 
people are doing. So for my benefit and other producers, can 
you tell me who exactly, and what the pecking order is, and 
how we do things here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I think the member had the 
committee described fairly accurately. It's a committee of 
Finance, Agriculture and Food, Highways and Transportation, 
and Municipal Government, and headed up from the official 
point of view, by the Premier's deputy. 
 
On that committee I have my deputy; Hartley Furtan is on it. 
We have a couple of people in the department working with 
him on that. We have the deputy of Municipal Government, the 
deputy of Highways, Clare Kirkland, and we have 
representation from the Department of Finance to keep us in 
touch with the overall economic impacts and impacts on 
provincial budgets. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, do you have any imminent 
meetings scheduled with the federal Minister of Agriculture, 
federal Finance officials? Can you tell me sort of what your 
game plan would be over the next two, three weeks? Have you 
sort of got an idea firmly in your mind about how you're going 
to approach federal government? Have you solicited support 
from Alberta, Manitoba, or are the provinces sort of each going 
their own way? What can we expect as western Canadian 
producers in the way of an effort over the next short while? 
 



March 9, 1995 

 
773 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I met with 
Mr. Goodale on Saturday morning, raised all of the concerns 
that I mentioned earlier. We have had a meeting with the 
president of SARM and the president of SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and the president of Sask 
Wheat Pool. We have another meeting tentatively set for 
tomorrow with these groups. 
 
I have been in contact with the Ag Minister from Alberta by 
telephone trying to determine what common ground we have. 
And I think there is common ground; obviously was common 
ground before the budget came down. All the farm groups and 
all of the prairie governments said that, if indeed the change 
was going to occur, that the value of the Crow was $7 billion 
and that we wanted to maintain that value. 
 
We agreed that there needed to be something in place . . . a 
system in place that assured that some efficiencies would occur 
so that we didn't just get stuck with higher freight costs, and if 
indeed there were savings in the system, that we had a system 
that squeezed them out. And secondly, we agreed . . . or thirdly 
I guess, we agreed that we needed some mechanism to be sure 
that that gets passed back to farmers. 
 
So there was a certain agreement before the budget. There 
certainly is an agreement. At least I haven't heard anybody from 
western Canada, say, disagree that this is an unfair cut and that 
this will be hurtful and that the impact is going to be very, very, 
very tough for Saskatchewan farmers and for Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
So I think we do have the alliance, although I guess our 
problem is whether or not we can get the federal Liberal 
government to understand what they've done and what the 
adjustment that they talk about means in terms of human costs 
in this province. 
 
And certainly we have had a long, hard fight at trying to put that 
point across and obviously did not get it across; that we were 
certainly . . . we certainly feel that we were treated unfairly; that 
Mr. Goodale did not come back with a good deal. 
 
Paul Martin says Mr. Goodale was a real bargainer and got a 
good deal. I would hate to see what a bad deal would have 
looked like. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that sounds good, Minister. But we both 
know that in the south-west corner of this province, people are 
generally seeding by the second week in April. 
 
A number of lawyers around the province tell me that already 
people are flooding in, trying to readjust lease agreements. And 
it's particularly messy when you've got family members 
involved — brothers to brother, father-son things — and they've 
had all sorts of arrangements that now are going to be very 
difficult to manage. 
 
And the mayhem that that stuff costs to communities and 
families is very difficult to repair, where you've had long- 

standing agreements that now are going to have to be changed 
in a substantial way because you've got a whole other equation. 
And I don't think we've got a whole lot of time here. 
 
The federal minister says we're going to see money at some 
point in '95. I would think that would be one of the things that 
your working group would want to firm up so that people have 
some assurance as to when they will start having access to 
money. 
 
I know various farm groups have proposed various solutions to 
this tenure problem, and also the time frame that the pay-out 
should come in. Should it all come in one chunk, or should it be 
two years, or three years? That type of thing. 
 
But whatever those options are available to take back to the 
federal government from a fairly strong bargaining position, 
that it's going to have to happen sooner than later, to quote a 
favourite saying of the Prime Minister. You know, we should 
get on with these things. 
 
And that's the . . . I guess the problem we're having here, we 
haven't seen a whole lot of organization on your side for taking 
a real good, hard, strong run at things. I mean my figures show 
me there's about 6,000 miles in western Canada of branch line 
that is in that grain-dependent situation; 4,000 of that's in 
Saskatchewan alone. 
 
You know, even your definitions of low-volume lines and light 
steel . . . I mean your part of the province up there has probably 
got a disproportionate amount of light steel sitting in it because 
the rehab program wasn't as strong up there. And when you 
think of the havoc in so many areas here, we want to know that 
there's a very strong effort being made. 
 
So can you assure us, Minister, that your government will be 
making some type of a very cohesive, coherent representation to 
Ottawa on these issues before any farmer in this province goes 
to the field this spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, 
there are a couple of issues there. We will be making 
representation to the federal government. We are also trying to 
pull in other provinces and farm groups, and that's our reason 
for meeting with farmers. We think that the federal government 
may listen to farmers better than they did to us. We certainly 
made the case, as did farm groups, before the budget. And 
hopefully there's enough outcry here that the Finance minister 
from Quebec will understand that this is a serious issue for us. 
 
I think the member makes an excellent point on the pay-out of 
the money, the $1.6 billion buy-out. There are, I think, two 
issues there. Number one is we need the money as soon as 
possible. 
 
But even more urgent right now is we need to know how much 
money we're going to get. And Mr. Goodale, after 20 years of 
proposing to change the method of payment and proposing a 
bond, has come out with the budget that says we're going to  



March 9, 1995 

 
774 

have a bond, and it's only going to be $1.6 billion, and we kind 
of think this is the way we should pay it out. What do you 
think? 
 
Producers right now are signing lease agreements, as the 
members pointed out. Producers are cleaning seed. Some of 
them already have their seed cleaned, and they're going to the 
bank to get their line of credit for this summer. They're doing 
that right now. And we don't even know . . . Mr. Goodale met 
with some farm leaders in Winnipeg today, and I don't know 
whether they made a final decision as to how it gets paid out 
even yet. We need that decision. We need a fair decision, and 
we need it very soon. 
 
The basic problem with trying to determine how to structure 
this buy-out is that there isn't enough money in the buy-out to 
do the hurt. There's absolutely no question that landowners will 
be hurt by the loss of the Crow benefit. Their land values will 
drop relative to what they otherwise would. Over time their 
rents will drop. They're going to be hurt by this. 
 
But there's also no question that tenants who are renting land, in 
particular tenants who are on long-term leases who cannot get 
them adjusted, but even having adjusted them, the freight bill 
will be on their backs, and they're going to be hurt by this. And 
the question is that 1.6 billion isn't enough to fix either of those 
hurts, and they haven't thought about how to distribute it fairly. 
 
(1600) 
 
Certainly we have for 20 years been saying, cut two cheques to 
the railways; take it off the freight rate. It's a lot simpler than 
mailing out 160,000 cheques then. Who are you going to mail 
those cheques to? And after 20 years they're saying well, we've 
decided to pay out to farmers. Who do you think you should 
pay it to? At a time when . . . I mean we should have known 
this six months ago so that farmers could plan. That is the 
whole problem with this particular move by the federal 
government. 
 
First, it's not fair, and secondly, it's an unwise cut for the future 
of this country. But thirdly, it's done without a plan, and they 
don't know what replaces it. They don't know where they're 
going and certainly farm groups are scrambling to come up with 
solutions as we are. And certainly we intend to work both with 
the method of the buy-out, which I think needs to be decided 
like right now in order for farmers to plan, but we also intend to 
work with producers as to how we protect producers from the 
impact of these cuts and how we give producers a fair chance to 
deal with railways so that they're not being ripped off by 
railways in the long term. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Minister, I have personally believed and 
I think my party has believed for quite some time that it was 
better to pay the producer, and I stand by that because I always 
thought that I was dealing with an historic number that was in a 
certain range. You and your party always believed that that was 
the wrong way to go and stood pretty fast on that for a long, 
long time in the face of a number of initiatives to change it —  

and I guess that's past history. 
 
There are some of us that believe that if a deal had been cut a 
few years ago, it would have been far more lucrative to 
Saskatchewan and western Canada than the one we face today. 
But I guess that's hindsight and we're into it. 
 
Can you tell me where exactly you and your government stand 
on the issue of . . . now that the deed is done, where do you 
stand on who should get paid? I haven't heard you say 
definitively if it should be to the actual producer on the land or 
. . . 
 
And there's another issue involving, in this province 
particularly, which permit book year or combination of years is 
going to be used to determine actual acreage base? Because a 
lot of people in this province have diversified by going into the 
long-term cover program or going back into livestock and have 
put significant acreages back into improved forages in order to 
diversify those acres until the 1994 contracts were eligible for 
quota. 
 
They have now been cut to a third and there is a whole lot of 
folks that are feeling that they may be discriminated against 
because, as producers, they took the opportunity — and many 
of these people are on leased land — to change the way that 
they do things. 
 
So could you tell me exactly what point we're starting at. Are 
you emphatic on it should be pay-the-producer and you are 
looking at these other issues, or is there another agenda that 
you're on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again there 
isn't a magic way to take $1.6 billion and spread it out to fix all 
the hurt that's out there. We wanted to get it done as fairly as 
possible. Maybe, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite who has 
been in favour of paying the producer for the last 25 years 
would know how to do it. And certainly if you have suggestions 
we will certainly carry them forward to the federal minister on 
this. But there is a proposal which has certainly a good deal of 
problems with it that the federal government points out. We 
certainly can sympathize with the different factors. 
 
I don't know that there's a simple way to do this. We're talking 
again, we're meeting with farm groups, and if the farm groups 
. . . and the farm groups indeed met with the federal minister 
this morning. I don't know what came out of that meeting, but 
again this is their program and their proposal and their budget, 
and there is some urgency for decision from them soon. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, if you'd like to trade seats I'd 
relish the opportunity to sit down and do a little negotiating 
with the federal minister, but our system doesn't allow that, 
right now anyway. 
 
So I kind of think it's incumbent before we rise from the 
agricultural estimates of the province of Saskatchewan that the  



March 9, 1995 

 
775 

minister, who is in charge of the bucks and is in charge of 
carrying our message, is going to stake some ground out. I 
mean, you can't tell me that you guys in that committee are 
going to go in there over the next two or three months and 
chase your tail around without coming with some kind of a 
position to go to the federal government. That's not acceptable. 
 
You're the Agriculture minister in this province and I'm sure 
that you can come up with the best interests of our producers 
and not leave it in the hands of the federal Liberals. I mean that 
has been a recipe for disaster, Mr. Minister, since I was old 
enough to go sit on a tractor with my dad. Those people have 
been fooling with western Canadian agricultural to no good, on 
and on and on. 
 
And you had darn well better have some kind of position or else 
you better talk your Premier out of going to the polls, at least in 
rural Saskatchewan this year, because we got to know where 
you're coming from. 
 
I mean you've been pretty emphatic over the last 20 years on 
method of payment and you stuck by that through the bitter end 
and maybe lost us a bunch of cash by doing so, but you can't go 
into this next round without us understanding very clearly 
where you're coming from. 
 
And I know there's a lot of groups out there say, how can I go to 
the field this spring, how can I hedge, how can I sign contracts, 
how can I do everything possible within my power as a 
producer to ensure at the end of the day there's a bottom line 
that's in the black instead of the red without knowing what 
you're fighting for? And you can't sign a lease, you can't do any 
of those things without understanding those things. 
 
So if you want to do it today, that's fine. But before these 
estimates are done I think it's incumbent upon you and your 
working group to be able to tell us, as agriculture producers, 
where we're going and what you're fighting for. Or are you 
simply going to wash your hands of it and say, do whatever you 
wish with us, Mr. Goodale. I don't think that's enough. 
 
I mean he's already done one number on us. Now it's time to 
gird our loins and get in there and do a little fight. And I'd be 
happy to help you. I think every member in this legislature that 
is an agriculture producer for sure would be glad to help you, 
because we're all in the glue together. But I got to know where 
you're coming from, what direction your leaning, where your 
Premier is coming from. 
 
You know, since the day I got elected to this House in the 
spring of 1985, I understand the carnage that has taken place in 
rural Saskatchewan. For six years sat in government and 
watched them drop one by one by one across this province — 
it's not a pretty sight — and didn't get a lot of help out of you. 
So I've been there. 
 
Now if you want us to be there with you and propose solutions 
to this thing, you're going to have to tell me where you're going 
and what the generic proposal is at least of where you're  

prepared to stand and fight, and what you're prepared to put on 
the table. Because we're all in it together this time. 
 
And when those branch lines start tumbling after our friend 
Young gets done with us, a whole lot of us are going to be a 
long ways away from a delivery point on top of it. And that 
could happen sooner than later. 
 
So once again, if you don't want to do it today, that's fine, but 
can you at least give us an idea of what you favour, and maybe 
we won't hold you to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are all in 
this together. We are all going to have a very hard time making 
a bottom line, and 1.6 billion is not enough to solve that. Mr. 
Goodale could stand on his head and pay it any way he wants; 
it's not going to solve the problem. 
 
It's going to leave many, many producers . . . it may solve the 
problem for one year but many, many producers will be in very 
difficult circumstances. As the member points out, if they're a 
long distance from rail lines and have to truck grain farther to 
end up paying higher freight when they finally get it to a rail 
line, it's going to be very difficult. 
 
Certainly we have positions on rail line abandonment. We don't 
say that maybe some lines shouldn't be abandoned at some time. 
We are saying you should not pull the pin on these branch lines 
without first convincing us that that is an actual savings in cost 
and not just a transfer of cost from railways to farmers and 
municipalities. 
 
And secondly, that there is some community consultation and 
alternatives. The community has a chance to look at what the 
alternatives are, and try to mitigate the problems. And maybe 
even that's a short-line railroad or whatever. But if indeed they 
go ahead with the wholesale abandonment of branch lines, that 
is going to be not only a shock to the farmers but certainly to a 
good many communities. And that we find quite unacceptable. 
 
So certainly we have positions on these issues and we are going 
to continue to fight to protect our farmers as best we can. But 
we don't have a magic answer to spread $1.6 billion out to fix 
the hurt in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, if you need more time to work on 
this, just say so. I mean we've got sort of two parameters here. 
We've got, pay the landowner which involves, unfortunately in 
this province, a lot of people that are getting rather elderly; 
banks, credit unions, trust companies, federal government, 
provincial government — got a whole raft of folks there — plus 
a few people your and my age, or we've got a lot of producers. 
 
I'm told that 40 per cent of the acres in the province are under 
some type of lease. I find that high, but maybe that is the 
number. I mean that's almost incredible that you would have 
that volume in some type of lease arrangement. And if that's the 
case, then it's very compelling to me that you cannot ignore 
that, whether it be the federal government or the provincial  



March 9, 1995 

 
776 

government. 
 
But you must have some preference, I think, of whether it's 
paying the person that actually does the work, or is it paying the 
owner, the mortgage holder on a particular piece of land. I mean 
you must have some starting point there, you know. And if you 
don't, then just tell me. But you personally even must have 
some type of a preference there that we can begin to base this 
on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said 
earlier, both of these people have a legitimate case from hurt 
and both should be compensated; 1.6 billion will not 
compensate either one of them adequately. The federal 
government has a proposal on the table which certainly is going 
to disadvantage a good number of people who lease land. 
 
They also have control of the tax system and they tell us well, if 
we do it this way, it won't be taxable; if we do it that way, it 
will be taxable. We do not want to lessen that amount of money 
by any amount and certainly we have expressed those concerns 
to Mr. Goodale and they are supposedly working on another 
proposal, or not — I don't know what they're doing. They've 
said they were prepared to listen; they've listened. We've 
certainly outlined the problems. And they met with farm groups 
today. 
 
But I would again emphasize that we don't have three or four 
months to kick this around as the member opposite has said. 
Farmers need a decision one way or the other and they need it 
now. So hopefully we will get a fair decision from Mr. Goodale 
and the federal government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'll put it to you another way, Minister. 
What do your officials recommend? I mean your deputy is an 
eminent agricultural economist who, if he weren't filling the 
seat that he is now, would probably be making some type of a 
public pronouncement about what's going on. Other ones at the 
U of S (University of Saskatchewan) and places are doing that. 
What are you being advised that would be the best way for you 
to represent the agricultural producers of this province? 
 
You know, if you don't want to give me your own opinion, 
that's fine. What are your officials, who are very eminently 
qualified to analyse and make comments on these things, what 
are they advising you on? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well my officials tell me what is 
obvious to most farmers in this province: that $1.6 billion is not 
going to solve the hurt. My officials tell me that land values will 
drop and they will drop significantly because of this move. 
They tell me that farmers who live long distances from main 
lines when branch lines are abandoned will have much higher 
costs and will be disadvantaged. 
 
So what they're telling me is that both the landlord and tenants 
will be affected by this change. They tell me that what we  

should have done was domesticated this subsidy and continue 
to pay it to the railways and that would have fairly distributed it 
to the people who actually produced the grain. 
 
Mr. Goodale rejected that proposal and has come with one that 
is not going to be fair. And I don't know if he's going to be able 
to get a formula that indeed is fair. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, maybe you can tell me then 
what a domesticated railway pay-out is like. That's a new 
terminology for me. If your officials say that's what we should 
have done, maybe that's what you should be taking back to the 
federal government as a counter-proposal. 
 
Maybe explain that one to me. How's that one green under 
GATT (General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs) compared to 
what we had before? Explain it to me, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what we said 
is if the subsidy was not an export subsidy, if it could be 
defined as a domestic subsidy, we would have no problem 
under GATT. It would not be green, but we're certainly within 
our limits  of having reduced our subsidies by well within the 
limits and we wouldn't have had to change it. 
 
Now there may have been trade disputes. We may have been 
challenged by that by our American neighbours or by others. 
But we were arguing all along that the subsidy should be 
continued and that the value of the subsidy should be 
continued. And in that case, then it was questionable whether 
our solution might have worked in the long run. 
 
But in the area of phasing it out as they are, and if they only 
were going to give us less than a quarter of the value of the pay-
out to the Crow benefit — they cut it by . . . 1.6 billion is less 
than a quarter of the value of it and it's gone in one year — if 
had they used some sort of phase-down and domesticated it, I 
think the trade issues would probably not have been very 
significant. 
 
It's hard to imagine that the Americans, who subsidize their 
transportation system and their Mississippi system and their 
port system and on down the line, would challenge a minor 
amount of money that would still be going into the Crow 
benefit. If they're going to take the dollars out anyway, we think 
that would have worked better. 
 
And we took that proposal to the federal government and they 
rejected it. And they've decided to pursue another avenue. And 
now they're saying to us, and they're saying to the farm groups 
out here, well what do we do, Jack? After 20 years we've finally 
decided to pay the producer and we don't know how to do it, 
and it's the middle of March and what do we do now, Jack? 
 
That, I think, is unfair to producers in this province. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I agree with you, Minister, it is. I'm still 
a little mystified at this. The way I always understood this 
problem we had with GATT was that . . . I mean in this country  



March 9, 1995 

 
777 

we approximately export 80 per cent of our production; we eat 
about 20. So 20 per cent of it you could have domesticated, but 
the other 80 was just going to run you afoul with somebody. 
 
I mean you can say whatever you wish about our friends to the 
south, but they are used to being bullies and they aren't going to 
stop because we . . . I mean they just wouldn't let you sneak it 
by. And I think that's why a lot of us have realized for a long 
time that there was only one way out of the conundrum. 
 
So I can see why your proposal didn't go very far because I 
mean they're bad enough as it is. Every time some guy down 
there wants to jump from governor to the Senate, we get a 
kerfuffle over a product or other, and that's the way their 
politics is. And I guess until they get out of the subsidy game, 
we're going to have to face that silliness that they indulge in. 
 
But don't ever try and make us believe that the Mississippi only 
has grain going down it. I mean that thing is subsidized but 
there's a whole lot of stuff travels down it, as there does across 
our railroads. 
 
That was the excuse, I remember, the federal minister back in 
the late '70s made when they decided to plough a billion dollars 
in rehab in. You know, we've got to haul other things besides 
grain; we've got potash and coal and sulphur and all of these 
things, so we've got to put a million dollar . . . or a billion 
dollars of taxpayers' money into rehab on a lot of lines. 
 
Well, Minister, I'm not going to press this today any further, 
because you obviously need more time to work on it. And we 
are going to expect though, before you're done in your 
Agriculture estimates, that you're going to be able to tell us 
where the Government of Saskatchewan goes in regards to 
taking on this federal Liberal government in the way that they 
are doing things. 
 
I want to ask you a couple of questions in regard to . . . and you 
may not have the numbers here because your Highways 
minister may be the person that leads on it. But I am told that as 
far as the abandonment process as currently is outlined, that 
there is going to be a change in the legislation that is allowing 
them to circumvent the process whereby when a line comes up 
it has to be offered at salvage value to a short line before they 
can go in and salvage the steel and the ties and that kind of 
thing. Can you tell me if that is your understanding of where 
things are at under the Western Grain Transportation Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, we don't know that. 
I think, as I understand the situation, the regulations governing 
rail line abandonment and short lines and so on is covered in 
the GTA, grain transportation Act. And that has been 
eliminated and moved to . . . the process has been moved under 
the NTA, National Transportation Act, and there are no 
replacement rules governing that. 
 
So we think that's one more of the uncertainties. We don't really 
know what they plan to do in that regard. That's one of the 
things that we will certainly be pressing for, is that there are  

legislation and regulations in place that allow short-lines to deal 
fairly with CP and CN, and also that there is an adequate 
process so that communities have time and resources to 
determine whether or not there is potential for short-lines as an 
alternative. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well, Minister, I'm going to ask you this 
question, and you can give me your own view or your officials' 
view or whatever. What would you say to the prospect of 
unlimited running rights on rail lines in western Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, that is 
something that we would support. We don't have a full analysis 
of it, but there are a couple of things that we think have to 
happen in the new world. We've got the old system basically 
blown away and nothing replacing it. 
 
There are only a couple of ways that producers are going to get 
a fair shake out of the new system. And one is through 
competition, where there's some real competition, and the other 
is through some form of regulation and legislation and control 
that protects producers. So if joint running rights can help to 
create some honest competition, that will be helpful. However, 
if CN is privatized and maybe even bought up by CP, we might 
have difficulty getting competition. And we may need 
protection certainly beyond . . . in fact we will need protection 
beyond leaving farmers to the good graces of the rail lines. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Minister, I wasn't confining my comments to 
the two corporate welfare bums that we have running the 
railroads in this country. I said unlimited running rights. That 
means if you want to run, you lease or you do whatever. But if 
you're a producer, a group of producers, a group of grain 
companies, whatever, and there's a railroad, the same as there's 
a highway, a seaway or an airport, you pay a fee and you run. 
 
That's the question I asked you: what would you think of 
unlimited running rights on steel in western Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Certainly the basic idea has merit. 
Whether or not there are some technical problems and whether 
or not those could be worked out remains to be seen. It certainly 
is something that needs some work. It's one of the avenues that 
we certainly need to explore. 
 
And again, coming back to the fact that the federal government 
has done away with the Crow benefit, done away with the 
regulatory system that's in place and doesn't seem to have a plan 
for the future, is very disconcerting. And we certainly will be, 
with farm groups, exploring all those avenues and trying to 
protect our producers. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I'm glad to hear that, Minister, because 
these kind of ideas are popping up every day across this 
province, given the climate that we're now into. And 
fundamental change is upon us and people are going to be 
sometimes grasping at straws, but other times, coming up with 
some pretty sound . . . The reason that I wanted to run that by 
you is because you've been a pretty hidebound outfit in the past  



March 9, 1995 

 
778 

when it came to some of these issues. 
 
There was never much give, not much latitude in solving our 
problems. And I want to know, and I think producers in this 
province want to know, that those ways aren't quite the same as 
they used to be and that you're prepared to look at things that 
would've been simply unacceptable a short time ago. 
 
This idea isn't mine. I mean people in the short-line business 
have talked about this for the last 10 years. They tell me, with 
satellite technology in place, that you can up-link from an 
engine to a satellite and back down and tell within a matter of a 
metre where any piece of running stock is in western Canada. 
And I don't know, I'm not a . . . maybe our friend with the 
computer there can tell us. But they say that it is becoming a 
low cost alternative to some of the current technology that they 
use to govern this as they do in other places. 
 
So if that's upon us and that's an alternative and we have to 
present options to the federal government because of what 
they've done on the regulations side, then I expect that to come 
out of your working group and others to put forward those kind 
of positions. Are you prepared to do those kind of things and 
forget some of the ideological nonsense that used to be around 
here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we certainly 
are prepared to listen to producers. And the member opposite is 
right — you go out in rural Saskatchewan and you'll find a lot 
of ideas. And sometimes some of them, when they are put 
under scrutiny, don't pan out, but every once in a while you will 
find an idea that will work. And the producers are . . . That's the 
reason they've survived in Saskatchewan, is because they're 
innovative and they have ideas. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, we believe in a national transportation 
policy. We believe that every country should have a national 
transportation policy. But having the federal government 
abandon that position and moving away from having a national 
transportation policy, if Canadians, who have had cheap food 
for the last hundred years because of our farmings and our 
efficiencies and our innovations in this country, if Canadians 
are not prepared to pay the bill to have a national transportation 
system to keep those jobs in Canada and to keep goods flowing 
east to west and to keep this country together, Saskatchewan 
farmers are not prepared to carry that whole load themselves. 
 
And we are prepared to work with our producers to any ideas 
— innovative, new ideas — any way we can to get our produce 
to market in order that our producers can survive. 
 
And we don't have a choice; ideology doesn't play a role in this. 
What we have is producers who have been dealt a harsh blow 
and they will do what they always do — they will adapt with 
new and innovative ideas. And we are going to be prepared to 
look at each and every one of them and help our producers. 
 
And we may continue to make the argument that we need a 
national transportation system in this country, but it's going to  

be . . . if we have a national transportation system paid for by 
the taxpayers of Canada and the people who eat our produce 
and not carry it solely on the backs of Saskatchewan farmers. 
And that I think is obvious. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well that brings up another question that 
begs answers, Minister. I understand this morning the process 
of lockout started. There was some rotating job action with the 
CP network and a lockout process started. We may be into a 
full-blown rail strike here shortly. 
 
Where are you on this? Or what's your position going to be with 
the federal government vis-a-vis . . . I mean you don't regulate 
them; I understand that. That's under national jurisdiction. What 
are you going to be asking for and how soon do you see action 
taken? I mean we're at the height of the shipping season for 
certain products right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, I have written a 
letter to the president of CN, the president of CP. I've written a 
letter to the president of the union. I've written a letter to my 
counterpart, the federal Minister of Agriculture, as have other 
ministers, expressing our concern with . . . From my point of 
view, of course, the agricultural industry is foremost, but an 
awful lot of our produce moves by rail, and we cannot afford to 
have a system that doesn't function. And we are urging that that 
be dealt with in some way as soon as possible. 
 
And I think that will shake out to be one of the results of 
removal of Crow benefit, is that everybody in the system is 
going to have to play their part in making this work better. And 
maybe some Canadians will end up losing their jobs as some of 
our grain moves south or elsewhere, because as I said earlier, 
we're not prepared to shoulder the load of all of Canada by 
Saskatchewan farmers alone. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Would you be prepared to send across copies 
of that correspondence to us, to understand exactly what you're 
saying to various players? And are you prepared to and would 
you call for back-to-work legislation imminently if we get into a 
situation where we see any significant reduction in rolling 
stock? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I certainly will send you 
copies of those letters. 
 
As to what the federal government does and how they do it is a 
matter to watch as things unfold. But certainly we cannot afford 
under any circumstances to have any major disruption of, 
particularly grain movement out of Saskatchewan because we 
certainly want to see our grain moved before August 1 this year 
because any that's around after that is going to move at much 
higher freight rates. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well you raise a good point, Minister, 
because if we don't get her done by August 1, it's a different 
ball game. I mean everybody's going to want to move  



March 9, 1995 

 
779 

everything they can in the current crop year. And goodness 
knows, we lose a week or two weeks or something like that; 
you're going to have a lot of stuff piled up in places where 
people don't want it piled up. 
 
And the costs are going to ratchet up, and the producer is 
always the guy at the end of the day that pays it. There is no one 
else in there that will not pass on their costs back to you and I. 
And I think that's why I asked the question on behalf of people 
out there. They want to know if you're prepared to go to the 
wall on this thing quickly. 
 
It wouldn't be so bad if, come August 1, they said there's 7.2, 
and we're going to give it to you over five years or seven years 
or ten years or some of the proposals that were around. I think 
that people would have some confidence that they were going 
to survive. But the fact is, if we get a one-time shot here and it 
doesn't come till December, January, and meanwhile we've had 
a prolonged labour dispute, it's going to make it darn difficult. 
 
Somebody told me the other day their phosphate fertilizer was 
$130 a tonne higher than last year. Now that seemed high to 
me, but they were willing to produce bills. I mean when you get 
that kind of front-end cost coming into this growing season, 
along with this other thing, a very short period of time can 
negate all of those gains that you potentially might make. 
 
So I'll just ask again. Are you prepared to move and move fast 
if this thing comes to a grinding halt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — We're certainly prepared to move 
within the powers that we have, although as the member has 
pointed out, it is federal jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — One other thing that I need to ask you about, 
Minister, and this you may have to do some research on it. But I 
understand that with the changes from the Western Grain 
Transportation Act to the NTA (National Transportation 
Agency) that we will now all be subject to provisions of 
preferential contracting. It's something that the potash 
companies and others . . . I mean the contract is not a posted, 
visible contract that's open to the public. And I'm told that the 
grain companies with the changes will now be able to go to 
preferential contracting. 
 
To me that is an onerous piece of work because in the many 
cases producers in this province are limited to one rail 
company. You don't have access to the other rail company. You 
don't have access to Burlington Northern. You don't have . . . 
and to not know that a grain company, for instance, I'm told on 
the low end on a 50-car spot can be as low as $16 a ton, or you 
can be as high as $35 a ton on an eight-car spot. That means 
that that company could be getting the benefit of a $16 rate but 
still charging me a $25 dollar rate because they would be under 
a hidden contract system. 
 
Is that your understanding that that's where we're going with the 
changes in the transportation Act? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Yes it is, and certainly that's one of 
the issues that we have raised, and will continue to raise. That's 
a serious concern. They're talking about a maximum rate being 
in place for a short period of time, and then being phased out 
and going to NTA rates which, as I understand it, would mean 
that they could be confidential and secret rates. 
 
That is one of our fears of what happens to the transportation 
system if the railways have that power, and possibly even the 
grain companies, to take losses on certain delivery points where 
the elevator company could draw grain particular to a point 
that's a long ways from another elevator company where there's 
not likely to be competition in the future, and take a loss on that 
for a number of years in order to move the grain to that point. 
 
Once that happens, you know what happens to the rest of the 
system, particularly with the branch lines being abandoned and 
elevators being abandoned. That becomes the only system that's 
left and the railways are then in a position of having that grain 
in a captive position where there is no other choice, and by that 
time we've done away with maximum rates and they can charge 
whatever they want. 
 
And that's what we've been saying all along, is that we're not 
opposed to some changes in the system if it results in savings. 
But if the result is that there's . . . the savings all accrues to the 
railway, then it's strictly a transfer of costs to farmers and 
municipalities and the savings that the railroads get are not 
passed on; then we've got the worst of both worlds. We have a 
transportation system that isn't any cheaper and we've got a 
system where the railways pocket whatever savings that they 
accrue. 
 
So that is a grave concern and whether joint running rights and 
some other things to force competition helps that or whether, I 
suspect, some sort of regulation that . . . or at least that rates 
need to be made public so that producers can understand what's 
happening. So that, as I understand it . . . and we haven't got a 
lot of detail from the federal government — but I believe you're 
right in your assessment of it. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — See, Minister, the only thing that's held that 
in check with other types of commodities is the fact they have 
that rule where they have that nearest switching point. You 
know you can go over to the next railroad and say, what rate 
would you give me, and then they have to go to the lowest 
common denominator. 
 
And it becomes very worrisome if CP were to buy CN and you 
had a straight monopoly, because you would never get that 
opportunity. That situation . . . and just necessarily making it 
public doesn't necessarily fix it because that is the case in the 
United States I believe, where it has to be posted on the wall of 
the elevator what those rates are. 
 
But if you don't have anybody else within a couple of hundred 
miles you've still got the guy pretty well in a captive market. So 
we need to think about ways that we as western Canadians 
would approach this issue. My preference personally is that this  



March 9, 1995 

 
780 

stuff should be decided on the floors of the federal parliament 
or whatever, and it should be all-party committees, that type of 
thing; and that people should have to come before it in a . . . I 
like watching what the American hearings do when they drag 
these guys in and put them through the mill a little bit to explain 
themselves. So maybe we've got some adapting to do. 
 
But if change occurs and we aren't on top of it, these things will 
get rammed down our throats, and the next thing you know we 
don't have too many options. It's tough, Minister, to put steel 
back once it's gone. And when you think of a billion dollars 
going into rehab and those same rehab lines now having a 
salvage value of $60,000 a mile just in salvage, you understand 
why they would want to get the steel tore up real fast; that's a 
net benefit back to either one of them. And if it gets done in a 
hurry, we're in a very poor bargaining position. 
 
And I think these issues have to be put on the table, put out 
front. And I don't know how you draw the lines in the sand, but 
you say to them, we're cognizant of the issues, we know the 
hurt, and you aren't going to get away with it without going 
through a real scrap on it. 
 
And if you ever want ideas on how to do that, don't hesitate to 
call. Any comment on what you think is a good proposal to take 
forward in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well I appreciate those comments, 
and certainly appreciate any input that we can get from the 
member opposite or his party. That in a nutshell, expresses our 
concerns. 
 
What we are seeing is the destruction of a system that was 
there, with all its warts — and we don't say that the system that 
was there was perfect — but what we see is the destruction of 
the system that was there and no plan to replace it, and hoping 
that something will arise from the ashes and replace this. And 
we're very afraid that what arises from the ashes will be a 
system that much favours rail lines and does not protect our 
producers. 
 
So that is what we need to have out of the system. We need to 
have an efficient system, but it has to take into account right 
from the bin to the ship, and it has to give producers some fair 
leverage in the system. 
 
And the member is absolutely right. If you blow this thing away 
and you have nothing to replace it with in the meantime, in a 
very short number of years a lot of the steel gets rolled up and 
the elevators get abandoned, it would be very, very difficult to 
go back. So that is part of our concern about the federal budget, 
that there isn't a plan, there isn't a vision. And we need all the 
help that we can get in trying to protect our farmers and to build 
some system that is fair to them. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just in going on in 
that line of questions. When you talk about what will happen,  

and everybody will speculate but I think there'll be a lot of 
common ground on this speculation  that there'll be two basic 
main lines in western Canada that will handle the 
transportation. 
 
There might be unique instances where this won't happen. And 
if you draw a line from east to west, it's the CP main line on the 
southern part and a Y going up along basically following the 
Yellowhead through Prince George and up to Prince Rupert, 
and then the other line going to Churchill. And when you take a 
look at what is in between, you have a significant amount of 
grain-dependent lines. I think 60 per cent of those lines in 
between — and that'll vary a little bit about how dependent they 
are on grain — but 60 per cent of those lines will be grain 
dependent. So when you take a look at that, the scenario isn't 
good. 
 
The member from Thunder Creek was talking about a wide-
open kind of running right, unlimited. What that would 
probably do is give an option on having other agencies come in 
and use lines if they were still available. But if we, in the next 
18 months, have the railroads abandoned and start tearing this 
stuff up, there's going to be a significant — in my view, at least 
— a waste of years and years of financing for the railroads that 
has gone into delivering a railroad into those communities. 
 
And so when I take a look at it, there isn't going to be anything 
between the American border and the main line CP, and 
chances are north isn't going to be any better. And what's in 
between is at risk as well. So given that as a scenario, what do 
you think are options that are available to individuals who like 
the short-line, or grain companies that want to protect their risk 
in those areas. I know Sask Wheat Pool and other grain 
companies — and I've questioned why they would have done 
this — but they've built some very prominent elevators and 
systems that are going to be gone. And the only way that they're 
going to recoup some of their investment is by maintaining that 
railroad in order to deliver that back onto the main line. 
 
So in your mind is there . . . are there options available that you 
are putting forward as a method to control this evaporation of 
rail lines before people can grab their wits and say, this is where 
it's going to stop. Are you going to do anything about it? Are 
you proposing to do anything about it? Because at some point 
in time, our whole infrastructure is at risk here. 
 
And I'd like to have you outline some of those options that are 
available and those that you'd be willing to put on the table for 
us to debate about how we can prevent this from just being a 
whoosh, and it's gone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well the member makes some very 
good observations. In fact I may just pass him over a copy of 
the rail system in Saskatchewan. It also impacts on how this 
budget is going to impact on different areas of the province. It's 
one thing to talk about the overall impact and the loss of $300 
million-plus to the Saskatchewan economy in increasing freight 
rates. 
 



March 9, 1995 

 
781 

But if you look at the map, there are indeed huge areas who are 
going to . . . potentially could suffer very dramatically and 
could almost be at a position of not being viable to any longer 
produce grain, because they're going to be an awful long ways 
from main lines. 
 
I guess one of the options is that you don't do anything until 
somebody comes up with a plan as to what this looks like in the 
future. And I don't think that any branch lines should be 
abandoned until there's a plan that says, well we'll abandon this 
one because it's low cost and the producers can then haul their 
grain over there, or we will do some adjustment for this area 
because they're no longer going to be viable for grain, or maybe 
a community wants to start a short-line and keep it going. 
 
And you know, I think we should not do anything hastily, and 
then there should be a plan in place before anything is done in 
terms of branch line abandonment, which doesn't mean that it 
may be unrealistic to expect every branch line that's there to 
stay. 
 
But we certainly will be making and have made the submission 
that you shouldn't abandon branch lines without a plan as to 
what's happening. Because the member is absolutely right, if 
those branch lines are rolled up in the next two or three years, 
and then we say, oops, what do we do now, it's going to be 
very, very difficult to put them back in. 
 
There are other impacts; for example, a dehy industry. There's 
some dehy plants around branch lines. If you abandon the 
branch line you knock that dehy plant and the diversification 
right out of rural Saskatchewan. And surely it's worth the time 
to analyse and look at whether or not that branch line makes 
sense to stay there. 
 
A lot of what we're doing in diversification in rural 
Saskatchewan also requires transportation. Some of the 
machinery manufacturing  which is becoming very successful 
in rural Saskatchewan  some areas, if they don't have rail, 
some industries will find it more attractive to go elsewhere. So 
the impact on some of these communities of rolling up big 
sections of branch line is going to be very, very dramatic. And I 
don't think that should happen on the basis of the railway saying 
well, we're not making any money on this line, let's roll it up. 
Because that is going to have a dramatic impact. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I guess my question to you then is: has the 
federal government provided any options or any plans to these 
communities to do this? Or is this just a bolt of lightning that 
came on the Minister of Transport's head one day and said, this 
is got to be gone and that's it. 
 
Has there been any options made available from the Minister of 
Transport to you regarding this? Is there anything on the table at 
all, or is it going to be the initiative of the individuals to provide 
that back to the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — I think the member is right. I think  

this was a bolt of lightning that hit the Transport minister or the 
Finance minister or somebody. This change is budget-driven. 
There's no question about that. 
 
Certainly this was not necessary to remove the funding from the 
Crow benefit in order to meet GATT rules. We're well below 
our spending constraints under GATT without doing any 
reduction of the actual amount of money paid out. 
 
And no, I think this . . . again, I believe it's driven by the 
assumption that if you just blow away the system that's there 
and somehow a new system will arise from the ashes and it'll be 
better and more efficient. And we don't believe that for a 
minute. 
 
The only process that's in place for lines that aren't light steel is 
the NTA process which gives some hearings in 90 days or so 
before abandonment. But there is no . . . there doesn't seem to 
be any . . . hasn't been any consultation with communities or 
doesn't seem to be a plan for any consultation with what 
happens to whole areas of the province if branch lines are 
abandoned. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Would there be no options on even how the 
railways are supposed to respond to regulatory functions? 
We've been given . . . the member from Thunder Creek also 
talked about regulations regulating variable rates and how they 
can be handled. When you have monopoly and you have a 
confidential, preferred kind of a tariff on this stuff, they can 
almost do whatever they wish to the function of transportation 
in western Canada. And you mean to say that there is nothing 
available anywhere from the Department of Transport? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — As we understand, there is nothing 
in the proposals that the federal government put forward that 
will protect farmers. There's maximum rates which will be 
phased out by the year 2000, which is not very far away, so we 
don't even have maximum tariffs in place for very long. And 
there are no minimums and no rules that say that rates need to 
be public. So essentially it looks like we're heading into a 
situation where the railways will be in control unless we can 
make that point with the federal government and hopefully give 
our producers a fair shake. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


