






















































May 8, 1995 Hansard


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 8, 1995 

 

 
2025 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to present a 
petition on behalf of the people from the Gull Lake area of the 
province. I'll read the prayer: 
 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 
than allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in the province. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
I'm happy to table these today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 
 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 
oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 
ownership. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a notice of 
motion that I would like to introduce on behalf of the member 
of Saskatoon Greystone respecting the first reading for Bills. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next move the first 
reading of a Bill, an Act to amend the district health Act. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another notice of motion that I 
would like to introduce on behalf of the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading 
of a Bill to amend The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 
 
The Speaker: — I think it's highly improper for the member 
from Shaunavon to introduce a motion on behalf of another 
member in the Assembly. This simply hasn't been done, and I 
would think that that is out of order. And therefore I rule it out 
of order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Before introduction of guests, I would 
like to outline today's special program for recognition of 
Second World War veterans. After my opening remarks, I shall 
invite the Premier, the representative of the official opposition, 
and the representative of the third party to pay tribute to the 
veterans seated in the galleries. I shall then ask the Associate 
Minister of Finance to introduce them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is with a great deal of pleasure and deep respect that I rise to 
pay tribute to the very distinguished guests who have joined us 
today in celebration of VE (Victory in Europe) Day. 
 
As has already been said in the rotunda ceremonies, this 
celebration is part of our Canada Remembers program. And I 
invite all members of the Assembly to join in welcoming the 
members of veterans' organizations, the war brides, and the 
serving members of the Canadian Forces and the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) who are seated in the galleries 
today. Welcome to all of you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the courage of our veterans during six years of 
war that paved the way for the peaceful communities, 
provinces, and Canada, that we enjoy today. 
 
And as we know, Saskatchewan people were involved in all 
aspects of the Second World War. Some flew the Spitfires in 
the Battle of Britain; some flew bombers over Europe. Others 
proved that prairie boys made great sailors when, from the ships 
of the Royal Canadian Navy and the Merchant Marine, they 
helped keep the lifeline to Europe open during the Battle of the 
Atlantic. And still others served as soldiers in the infantry, 
armoured artillery, and support units. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the American aviator, Amelia Earhart, once said 
that: "Courage is the price that life exacts for granting peace." 
Well in Hong Kong, Dieppe, North Africa, in Sicily and in 
Italy, in the Mediterranean, in Burma, south-east Asia, in 
Normandy, and north-west Europe, young men and women paid 
that price on our behalf. Some paid the ultimate price and never 
returned. They live on in our memories and we offer a special 
word of gratitude for their sacrifice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we remember the heavy losses suffered by 
the South Saskatchewan Regiment in the Dieppe raid of 1942, 
the sinking of the H.M.C.S. (Her Majesty's Canadian Ship) 
Regina in the English Channel in 1944, and the bravery of the 
Regina Rifles who were among the first units to land on the 
Normandy beaches on D-Day, and the first to reach their 
objective. 
 
We also remember the British Commonwealth air training plan 
which played such a vital role in the war effort. And we also 
remember the significant contributions of those here on the 
home front, their voluntary service and their hard work in 
keeping our economic and social structures together during that  



May 8, 1995 

 
2026 

very stressful and difficult time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning as part of VE Day, perhaps not 
strictly speaking but certainly spiritually, a sod-turning 
ceremony was held for a First World War Memorial which will 
grace the grounds of the Legislative Building — a long overdue 
tribute to the Saskatchewan men and women who lost their 
lives in the 1914-1918 war. 
 
And this morning we declared open the Saskatchewan archives 
display entitled "Saskatchewan at War, 1939 to 1945." I urge all 
members, in fact members of the public, to visit this excellent 
display and learn more about Saskatchewan's heroic 
contribution during that time, that difficult time, in our history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by expressing on behalf of all 
Saskatchewan people, our gratitude towards all those who 
helped make peace possible for their generation and for ours. 
We thank them for their determination, their willingness, their 
bravery, their courage; as Earhart said: to pay the price that life 
exacts . . . In so doing, they created a world of hope and secured 
freedom at home and abroad. We are all very, very, very proud 
of them today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
consider it a great privilege today to be asked, on behalf of Her 
Majesty's Loyal Opposition, to honour the thousands of men 
and women who fought so bravely to ensure the freedoms that 
we all enjoy. 
 
May 8 marks the 50th anniversary, Mr. Speaker, of the end of 
the world war in Europe. World War II began on that continent 
almost six years earlier and still continued for a while in Asia, 
and fortunately for most Canadians, the greatest bulk of the 
conflict was over. 
 
Canadian forces, and specifically those from Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, in the days of the Second World War, made a 
tremendous difference. They made a difference in a time of all-
out conflict, when failure would have meant subordination of 
democracy to an unspeakable tyranny. 
 
When the war first began, Canada had a small, very small, 
number of professionals enlisted in the Armed Forces. In fact I 
was surprised to learn that there were only about 4,500 soldiers 
in the army, 3,100 members in the air force, and 1,800 people 
in the navy. And yet very quickly thousands of people, 
including thousands from Saskatchewan, men and women, 
answered the call, and by the end of the war I'm told about 
75,000 Saskatchewan people had served our country in the 
Armed Forces, both at home, overseas, on the land, on the sea, 
and in the air. 
 
As well we all know about the contribution Saskatchewan made 
as the home to the 15th training sites for the British  

Commonwealth airborne training plan in locations such as 
Moose Jaw, Estevan, Regina, Davidson, Saskatoon, North 
Battleford, and others. 
 
The contribution of Saskatchewan individuals was great. And 
we are all indebted to their services, their sacrifices, and most 
importantly to the thousands who have lost their lives 
attempting to make life better for all of us. 
 
As we remember today, Mr. Speaker, and honour those who 
fought and died, let us all pay tribute also to the thousands of 
families. Because as the people went off to serve their country, 
it meant that many young children would not know mothers and 
fathers who did not return, and the hardships that they endured 
as a result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand today in recognition of some 
the bravest men and women that have ever lived  truly 
courageous and outstanding individuals. We must all remember 
and teach our children the significance of those who have worn 
and those who still honourably wear the Queen's uniform, and 
to share pride in them. 
 
It seems at times, Mr. Speaker, in the 1990s that it is not the 
most politically correct thing to do these days — to be in the 
Armed Forces. But I believe, Mr. Speaker, it certainly is the 
right thing to do. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I would like to express our 
heartfelt gratitude to all of the valiant men and women who 
helped secure the freedom that we take for granted. And thank 
you to the men and women today who represent both the 
veterans and the current Armed Forces who have joined us in 
this gallery. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
Liberal Party caucus, I want to welcome the many special 
guests who are with us today to mark the 50th anniversary of 
Victory in Europe Day. VE Day marks the complete defeat and 
utter destruction of Naziism and the crushing of a dictator's 
dream of global conquest. 
 
The defeat of Hitlerism required the mobilization of the world 
and resulted in the deaths of more than 30 million men, women, 
and children. Fifty years later, we cannot doubt that the struggle 
was worth the price because some wars must be fought as long 
as there are tyrants who respond to nothing less than force. 
 
War requires many personal sacrifices by everyone, not only 
those who fought in the war but those who stayed at home. The 
world will never forget that the victory in Europe would not 
have been possible without the immense contribution in men 
and material by Canada and the sacrifice of many of its bravest 
and best. 
 
While today many commemorate the end of the hostilities in 
Europe, it does not mark the end of the war nor the end of the  



May 8, 1995 

 
2027 

injuries and deaths. A month after VE Day, my father, Arthur 
Goodman, who served as lieutenant in charge of a bomb 
disposal unit, lost both his legs when he and a comrade stepped 
on a mine in France. 
 
I came to know firsthand, through my father, how the war left a 
lifelong legacy of pain for many who served and survived. 
 
Today we honour our guests who fought in the front lines and 
experienced firsthand the atrocities of war that we pray will 
never again be visited on us or our nation. We honour their 
families and fellow citizens who supported the war effort 
wherever and however they could here on the home front. 
 
And finally, we honour those who did not come home, those 
who lost their lives in a far-away land, fighting for a freedom 
they never lived to enjoy. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It is my special honour to introduce some veterans and others 
who are here to lend special meaning to today. 
 
It was exactly 50 years ago yesterday that Winston Churchill 
announced to an exhausted and devastated continent the end of 
the war in Europe. By any standard it had been the largest 
conflict in the history of mankind. It was certainly the most 
destructive and murderous war ever waged by man. Indeed it 
was some time before we realized the awful horrors which had 
been committed by the Nazis. We have been much longer in 
appreciating its significance. 
 
The American president Woodrow Wilson said of the First 
World War that it was a war to make the world safe for 
democracy. Through no fault of anyone who sacrificed in the 
First World War, we failed to achieve that objective. Where the 
First World War failed, the Second World War succeeded. And 
the half-century which has followed the end of the war has been 
a period of continual peace and growing prosperity that has few 
if any parallels in history. For these blessings, Mr. Speaker, we 
have our guests to thank; the post-war world was built upon 
their sacrifices. And so in 1995 a grateful nation has taken time 
to assure the veterans that we remember. 
 
This evening many Canadians will be watching the first TV 
episode of Herman Wouk’s epic novel, War and Remembrance. 
Although it's many years since I read the book, I recall the first 
line as clearly as if I'd read it yesterday. The book began by 
saying: 
 
 War, like slavery in an earlier period or cannibalism in 

an even earlier period, has become an outmoded 
pattern of human thought. 

 
The reaction of many might be, dear God, let us hope that some 
day that comes true. The events in Bosnia-Herzegovina suggest  

we have a ways to go before war does indeed become an 
outmoded pattern of human thought. 
 
I suspect that if the veterans which I'm about to introduce had 
but a single request, it would not be that we express our 
gratitude — although that is richly deserved — or that we 
remember, as we do, but I believe they would request that we 
ensure that our children and our grandchildren understand the 
true horror of war. If we do so, then there is a chance that war 
may indeed become an outmoded pattern of human thought and 
the world will continue to be safe for democracy. It is in this 
spirit that we welcome a number of guests to the legislature. 
 
Before calling on the veterans, I'd like to begin by recognizing 
the mayor of our provincial capital, who has done an enormous 
amount, both to support Canada Remembers and the First 
World War Memorial, His Worship Doug Archer. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — It's not on my list of people to 
introduce, but I'm next going to call upon Joyce Johnson, wife 
of a former lieutenant governor, Fred Johnson. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — We all know Fred Johnson as a 
distinguished jurist, chief justice of the Queen's Bench for some 
years, and equally distinguished lieutenant governor. We may 
not know that he spent five years in Europe as a veteran. And 
perhaps Mrs. Johnson, as much as anyone, symbolizes the 
wives and the girlfriends who stayed at home, kept the factories 
and the farms running to feed an army in Europe. 
 
I'd like to call on Bill Barclay, provincial president of the Royal 
Canadian Legion. I'd ask him to stand and with him the other 
executive members and other members of the Royal Canadian 
Legion who are here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Karl Karasin, honorary provincial 
president, and other members of the Army, Navy and Air Force 
Veterans in Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Ian MacLeish, president of the 
Disabled Veterans Association; other members of the Disabled 
Veterans Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — David Greyeyes, a much-decorated 
veteran of the Italian campaign in his own right. He also 
represents the Saskatchewan Indian Veterans Association and 
other members of this association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 8, 1995 

 
2028 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Senator Stan Durocher and members 
of the Saskatchewan Metis Veterans. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Helen Hammer, representing the 
Saskatchewan War Brides Association, and other members of 
the war brides association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — William Dunn and members of the 
Royal Canadian Airforce Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Dr. Ralph Cheesman and members of 
the Naval Officers Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Henry Lebiota and members of the 
Polish Veterans Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — James O'Kane, president of the Royal 
United Services Institute of Regina, and members of the 
executive of the institute. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I would next like 
introduce a very special group of people, dedicated citizens who 
have worked hard to ensure that a long-overdue project came 
off with such success. I refer to the First World War Memorial 
for which the Deputy Premier turned the sod and of which the 
Premier spoke a few moments earlier. 
 
I'd now ask Lloyd Jones, chairman of the First World War 
Memorial Committee, and his committee members, to please 
rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, the Canadian forces 
and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police continue today the 
proud tradition of these veterans. They're well represented here 
this afternoon. 
 
I'd first ask you to acknowledge the senior Canadian forces 
representative present — a person who has strongly supported 
our Canada Remembers program and indeed supported this 
program in this province in many, many ways — the 
commander of Wing 15, Canadian Forces Base, Moose Jaw, 
Colonel Bill Kalbfleisch. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Next, representing a proud 
Saskatchewan regiment, one which led the way on the beaches 
of Normandy on D-Day 1944 and provides a large share of our 
peacekeepers today, I introduce the present commanding officer 
of the Royal Canadian Rifles, Lieutenant Colonel Wayne Marr. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Representing the navy, Naval 
Lieutenant Barry Leslie, executive officer of the H.M.C.S. 
Queen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The commanding officer of the 16 
Medical Company, Major Donna Robb. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The commanding officer of 734 
Communications Squadron in Regina, Major Joanne Murphy. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — The commander of Cadet 
Detachment Regina, Major Peter Garton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Representing F Division of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police, Superintendent Jack Cronkite. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Representing the training academy of 
the RCMP, Superintendent Les Chipperfield. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I'm informed as well 
that Colonel Frank Hanton, who was a recipient of the 
Distinguished Flying Cross — he is a farmer and he's a 
principal aide-de-camp to the Lieutenant Governor; we've seen 
him in here frequently — I'm told he's here as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Similarly, Mr. Bill de Lint, the 
honorary Consul of the Netherlands, liberated by the Canadian 
soldiers in 1945 — Bill de Lint. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Harold Hague, Chair of the Regina 
Canada Remembers Committee. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — And Gregg Trout, Chair of the  



May 8, 1995 

 
2029 

Estevan committee. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I take my chair. I do so 
in . . . I express, I believe, the view of all members. We deeply 
appreciate the sacrifice and the efforts of these people on our 
behalf. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce eight guests from the city of 
Harbin in the province of Heilongjiang from the Republic of 
China. I would ask them to stand and be recognized. Mr. Ren, 
the deputy mayor of the People's Government of Sui Hua City. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Li, the chief engineer of the 
Bureau of Aquatic Products of Sui Hua Prefecture; Mr. Li, with 
the Fisheries Marketing Development Corporation in Sui Hua 
City; Madam Liu, the division chief of the agriculture division 
of the Heilongjiang Provincial Commission of Science and 
Technology; Mr. Ren, the interpreter from the Foreign Affairs 
Office; Mr. Sheng, the director of Harbin Aquatic Research 
Institute; Mr. Cheng, the division chief of the Foreign Affairs 
Office of Harbin municipal government; and Mr. Xi Feng Chen, 
the division chief of the agriculture and rural village division of 
Harbin Municipal Science and Technology Commission. 
 
On behalf of my colleague, the Hon. Bernie Wiens, Minister of 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management, we are 
pleased to welcome our honoured guests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our guests are here to proceed in the fish species 
transfer project; to learn about the cultural techniques and 
fisheries management of wall-eye and other fish species in 
Saskatchewan; to receive 1 million wall-eye eggs from 
Saskatchewan; to discuss further details on fisheries and 
agriculture cooperation; and to discuss trade opportunities 
between the two provinces. 
 
We look forward to a growing and strengthening relationship 
with our colleagues from the People's Republic of China. 
Welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
take a moment as well to introduce to the Assembly personally, 
a couple of friends who have joined us this afternoon, legion 
members from the Whitewood area, Wayne and Sue Shepherd. 
 
I'd like to welcome them and thank them for their work and 
efforts in representing the legion in our area, and certainly, 
speaking out on behalf of the legion, and what work the legion 
has done through the years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to . . . it is 
indeed with great pride that I introduce Indian and Metis 
veterans. Mr. Speaker, on the Metis side, as was introduced 
before, we have Senator Stan Durocher. I also understand there 
is Alex Daniels that is here from Regina. On the Indian 
veterans, we have had David Greyeyes from Muskeg Lake that 
has been introduced, and also Gilbert McLeod from 
Peepeekisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's also representatives from Cumberland 
veterans: William Carriere, Solomon Goulet, and Joe 
McGillvary. 
 
It is with great respect and honour that I express our deepest 
appreciation to the Indian and Metis veterans of this province. 
Treaty Indians, along with the Metis, joined the Armed Forces 
to fight for our country in large numbers. As an example, since 
World War I, Cumberland House has had 81 veterans. There 
was 26 listed on World War I, 33 in World War II, 22 as 
present-day peacemakers. 
 
Indian and Metis soldiers distinguished themselves in 
preparation and in combat. They played a key role in 
reconnaissance in the front lines. Some were used in 
communications using their own language because the German 
and Italian armies could not decode their messages. We thank 
you again for your bravery, your courage, and your 
determination to save our country, to liberate Europe, and bring 
peace to the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with due respect to all languages, I will now say a 
few words in translation with one of our indigenous languages, 
Cree, that was used to save many of our Canadian and allied 
troops. 
 
(Translation in Cree: Otuyumiw, Mistuhi Kisteneetumuhineek 
isi ka noote nunaskomagok iskoniquneenniyuk uschi 
apeetuhigossanuk ootu Kiseeskachiwunoohk. 
 
Meechet iskonigunenniw igu apectuhigossan. Ki gee 
notinigestumagoniw oomu ootu Kituskeenuw. Isu pogo apo 
nistomitunuw nistosap napewuk ka gee simagunseeganchik 
Kaministigominuhigoskak oochi. 
 
Misowe keesi nugucheehisiyuk uschi Kee neeta notinigewuk. 
Kee apucheetawuk meenu otuiyumeeniyau iga egohachi 
nistootagochik Germunu igu Italiyunu. 
 
Ki nunaskomitinan inigook ka gee soogigapuhistumek oomu 
Kituskeenuw, Ugamuskeeniw meenu ka gee puspiyayek uschi 
Kaginuw unisinniw wuskituskumik. 
 
Aw egosi.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it's very fitting  



May 8, 1995 

 
2030 

that today of all days I should have the opportunity to introduce 
to you and through you to other members of the Legislative 
Assembly, some 57 students from grades 4 and 7 in Ruth 
Pawson School in the north end of Regina. They're seated in 
your west gallery, Mr. Speaker. It will be my joy to meet with 
this group a little bit later, the group that has been here for 
much of the ceremonies that we've enjoyed so far today. But I 
look forward to meeting them, having our photo taken, and 
sharing a refreshment with them. 
 
These students of course are the future that many of our 
veterans were fighting for 50-and-beyond years ago. So I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming the Ruth Pawson School 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, four 
important special guests seated in your gallery. And I'd ask 
them stand as they're introduced. 
 
First of all, Mr. Jackie Dadon, the head of production for 
CineFin Corporation; Gary Kaufman, head of business affairs 
for Buffalo Films; Mark Borde, producer, CineFin Corporation; 
as well as our good friend, Kevin DeWalt, president and owner 
of Minds Eye Pictures here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CineFin Corporation is a Paris-based company 
with offices in Los Angeles involved in the financing of 
production of the feed for worldwide distributions of movie 
production. CineFin is also the production arm of Orion 
Pictures of Los Angeles, whose claim to fame includes films 
like Dances with Wolves, Silence of the Lambs, The 
Terminator, Robocop, Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, just to name a 
few. And not to say that has any application here. 
 
But I do want to say that these individuals have spent the last 
three days looking at potential locations, I guess I would say, in 
Saskatchewan. And I want to say that we wish you the best of 
luck in making a decision to locate some of your future 
productions here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that all members will want to welcome the 
company and companies here today and wish you a great visit 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

VE Day Anniversary 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, well before I emigrated 
from The Netherlands to Canada as a young boy, I was raised to 
appreciate and respect Canadians for their dominant role in the 
liberation of my then country. Genuine, strong gratitude is what 
Dutch people will always feel for Canadian courage and acts of 
valour that resulted in their freedom. The Dutch stand as one  

with Canadians in mourning the loss of thousands of young 
Canadian soldiers lost in the World War II campaign of 
liberation. 
 
Canadians today, who have always enjoyed freedom and have 
never lost it, may find it hard to understand the outpouring of 
joy and celebration by the Dutch even now, 50 years after 
liberation. Consider the impact of liberation on my family. My 
grandmother Jacoba, a widow, and her children — my aunts 
and uncles — sheltered a Jewish family of four from the fall of 
1942 until liberation. One uncle had escaped from a German 
POW (prisoner of war) camp. My parents hid an American flyer 
in their own home. All this in small towns near the German 
border. 
 
This meant living every moment with the oppressive burden of 
fear of being exposed, of being caught out. Liberation, freedom 
— these are more than words to express an absence of 
oppression. They were, 50 years ago, and still are today for my 
family, occasions of tremendous joy, an outpouring of relief, of 
life renewed, and of bottomless gratitude for Canada and the 
Canadian soldiers who made that possible. Thank you, Canada. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On VE Day, I was 
two years old. And while I can't remember the joyous 
celebrations in my home town of Rotterdam, Holland, my 
parents spoke of them often and my mother still does. In fact 
my mother says that my first word was not mommy or daddy 
but Churchill. 
 
The war was a devastating experience for many. My father was 
taken prisoner, and while my mother had no idea where he was 
or even if he were still alive, she became involved with the 
resistance movement, helping where she could. She even 
distributed pamphlets from my baby carriage. Eventually my 
father escaped, and with the help of sympathetic German 
families, he walked back home in time for the celebrations in 
May of 1945. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those of us who are here because of the courage 
and sacrifices of those splendid Canadian men and women, can 
only imagine the unspeakable horror of war. Here in Canada out 
of a population of 12 million people, 1 million served in the 
forces, most as volunteers. Few countries in the west were so 
committed to fighting for the cause of freedom. 
 
My pride in being a Canadian comes from the gratitude of my 
family and the thousands of other Dutch families who saw 
firsthand, 50 years ago, the generosity, the courage, and the 
compassion that have always been characterized by Canadians. 
Those attributes were certainly evident in Holland in May 1945. 
Thank you. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is  



May 8, 1995 

 
2031 

with humble appreciation I join my colleagues today to add my 
words to this important celebration. 
 
Saskatchewan had an important role to play in the British 
Commonwealth air training plan. There were many training 
bases established throughout Saskatchewan, including a 
bombing and gunnery school at Dafoe. There is a farm at Dafoe 
which now has one of the largest farm storage buildings in the 
province. It is used to be a hangar for the bombing and gunnery 
school. A concrete gunnery target is still visible from the 
highway, and private planes are still using some of the runways 
that were needed for training some 50 years ago. 
 
In 1940, Saskatchewan was home to six service flying training 
schools and five elementary flying training schools. In addition, 
there were bombing and gunnery schools, such as Dafoe and 
Mossbank. There were air observer schools at Prince Albert and 
Regina and initial training schools in Saskatchewan and Regina. 
 
Canada was a good choice for many of these training schools: 
our wide open spaces, recruits who were eager to get involved, 
and our proximity to the United States and to Great Britain. The 
sites of these training air schools are an important part of 
Saskatchewan's past. Many young men passed through our 
province over 50 years ago and learned enough about flying to 
make a significant contribution in the war effort. On behalf of 
all my colleagues in this Assembly, I thank all veterans for your 
courage and your dedication to our country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 
past week we've observed, by the televisions in our living 
rooms, the ravages of war. We've observed the triumph in 
victory and the appreciation in remembrance. And I think our 
hearts have been moved as we've just watched the proceedings 
that have taken place and the celebrations across the world. And 
certainly in many nations in Europe . . . were saying thank you 
and remembering the time when their land was liberated. 
 
And I can only add, Mr. Speaker, that while we've had 
comments about the wars to end all wars, in this great country 
of ours we certainly have a lot to be thankful for. And I believe 
while we celebrate today, it certainly is imperative that as a 
nation we continue to push for and strive for lasting peace, as 
we see men and women, boys and girls in parts of the world, 
have to continually live with and suffer under war. 
 
And while we pay tribute to the legionnaires, our Armed Forces 
and the services represented here today, and we say thank you, 
let us only pray that we can have our part in indeed making not 
only this nation one of the greatest nations to live in, but 
working to build that better world. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday it was my honour to 
attend Moose Jaw's VE Day anniversary celebration and to lay a 
wreath on behalf of the province, along with the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. Perhaps because of our closeness to 15 
Wing, where hundreds of Canadians and Allied pilots earned 
their wings, Moose Javians feel a special pride in the service 
and victory of our military. 
 
I am pleased to note that this summer a group of Moose Jaw 
youth, three generations younger than the veterans of VE Day, 
will pay tribute to fallen Canadians on Dutch soil. The Moose 
Jaw children's choir has been invited to an international choir 
festival in Arnhem, Holland. During the festival, on the day 
after Canada Day, they will pay a special visit to the Canadian 
war cemetery and lay a wreath of their own. 
 
In doing that, Mr. Speaker, they will say thanks to our veterans 
in the most meaningful way possible — with their youth, their 
freedom, and with hearts filled with the joy of song. Mr. 
Speaker, Moose Javians feel that the ultimate memorial to the 
sacrifices of war is the preservation and celebration of peace. 
None say that better than our children. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recall VE Day as 
a warm and sunny day in Saskatoon. People were out working 
in their lawns and gardens when neighbours who had been 
listening to their radios inside came running out, crying, the war 
is over, the war is over! There was much hugging and joyful, 
spontaneous celebration, for there was scarce a household 
which was not directly affected by the loss or absence of loved 
ones. 
 
In our household the news was bittersweet. My mother and 
sister and I followed my father, from the time he enlisted in 
1939, from Dundurn to Chilliwack to Trois Rivières, from 
where he embarked for Europe with his division of the 
Saskatoon Light Infantry in 1943. 
 
Then we returned to Saskatoon to live with my maternal 
grandparents. Besides a son-in-law  my father  my 
grandmother had three sons all enlisted, all in Europe, one each 
in the army, navy, and air force. As far was we knew on VE 
Day, all were safe but one. One uncle had gone missing in 
action a year before. 
 
I will never forget the day the courier brought the telegram and 
my grandmother could only read as far as, we regret to inform 
you, before she gave way to tears. 
 
Veterans began to return shortly after VE Day. Ration books 
could be discarded and life began to improve. My own father 
was involved in the paperwork of the decommissioning process 
in Britain and returned in September of 1945. As for my uncle, 
it turned out that as a dispatch rider in Italy his motorcycle had 
hit a land mine, and he did return home eventually, although  



May 8, 1995 

 
2032 

wounded. 
 
It is remembrances like these, Mr. Speaker, which make us 
every day thank God and all the veterans and peacekeepers of 
this country for the peace and freedom that the children and 
grandchildren of our generation have known. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — Mr. Speaker, sir, I was too young to be 
involved directly in the Second World War, but I was old 
enough to be a target. We had four bombs in our roof. 
Fortunately they didn't explode. Possibly they came from Oscar 
Schindler's factory. 
 
Nevertheless my memories of VE Day are definitely sound and 
light. The sounds were when we were awakened by the church 
bells from St. Luke's Parish Church just down the road, and by 
carillons of St. Hillary's, St. Mary's, and All Saints. In those 
days, sir, there were real bells in every parish church. 
 
And from the ships in Wallasey Pool, Birkenhead ship yards, 
and the Mersey, fog horns boomed out triumphantly. In the 
back streets were parties with tables and chairs in the roadway. 
Flags and bunting were everywhere. The dot, dot, dot, dash was 
painted on roads and walls. On factories we had paintings of the 
Union Jack and good old Winnie and good old Joe, meaning 
Stalin of course. 
 
Unfortunately I lived on the main street with all the buses and 
all the trucks so we couldn't have a party, and we felt a bit left 
out of this, Raymond Bott, a colleague and I. 
 
But that night it was the lights that struck me. For over five 
years the street lamps had been blacked out completely. Every 
window had to be completely covered and blacked out to 
prevent bombers from using them for guidance in their deadly 
missions. 
 
But on this night, May 8, 1945, everything changed. Everything 
became brilliantly illuminated and I realized the significance of 
Vera Lynn's song: when the lights go on again all over the 
world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Crow Benefit Pay-out 
 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
could you outline your policy on distribution of the Crow 
pay-out? Specifically, how is the Crow pay-out going to be 
distributed to those farmers who are in the process of 
purchasing Crown lands in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — On the pay-out of Crown land, if 
somebody has an agreement for sale that they are buying the  

Crown land or have boughten it, we will pass the full Crow 
benefit on to those producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 
you have made the commitment to pass the Crow pay-out on to 
producers. However, that isn't exactly what you're doing, is it, 
Mr. Minister? I have a letter here that you sent to one farmer 
who is purchasing Crown land, Mr. Jim Barmby from Lang. 
 
Now I understand that you sent out a lot of these letters to 
people in the province, and this letter outlines how this money 
is going to be distributed. First the letter says the proceeds will 
be applied against any arrears outstanding on the sales 
agreement. That seems fair enough. 
 
But then you say that any remaining funds will be applied 
against the principal balance. Now even if the farmer is right up 
to date in his payments, like Mr. Barmby is . . . Mr. Minister, 
why is it necessary for you to get first claim on all of this 
money? Why don't you pass it on to the producers and let them 
decide how they will use the money that they don't need applied 
to their principal and maybe need for spring seeding 
commitments in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Speaker, we've committed to 
pass the money on whether . . . obviously if there's arrears 
owing, we would deduct that from the arrears, and we'll deduct 
it from the money that's owed to us on the land. 
 
I don't know how much fairer you can get than that. I don't 
think other lenders, or other people who in the same situation, 
may even be doing that. Technically, as I understand the federal 
legislation, it will be who owns the land as of February 27. If 
we have title to the land, we obviously would get the cheque. 
 
What we're saying is we're going to pass it on to the farmer — 
the full amount of it — to the people who are in the process of 
buying it because that seems like a fair thing to do, to us. And 
that's what we're doing. We're passing on the full amount to the 
producer. He gets the full benefit of that payment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Minister, that 
is a very confusing kind of an answer. You can't have it and not 
have it, it doesn't seem to me. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, what you are effectively doing is breaking 
another contract with farmers. Even if a farmer is right up to 
date in his payments, you are forcing him to make an additional 
payment on his loan. You just have to get your hands on every 
possible dollar you can, don't you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Now this money is supposed to be used to offset significant 
increases in transportation costs, yet you find it necessary to  



May 8, 1995 

 
2033 

take it away and apply it against land payments even if those 
payments are right up to date, Mr. Minister. That's not fair. 
 
Again, Mr. Minister, farmers want to make their own decisions 
on how to spend their money instead of having you do it for 
them. They don't think you know best. They think they know 
best how their money needs to be spent. 
 
Will you change this policy and see to it that this money goes to 
the producers as per your previous commitment which you have 
made some time ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
commitment that we made previously was that when we found 
out from the federal government whether or not there was going 
to be money, we would make a decision as to how to pass it on. 
I don't know what more the member opposite can ask for. We're 
saying in the situation where there is an agreement for sale, 
even though the federal legislation doesn't oblige us to pass this 
money on, we're going to pass it on. I don't know how much 
fairer you could be than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Montreal Lake Area Co-Management Plan 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for Indian and Metis 
Affairs. 
 
Madam Minister, as you are aware, there are growing problems 
with respect to the co-management plan being proposed by you 
and the federal government for the Montreal Lake area. This 
agreement transfers sweeping powers to a council 50 per cent 
controlled by the Montreal Lake Band, with 25 per cent going 
to the provincial and the federal governments. 
 
This agreement, Madam Minister, affects 3 million acres, 
including the entire Prince Albert National Park. This is a land 
mass roughly equivalent to three times the size of Prince 
Edward Island. And yet the taxpayers, property owners, and 
RMs (rural municipality), have yet to be consulted on this issue. 
As a matter of fact, negotiations had been going on for over a 
year before they knew about it. 
 
Madam Minister, what is your role in this débâcle and what are 
you planning to do to rectify this situation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'd like to thank the member for his 
question. 
 
I will start out by affirming that this is Minister Irwin's plan — 
the Liberal federal minister responsible for Indian Affairs — 
and that we have made clear several times to him that this is not 
our process and that we do not agree with the statements he's 
making and do not agree with the way he is conducting himself 
regarding co-management. 

We do have a process in Saskatchewan by which we discuss 
these issues and they do involve bringing all stakeholders 
affected into the discussion, and it's an orderly and systematic 
process that includes all of those who may be affected. 
 
You've seen in other situations where we've adopted a willing 
partners type of approach to resolution of these kinds of issues, 
so we would just have to ask Mr. Irwin to discipline himself 
and to get into the process that we've set up here to deal with 
these things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam Minister, 
it appears there is certainly a difference of opinion between you 
and the federal government and I think it's about time your 
government recognized its responsibility and accepted it. 
 
The federal Minister of Indian Affairs, Ron Irwin, said it was 
your government that initiated this deal. In fact, this morning on 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio, he said the 
Saskatchewan government invited him to put together a 
co-management deal in the province and that everything was 
going fine until a few months ago. 
 
Also, the chief of the Montreal Lake Indian Band blames you 
for the trouble with municipalities. He said, and I quote: one 
thing the provincial government cannot back down from is that 
they left the RMs out to dry and they did not inform them of the 
paper that was presented. 
 
Madam Minister, the chief of the Indian band has said you left 
people out to dry. So let's start with the basics and get you on 
the record. Do you support the co-management proposal — yes 
or no? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll make another attempt to explain this 
to you, that this is something that Minister Irwin is doing on his 
own. We have conveyed to him in writing several times that we 
do not agree with his conduct in this matter, and that we instead 
would like him to follow the orderly process that we have 
already laid out for co-management discussions. 
 
It really is incumbent on the federal government to come to 
grips with these issues of jurisdiction, and because they're 
unwilling to do that, they keep shuffling it off in these kinds of 
politically reckless sort of arrangements; that they're trying to 
replace some actual legal and responsible decisions in terms of 
jurisdiction that are clearly in their court to make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, it seems quite convenient 
to blame the federal government when you invited the federal 
government to, in fact, ask them to . . . it was your government 
that initiated the deal. And, Madam Minister, recent media 
accounts are saying that landowners and residents of villages 
and rural municipalities are stunned that such sweeping changes 
are being contemplated. 



May 8, 1995 

 
2034 

And that was the same concern that was raised with me in 
Maidstone a week ago. Madam Minister, is it your intention to 
not only consult but actually listen to these concerns? Or better 
yet, is your intention to seek their approval before any 
documents or agreements are signed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The provincial government has no 
intention to sign any agreements that fall outside our legal 
responsibility/authority to do so. And whatever is contemplated 
by the federal minister is contemplated by himself alone, and I 
guess whoever else chooses to join him on this particular path, 
but that certainly isn't ourselves. 
 
We have a process in place by which we discuss these things. 
He's not following that process, and we will continue to remind 
him of what the process is. And I can only say to you today that 
we have no intention of going down this path, and we have 
made that clear to the federal minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, Madam Minister, 
can the individuals or the people living in this area of the 
province . . . are you giving them your assurances today that 
their approval will be sought before any documents or 
agreements are signed? Is that what you're saying, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can only speak for the provincial 
government, but the provincial government will not be party to 
any agreements that haven't involved the willing participation of 
the stakeholders in a full discussion of whatever resolution 
would be made. So yes, I can give you that insurance for those 
matters which fall within our jurisdiction. Other matters you 
may have to take up with the federal minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government's choice to ignore the wishes of businesses across 
the province and implement the new Crown Tendering 
Agreement speaks volumes about this NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government. This government and this policy will cost 
more and could cost local workers valuable jobs. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business has joined 
the fight against this costly tendering policy. And I quote from a 
recent letter that states costs for utility customers and taxpayers 
inevitably goes up anywhere from 5 to 20 per cent above 
previous competitive bidding. And I'd like to table that letter 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the Premier today. How much public pressure 
will it take for you to admit that implementing this policy was 
wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
we are monitoring this. We believe that this program will prove 
itself when it's had an opportunity to be in effect for a 
construction season. There's every reason to believe that this 
program isn't going to cost the taxpayer anything, that it will not 
cost the taxpayer anything. We are going to monitor it; we have 
said that. At the end of the year we'll review it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it 
was a week ago that I raised that $115 million more to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers for your program. Mr. Speaker, the 
public is not pleased with this agreement. The Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business has compiled a list of over 
300 contracting companies who oppose this union preference 
policy. That's over 300 companies who employ thousands of 
people in this province who oppose your Crown Tendering 
Agreement. 
 
And I'd like to read a Leader-Post argument, May 4, 1995, and I 
quote: 
 
 Romanow says the policy is designed to help keep 

skilled jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
 But he conceded it may be reviewed if it has a negative 

impact on companies and workers. 
 
The negative impact is real, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question again to the Premier. Over 300 companies and 
employers can't be wrong; will you commit to ending this 
agreement today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I'd remind the member 
from Shaunavon that there's nothing unique about this policy. If 
you find it so offensive, you might want to have your leader 
speak to the federal government; they've had this very same 
policy in effect for decades and it's worked fine for them. 
 
This is a bit of Liberal policy in fact which we're trying here. 
We believe, as has been the experience at the national level, that 
it isn't going to cost anything. That's been the experience in 
Ottawa and we believe that that will be the experience here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I'll tell you 
what's unique  and it's only in Saskatchewan  you're willing 
to give up the jobs of workers and companies to bring in a 
union-only policy. That's what's unique. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown Tendering Agreement has only been 
implemented for a very short period of time and already one 
company is moving out of Saskatchewan because of this new 
tendering policy. The president of Mechanical Management and  



May 8, 1995 

 
2035 

Consulting Inc. stated in a recent news article, and I quote: 
That's why I moved my company headquarters out of 
Saskatchewan. And he went on to say that as long as 
Saskatchewan maintains its current labour and taxation policies, 
its tax base will continue to shrink and its economy will suffer. 
 
And I'd like to send a copy of that letter across over to the 
Premier, so he could perhaps read along, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: how can you stand by this policy 
when in just a few short weeks it is already clear that companies 
are leaving the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Perhaps the member would just send 
the written question over and then it might be easier to 
understand. 
 
I want to say to the member from Shaunavon, that this policy 
establishes a level playing-field. It'll be the same for union and 
non-union firms. I also want to say to the member opposite that 
this is in real distinction with the way Liberals hand out 
contracts when they're actually in office. The Prime Minister is 
accused of awarding a contract to his son-in-law — that's the 
way the Liberals do business. That's not how this government 
does business. We award the contracts on a fair, even, level 
plane. That's our . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order! Before I 
call on the next . . . Order. I want to ask the member from 
Shaunavon that in the future, if he asks a question, I think he 
should have the courtesy of listening to the answer. 
 

Government Financial Planning 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, your 
government is still refusing to give Saskatchewan people a 
complete picture with regard to the province's finances. The 
very first point the auditor makes in his spring report is the 
government needs to present the Assembly with a complete 
financial plan. 
 
The auditor says the '95-96 budget is incomplete because the 
General Revenue Fund only accounts for about 60 per cent of 
the government's activities. 
 
 As a result (the auditor says), comparisons of planned 

and actual . . . results for the Government as a whole 
(are not) . . . possible. Such comparisons are needed to 
understand and assess the Government's financial 
performance. 

 
Madam Minister, why won't you follow the auditor's advice? 
Why won't you include the Crowns as part of the annual 
budget? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, again he's using selective evidence. What he's not 
reading is what else the auditor said about our accounting 
practices. He said they're amongst the best in Canada. And in 
terms of our accounting, we give a full and complete 
accounting of all activities of the government, including the 
Crown corporations. 
 
Now he's talking about budgeting. The way we budget is the 
way the vast majority of provinces in Canada budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand proud of the accomplishments of this 
government in terms of opening the books and ensuring that we 
are accountable to the people of the province for the finances of 
the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
question's relevant because of the answers of Madam Minister 
last Friday in debate on a Bill. And this is a problem, Mr. 
Speaker, because during that debate the minister admitted to 
increasing taxes by a net of $225 million — not the $220 
million decrease that she's been bragging about in recent days. 
 
The minister says that she raised taxes in total by $225 million, 
but she couldn't tell us the size of the increases in utility rates 
which, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, can be another form of 
taxation. 
 
So even though the Minister of Finance sits here today, she 
can't tell us about 40 per cent of the government's spending. 
Now, Madam Minister, wouldn't the picture be a lot clearer if 
the annual budget included all government operations as 
proposed in our Taxpayers' Protection Act? 
 
Why not amend your balanced budget legislation to include this 
provision, so that we could see the entire picture, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I would welcome the 
opportunity to answer the member's question because it was 
very, very interesting — the former premier of the province, 
standing up, trying to say that a utility rate increase is a tax. 
That means when Alberta Power, a private company, increases 
power rates in Alberta, that's a tax. That means when Bell 
Canada, a private company in Ontario, increases telephone 
rates, it's a tax. 
 
But what was so absolutely revealing was the comment by the 
former premier that you might have some money in the Crown 
corporations; why wouldn't you just move it across and spend it 
— and spend it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I say to the members opposite is our  



May 8, 1995 

 
2036 

Balanced Budget Act, if the members would care to pass it, 
does cover all the operations of the government because the 
debt management plan applies to all parts of government 
including Crown corporations. So I invite them to join us in 
passing our balanced budget legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister knows that just rings hollow. In all other jurisdictions, 
there's a review process where the public can understand why 
those utility rates go up. The only review process we've got in 
this province is the Premier's former law partner, Don Ching, 
sitting on high at CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), saying we need some more money to balance 
the budget. There's no review process, Madam Minister. It's 
done in the dark of night over at CIC, and you know it. 
 
Now by your own admission on Friday, you've hit 
Saskatchewan taxpayers with a net tax increase of $225 million 
since 1991. That's net, Madam Minister, including the tax cuts 
you like to talk about. Now we don't even know what the utility 
rate increases have come from because you either don't know or 
you refuse to tell us. 
 
The point is, Madam Minister, isn't it time taxpayers started to 
see some protection from you simply raising more revenue by 
gouging taxpayers with your tax and utility rate increases. Isn't 
time we had some protection like the taxpayer protection Act? 
You made a good start, Madam Minister, on Friday, admitting 
you actually raised taxes since '91. Take one more step, Madam 
Minister. Protect Saskatchewan tax. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member must have a 
question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I do, sir. Madam Minister, will you pass our 
taxpayer protection Act so that you cannot gouge taxpayers in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite. You do have to have a sense of humour to sit in this 
legislature, to hear the Tories talk about creating a PURC 
(Public Utilities Review Commission) when they were the ones 
that disbanded it; to hear the Tories talk about taxes, the party 
that came to power talking about cutting the sales tax, cutting 
the income tax, cutting the gas tax — what they did was raise 
the gas tax, raise the sales tax, raise the income tax. 
 
If we did not have the debt that these members opposite created 
for this province, if we didn't have to pay over $800 million a 
year in interest, we wouldn't have to have an E&H (education 
and health) tax in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have opened the books of the province. We 
have a new plan for the finances of the province, which 
includes tax cuts and paying down the debt. That's where we  

stand. Where do you stand? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Madam Minister, you know full well that you 
don't have to create another PURC. There's another piece of 
legislation before this House that if you had the courage to use 
it, Madam Minister, would put a majority of your members in 
charge of reviewing those utility rate increases. And I'd sooner 
have the New Democrat members of this House, Madam 
Minister, review it than the Premier's friend, Don Ching, over at 
CIC because at least it would have to be done out in the open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Now, Madam Minister, why don't you start 
. . . if you are scared, if you are afraid of The Taxpayers' 
Protection Act, then go back and at least pass the piece of 
legislation that would allow the members of this Assembly to 
review those rates before you impose them. 
 
Would you at least do that, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, you know I fear that 
the Tories have developed the Liberal disease, the one hand not 
knowing what the other hand is doing. On the one hand was 
their platform released last week, in which they spend $170 
million cutting the sales tax. And they find it, sort of, they say, 
somewhere. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sort of. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Sort of. By cuts that people are 
supposed to figure out where those cuts are. That's on the one 
hand. 
 
But then on the other hand, which is what they're talking about 
today, is their Act. And in there they're going to reduce the debt 
of the province in 25 years, which happens to cost 
$500-and-some million a year. Now where the heck is that 
money coming from? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition parties can't go out promising 
everything to everybody  tax cuts, paying down the debt  
and saying, I don't know where the money's coming from; you 
figure it out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they want is a government with a plan where 
everything is laid out, and only we provide that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Employment Offices 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to either the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister 
of Labour. It's in reference to the labour force statistics which  



May 8, 1995 

 
2037 

we've just been perusing. 
 
We note that agricultural employment, Minister, has increased 
3,000 from the March 1995 levels, to 72,000. And that's a very 
significant number. 
 
Largely responsible, Minister, for these job placements are the 
local agricultural employment offices, which are of course a 
federal jurisdiction. They are to be closed, we hear, in 
September and those jobs will be no longer be placed. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you doing, first of all, to save the jobs of 
the people who work in these offices, and what are you going to 
do to provide an alternative for this service in the province of 
Saskatchewan to place agricultural workers in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: — Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite quite rightly points out that the agricultural 
employment service centres are — I believe seven of them in 
the province — are being closed down by the federal 
government by September, I believe. We believe this is going to 
be a hardship on Saskatchewan farmers; I've written a letter to 
the federal minister expressing our concerns about it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, again we will not be able to backfill all of the 
cuts that the federal government is making, particularly in the 
field of agriculture and transportation. They've hit western 
Canada very, very hard, and this is just one more hit on the 
agricultural industry that we will . . . (inaudible) . . . be unable 
to backfill that service for farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislature Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 
of a Bill to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to written 
question no. 74, I believe, I would move it be converted to 
motions for return (debatable), and question no. 75. 
 
The Speaker:  Question no. 75, motion for return debate. 
 
(1445) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 27 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, and to make a 
Consequential Amendment to The Municipal Board Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 29 — An Act to 
amend the Rural Municipality Act, 1989 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What are the 
implications of taxes that the minister I'm sure is aware of . . . 
are the activities of the federal government in its relationship 
with provinces? I notice recently that, as a result of the federal 
budget, there have been some revenue implications for the 
province of Saskatchewan that could have some impact on our 
revenue and our taxation. 
 
Would the minister have any . . . could provide the public with 
an indication of, briefly, what implications on our revenue the 
federal government budget, the federal budget, had on our level 
of revenue as it might impact on our need for taxation. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, very little impact. Less than a million dollars from 
what was in this budget has any impact on our budget. Most of 
the tax measures . . . gas tax has no impact for us, for example. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So on this budget, so I understand, that there 
has been really no appreciable — not to discount a million 
dollars, but in terms of the budget here of a $5 billion budget 
approximately — there's been no appreciable impact on the 
revenue for the province of Saskatchewan. It's pretty much 
neutral. It's about a million dollars is all the revenue impact and 
that would be a million dollars negative for us? Or how did it 
wash out? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, just about half a 
million more. But this is just from taxes. We're not talking 
about any of the expenditure items that they announced. But if 
you look at the revenue items that were announced in this 
budget, half a million at most effect on our budget this year . . .  



May 8, 1995 

 
2038 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would that be 
true over the last few years, '93-94, 4 and 5, or has it been pretty 
neutral; or have they offloaded or have they taken away, added? 
If this year is worth half a million dollars to us, did that kind of 
make up for anything in the past? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last year and this 
year there would be a negative, if you look at the whole picture 
of what was announced in the budget. Every time they change 
unemployment insurance it means hundreds and hundreds of 
dollars more in welfare payments. So each and every budget 
they have offloaded onto the province much more in costs than 
you've ever gained in revenue. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I suspected that, Madam Minister. Could you 
or your officials just briefly itemize . . . I mean what areas did 
they offload? Where did we get hit and what did it cost us? Just 
the major categories and in part where, in your view as the 
minister, where you think it impacted the people of 
Saskatchewan more. 
 
And going back to the other day, was it a balance of an impact 
on individuals versus the business community? Or did it hit 
pretty much everybody on a 50/50 basis? But generally just the 
impact in the major categories over the last few years would be 
very helpful. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, clearly one of the biggest areas of offloading has been 
the area of agriculture, which of course in the budget they 
announced the elimination of the Crow benefit. They 
announced 30 per cent cuts in other farm subsidies. So there has 
been significant reductions there. 
 
There's also been reductions in all social programs. They've 
frozen their commitments in health and post-secondary 
education, which has meant reductions. And a major source of 
offloading has been changes in unemployment insurance and 
other similar social programs. 
 
Another decision which was very detrimental to the people of 
Saskatchewan was transferring responsibility for treaty Indians 
from the federal jurisdiction to the province. As soon as treaty 
Indians leave a reserve they're now the responsibility of the 
province, so that has cost us significantly. 
 
Our estimate is that over the last decade Saskatchewan people 
have absorbed about $522 million in cuts of one kind or another 
that have come from the federal government. The most dramatic 
of these have been in the areas that I've described, and they 
continue into the future. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thanks, Madam Minister. Would you have a 
brief summary of what you think this has cost Saskatchewan in 
the last . . . in your administration, since '91-92 to date, and how 
you think it might have balanced? Give me a ballpark on 
individuals versus businesses. 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — A rough estimate would be about a 
billion and a half in the '90s have been offloaded from the 
federal government to the people of Saskatchewan in one way 
or another from the programs that I've talked to you about — 
agriculture, social programs, across the piece . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 1.5 billion has been offloaded onto the people 
of Saskatchewan in terms of things the federal government used 
to cover, they no longer cover, and are having to be covered by 
the province or else have been eliminated. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well let's . . . there's two different figures there, 
Madam Minister. You said it was about 522 million in the last 
10 years. Then I asked you for the last four years and you said 
it's 1.5 billion. So it doesn't . . . it just doesn't work. Could you 
or your officials give me a . . . over the last . . . since your 
administration came in, what the cuts have been to the province 
of Saskatchewan in terms of the federal government 
offloading? 
 
I mean you'd have them, I'm sure, quite readily available. And it 
is a little confusing when you said over the last 10 years it was 
522 million and then you said over the last five years it was 1.5 
billion. Now that's quite a difference. 
 
So perhaps we could take another run at that and just . . . Over 
the last four years, or since your administration came in, what 
have been the cuts imposed on the people of Saskatchewan 
from the federal budget in terms of offloading to the people? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. Actually the document I'm looking at is in the budget, 
page 82 in the . . . 86 in the budget. And there's a graph there 
and it goes through all of the different years. 
 
The correction is 522 is 1995-96, that one year alone. But the 
graph goes and it starts with . . . what it has here is 1991-92, 
497; 1993-94, 499; 1995-96, 522. And then if you look at the 
pie chart in the budget, they break down where those reductions 
have been — 278 million for established programs financing, 
which is health, education, post-secondary education; 
agriculture, 150 million; treaty Indians, 43 million; and other, 
51 million — that would include things like unemployment 
insurance changes. 
 
So the pie chart shows the distribution in the different areas, 
and the graphs show the reductions each and every year. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Madam Minister. To finish that 
picture, do you have a similar pie diagram or chart in terms of 
the province's contribution to health and education, rural 
municipalities, urban municipalities, in terms of local 
government financing? 
 
In other words, have we been keeping up our help and 
assistance to health, education, and rural municipalities over the 
same period of time? If you've got a pie diagram and a chart for 
the feds, do you have one for the province that would sort of 
give us the same summary over the last few years? 



May 8, 1995 

 
2039 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Not exactly, but on page 44 there's a 
breakdown of the spending of the government, comparing 
1991, 1995-96, and projected 1998-99. And it shows the 
distribution of spending. 
 
And as I say, that's on page 44 of the budget. And what you find 
there is that the province's contributions to health are about the 
same, will be about the same, this year as they were in 1991 in 
terms of the pie chart — similar numbers in education and very 
similar on social programs. 
 
So I think the distribution is very similar in terms of the amount 
that's being spent in each area. 
 
Mr. Devine: — So are you saying, Madam Minister, that your 
administration has maintained the expenditures to third parties 
— that is, rural municipalities, urban municipalities and your 
grants to universities and to education and to health care and to 
social services. In terms of third parties, other levels of 
government, have you maintained your expenditures there? Or 
have there been, as they say, any indications or could you tell 
me of any indications of what are called corresponding 
offloading to other levels of government that have been 
experienced? 
 
And obviously we've heard of levels of offloading from local 
politicians elected at other levels. So I'm trying to find out 
where it all washes out. How have the rural municipalities, for 
example, been treated? And then we can go through each one of 
them. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. What I said is . . . no, we do not have tables like that. 
The only tables we have in the breakdown is on page 44 of the 
budget, and it talks of the pie of spending, what percentages 
goes to health; of the pie of spending, what percentage goes to 
education. The information the member is mentioning, no, we 
do not have that. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, percentages don't tell 
us a lot about how the municipalities are doing. I think you 
would admit that or acknowledge that. Do you have any 
indication, or do your officials have any indication, whether the 
budget this year, for example, increased or decreased the 
amount of money that went to rural municipalities in terms of 
revenue sharing? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I would say is that of course is in the Estimates. 
The member opposite will know that that has been frozen, but 
they will also be participating in a percentage of VLT (video 
lottery terminal) revenues. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, it would be very 
helpful in going through this Bill to know how people have 
fared in terms of taxation at the local level as a result of your 
administration. And we would just like for you to have some 
summaries to present to us. 
 

If you are going to change income tax but at the same time 
you've had some impact on local taxation . . . I think, you know, 
members of the legislature used to be in municipal government. 
Some were on city council, some now sitting in here in the 
legislature. 
 
City councils have to perhaps raise taxes to meet their budgets 
if in fact money doesn't come from provincial governments or 
doesn't come from federal governments. And it would be . . . 
I'm sure you have the numbers, Madam Minister, in terms of the 
amount of money and revenue sharing that has gone to third 
levels of government. And I politely ask you again, would you 
have the increases or decreases and the amount of money that 
goes to municipalities? 
 
I mean, the Department of Finance does this all the time. I'm 
sure you have that because obviously that has some impact on 
their level of taxation, and if it's all awash that's fine. If they've 
had to bear some more costs, therefore they've probably had to 
raise some taxes. If they've got some windfalls, they probably 
could hold the line on taxes or reduce them. 
 
And I wonder if the minister's officials . . . I asked again. If you 
could just give us a summary of whether you're spending more 
for municipal governments or you're spending less, and how 
much that was. You were kind enough to give me the numbers 
on the federal government in terms of offloading or in terms of 
differences. Could you do the same for municipal governments? 
 
I think it's only fair and reasonable to get informations on the 
two levels of government because you're in the middle. You 
deal with the federal government, and of course you deal with 
the municipalities. It's not right that you just talk about the feds 
and not talk about how the provincial municipal governments 
have fared. 
 
Again I would ask your officials, or ask you to through to your 
officials to . . . could they give us the net change in revenue to 
third parties, and particularly to municipal governments in the 
province, over the last four, five . . . or last four years? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what we announced in the budget is a freeze in 
monies to municipal governments across the province. They'll 
also participating in the VLT (video lottery terminal) revenue, 
10 per cent of the VLT revenue, in some way. 
 
I'm sorry we do not have that information. We're here, I would 
remind the member opposite through the chairman, to discuss a 
tax Bill. We do not have those cumulative figures; they're not 
available. And I'm sorry; we do not have the capacity to put 
them together right now. 
 
Now if the member has questions about the tax Bill, we of 
course would be most pleased to answer questions about the tax 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, my questions about the 
tax Bill are as . . . in the way that you're bringing forth this Bill,  



May 8, 1995 

 
2040 

perhaps you could be more generous when we get the total 
picture. But as we heard in question period and we've heard 
from the auditor and we're hearing again, we don't have the 
whole picture. 
 
Well what we would like and what the taxpayer would like is 
. . . just what is the financial picture in terms of revenues to the 
municipalities? You said, Madam Minister, that there was a 
freeze in revenue sharing to the municipalities in this budget. 
Could you give me therefore what it was. I'm sure that you have 
it at your fingertips. Was it froze last year, and was it froze the 
year before, or was there an increase or a decrease? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. The practice of the government is to announce 
third-party grants two years out. It is frozen this year, 1995-96; 
it is frozen '96-97, but there will be participation in the 10 per 
cent VLT revenue in some way by these other parties. 
 
Mr. Devine: — I got that, Madam Minister. Could you tell me 
if it was froze in '94-95 and '93-94? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, that information will be available in the budgets. We 
do not have all the past budgets here, but it would be easy to get 
research staff to . . . your research staff to look back and find 
out what it was. I don't have that information here as of now. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Minister, that's very difficult to fathom that you 
wouldn't know whether you had increases or decreases in 
revenue sharing to the municipalities over the last couple three 
years. You had the total increases in taxes, the total decreases in 
taxes, and the net change in taxes over the last four years the 
last time we were in this . . . discussing this Bill. That was 
available. This is a lot less complicated than that. 
 
Madam Minister, I would just ask you to . . . Could you have 
your officials — we have time this afternoon — could you ask 
your officials just to check the last two or three budgets and 
find out if the contributions to the municipalities went up, 
down, or went sideways in the last two or three years. I don't 
think that's too much to ask because we could begin to get a 
sense of any success or  if you will  burden, pain on 
taxation to the local people because obviously there is only one 
taxpayer. That's at the local level. And if you change taxes 
there, you're going to have an impact on the municipalities as 
well as health and education. 
 
So, Madam Minister, do you think your officials could get those 
numbers, perhaps later this afternoon? Or would they be able to 
just make a phone call and say, what's the revenue sharing been 
over the last three years in our jurisdiction? It's probably a 
phone call, Madam Minister. Do you think we could do that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that 
somebody's research staff could easily look back over past 
budgets and find out the number. But, Mr. Chairman, I just 
would remind the members opposite that what we're looking at  

is a tax Bill to cut taxes in the province of Saskatchewan, to 
reduce the income tax rate for a significant number of 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, what we're seeing here is 
your reluctance to be honest with the taxpayer. You've said  
and it's relevant  that there's a freeze in revenue sharing in 
'95-96, '96-97. Now that's important for us to know when we're 
looking at taxation. 
 
Would the minister tell me . . . perhaps her officials have . . . 
what their estimate of the rate of inflation or cost of doing 
business is for the municipalities on those two years that she's 
frozen the money going to the municipalities. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — The member opposite would know 
that we don't do particular estimates for municipalities so that 
the estimates we have would be for the province. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, we're going to be here an 
awful long time on this Bill on taxation if we don't get a little 
bit more cooperation. And we want to know why it's necessary 
that you have these particular provisions in the Bill. And to 
know that, Madam Minister, we need to know how the taxpayer 
has been faring. 
 
The taxpayer at the local level picks up the slack that you and 
the federal government impose on them because of offloading, 
and anybody knows that. Any municipal councillor knows it. 
Any member of the legislature knows it. Anybody involved in 
any kind of government knows that it is this three-way 
contribution that is necessary. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I would respectfully like to know, on 
behalf of the taxpayers, if you can give us the rate of inflation 
that you expect when you put together your budget so that we 
know how much the taxation has an impact on local people. 
Then we have an idea of what the cost is. And if you've cut 
education and cut health care or cut your contributions to 
municipalities, obviously there's another level of funding that 
the taxpayer has to come up with. 
 
So I ask you again, could you reconsider and provide us with as 
much information as possible so that we could get an idea on 
behalf of municipal councillors, the city of Regina, city of 
Saskatoon, local RMs, rural and urban municipalities, how they 
have fared under your jurisdiction? I mean just give us a rough 
go at it. People are going to wonder what you're afraid of. If 
you've done a pretty good job, you shouldn't be ashamed of it. 
You'd say, well we've treated them fairly, and here it is. I don't 
know why we necessarily have to have a difficulty here . . . just 
basically what has it been, how is it, so we can get a rough 
estimate of how the taxpayer is faring under this tax provision. 
 
And again I point out, with respect, that you seem to have the 
summary of the offloading from the federal government; I think 
you would have something similar for municipal governments 
because you deal with them. And it's a little strange — it seems 
to me — that you would avoid that. 



May 8, 1995 

 
2041 

If you think you've done a good job, just lay them out for us, 
and we'll have an idea of what we're talking about. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, much of the information he's asking for is contained 
in our budget document. And I can refer him to page 32. We do 
not have a table. We are not going to provide a table on the 
municipal side. It doesn't exist. 
 
But what we do have is . . . you asked for the Canadian price 
index, inflation. I would remind the member opposite that the 
budget says 1.2 per cent. And you can look at all the 
assumptions right throughout on page 32 of this year's budget. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Would the minister give us, just because she 
has officials and I don't here, what the budget was or your 
contribution is to municipal governments, third party people, 
Health, Education, and Municipal Government for '95-96? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Freeze. It was exactly the same as it 
was the year before. 
 
Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, I would remind him 
again what we're talking about is a tax Bill to cut taxes for 
individuals in this province. But what I would say is page 93 of 
the budget . . . it's a matter of adding up third party grants on 
page 93 of the budget. 
 
So you can do Health, 1.5. You can add up Education, 880. 
You can add up part of Municipal Government at 198 although 
infrastructure money is in there as well and culture money. So 
the two main ones are Education and Health. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well all right, Madam Minister. What I'm 
trying to get . . . If your officials could add those up . . . what 
the third party money is . . . and we've got 2 per cent inflation, 
and it was a little higher than that in the last two or three years. 
And you've either frozen it or rolled it back a bit. We'll have an 
idea of how much offloading that the local taxpayer has had to 
bear as a result of your budgets. 
 
So it looks to me like it is in the ballpark  $872 million plus 
$198 million plus probably 1.4, $1.5 billion. Now you've cut 
some of that back, and you've frozen it when there's inflation. I 
imagine it's fair to say we've had, say, four years of inflation at 
2 per cent. That's 8 per cent cut. Plus you've cut some others on 
1.5 billion, so you're looking at maybe 15 to 20 per cent cut net 
in that budget over the last four years. And 20 per cent on a 
billion dollars is $200 million. Would that be about accurate, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I would say is we're talking about a tax Bill here. 
We do not have the capacity to go into great detail breaking 
down other estimates. The member opposite would know. If 
you're getting less money from the federal government, of 
course we have cut third parties. Of course he remembers that  

very clearly. 
 
We do not have that number here, available today. I'm sure at 
some point research staff can get it, but it's not here, available 
today. And as I say, what we're talking about is an income tax 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, this is so relevant. We're 
talking about taxes, and we're talking about municipal 
governments. It's so relevant. 
 
It's almost unbelievable that you wouldn't have taxation 
numbers and revenue that you share with municipalities over 
the last two or three years when you have at your fingertips the 
federal number. And you just said, if the feds offload, we have 
to offload. You said that here's the fed's offload, and now you're 
reluctant to say what your offload was. 
 
Well we can put it together, Madam Minister, and I'm just 
asking for your concurrence. You have officials. You have 
calculators. You have computers. You have telephones. You 
have several hundred staff. 
 
If you have 1.5 billion budget and over four years you've cut it 
in the neighbourhood of 15 or 20 per cent, given inflation and 
given 2 per cent here and 2 per cent and 2 per cent there, we're 
looking at maybe — what? — a couple of hundred million 
dollars in offloading to municipal governments and third 
parties. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, they had to make that up with taxes. See 
the relevance? This Bill is about taxes and about income tax. 
And that local municipal person, that taxpayer, has to pay 
health and education tax for local government because you've 
been offloading and dumping on them. Madam Minister, it 
seems to me fairly relevant. And particularly, you've given me 
everything but, okay? You've given me the federal offload. 
You've given me the fact that you had to freeze it. You've given 
me the rate of inflation. You've given me the totals in budgets. I 
just want you to calculate what the pain is or the level of tax 
increases at the local level as a result of your particular 
government coming into power. I'm sure, Madam Minister, that 
you would be able . . . I'm sure you have the figures there. 
 
Or maybe put it another way. If that budget on those 
departments is one and a half billion dollars, and you freeze it 
or reduce it, and you've got a rate of inflation of 2 per cent, and 
you do that for four years, would the cut generally be in the 
neighbourhood of $200 million? Is that about the cost of 
offloading to the local taxpayer as a result of your 
administration? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, that of course is a 
question for estimates, and we would be delighted to get into it 
at estimates time. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister . . . Mr. Chairman, isn't it 
interesting, Mr. Chairman, that the minister was ready with the 
numbers on the other players and not on the local Saskatchewan  



May 8, 1995 

 
2042 

taxpayers? Now I know it's political, Mr. Chairman. It's very 
difficult. We're dealing with taxes at the local level, and the 
minister wants to say this is all about tax reductions. No, it's 
not, Mr. Chairman. 
 
What we see and the accumulation of the effect in this province 
is that we had a $250 million net tax increase that the minister 
admitted the last time we talked — net tax increase to the 
people of Saskatchewan; all tax increases and all decreases. 
 
Now what we didn't cover — and we tried to — is the 
offloading which is another couple of hundred million dollars. 
The utilities, which the minister says when you raise the power 
rates and telephone rates and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) rates, those aren't tax increases; they just take money 
out of people's pockets. We didn't include those. 
 
Now when we get the net, net, net  as my colleague asked for 
here in question period because the auditor said we should have 
some restatements here  what we look at coming out of the 
taxpayers' pockets is utility rate increases of a couple of 
hundred million dollars at least, offloading of a couple hundred 
million dollars, and your tax increase is net of $250 million that 
you admitted to the other day. So, Madam Minister, that adds 
up to in the neighbourhood of 6, $700 million net tax increases 
on the people of Saskatchewan. And you're waltzing in here 
with this piece of legislation saying this is all about tax 
decreases. You see why we're a little sceptical. 
 
Madam Minister, three and a half years ago you talked a lot 
about taxes. You said, we will reduce the PST (provincial sales 
tax). We will eliminate the PST on harmonized goods, and we'll 
never raise taxes  never. You said no taxes on the people of 
Saskatchewan — 1991; I remember it clearly. 
 
And what you have here — and it's relevant to the taxation that 
you're talking about in this Bill — is over $200 million in net 
tax increases, over $200 million in offloading onto cities, 
towns, and communities, and $200 million plus in utilities, 
Madam Minister. If you don't want to call those taxes, I guess 
you could say well it's picking the pockets of the local taxpayer. 
And it's a utility, and it's offloading, and it's municipal tax. I'll 
just ask you, Madam Minister, maybe to help you in terms of 
the relevance of this, would you call federal offloading out of 
the province of Saskatchewan a tax increase for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, he raises many points, and most of them lack basis in 
fact  most importantly, the fact that we ever promised to 
eliminate the PST. 
 
What I'll say to the member opposite is this. This is not about 
taxes at the local level. This is not about utility rates. This is a 
tax Bill to reduce the income tax rates for people in 
Saskatchewan — $150 per person, $300 per family — and to 
provide targeted tax cuts to business. We would invite the 
members opposite to debate this Bill, to tell us what they like, 
what they don't like about this Bill. But I think it's incumbent  

upon them to direct their attention to this Bill because it's a very 
important piece of legislation to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well, Madam Minister, the point is with all of 
your tax increases, this Bill should remove the burden of this 
special taxation. You've got a net increase of taxes of 
$200-and-some million, offloading of 200 million, and utilities 
of $200 million, and you're talking about a slight decrease here. 
What . . . my argument in this Bill is that you should just wipe it 
all out because you're not being honest with the taxpayers, and 
you won't be honest with me in the legislature, and you won't 
tell the viewing public what the total tax increases are. 
 
I asked you a question. I will ask you once again: do you 
consider federal offloading a tax burden to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Could you answer that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, what I consider 
federal offloading is a cost to the people of Saskatchewan. It's 
obviously a cost to people who have to go on to unemployment 
insurance, getting less benefits. It's a cost to people who've had 
difficulties in health care and education. 
 
And I would ask the member again to remember that we're 
talking about a tax Bill which cuts income tax for the average 
family — $150 per taxpayer, $300 per family . . . targeted tax 
cuts to business. And that's the legislation before the House. We 
want to talk about other measures. We should go into estimates 
which is the time when we have all the information here to 
answer those questions. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Madam Minister, would you give me your 
commitment that you will answer the questions that I have put 
forward here when we get to your financial estimates? In other 
words, what we'd like to know and the taxpayer would like to 
know is what is the revenue sharing position net versus your 
contributions versus your cuts versus your freezes since you 
were elected? Could you give us that? In other words, the total 
offloading onto local governments that have to raise taxes to 
make up the difference . . . Because you said, Madam Minister, 
if the feds offload — and you just finished saying this — then 
we have to offload. That's what you said. 
 
So all I'm asking you is, could you tell me how much you've 
offloaded? And obviously, for political reasons, you don't want 
to do that. But what I would ask you is that if we get into 
estimates — your estimates, financial estimates — are you 
prepared to come here and say, here is the net position on 
revenue sharing? Here is the net position on taxes. Here are the 
net position that we could accumulate, if you will, on other 
sources of revenue. Crown corporations, we'll have to get in 
Crowns, but we can come up with some estimates there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, we won't. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well we will eventually, I guess, if they ever 
sit. 
 
Madam Minister, would you give me your assurance that you  



May 8, 1995 

 
2043 

will bring those numbers to the estimates of Finance when we 
get into them, so we can have a summary position? 
 
As well, Madam Minister, would you also agree or could you 
agree to bring forward the amount of money that you've taken 
from rural residents in terms of their crop insurance and their 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) package? In other 
words, I think it's 189 to $200-and-some million which is 
obviously taken out of their pockets. And it ended up 
somewhere, and we'll find out where that is. But could you 
summarize or would you be prepared to cooperate in your 
financial estimates to get us that kind of information so that we 
could look forward to . . . If you don't want to do it here, fair 
enough. If you're not going to do it at all, these Bills are going 
to take a long time. 
 
But I just think that if you think it's estimates, in your estimates, 
then fair enough; we would be glad to do it in the estimate of 
Finance. Could you give me that assurance? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I can assure the member opposite that when we get 
into estimates, we will do our very best to address the broad 
questions that the member opposite has asked. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Are you 
confident, Madam Minister, that the impact that you are having 
here will have a neutral position on whether it affects taxpayers 
as individuals versus taxpayers as business? Your balance over 
the last three or four years . . . can you feel confident that the 
balance between what business has experienced in terms of its 
tax increases and the average taxpayer, individual taxpayer, has 
experienced is fair? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, yes, we believe it's fair. 
 
Mr. Devine: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Would you 
have any other tax provisions, Madam Minister, that you think 
that you'll be including in a Bill like this? Or do you have any 
other Bills or any other pieces of legislation that would affect 
taxation that you could tell us about? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, no. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 
officials for their work over the last several days on this Bill. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to 
thank the officials for the time that they've spent in the  

Chamber on this particular issue and look forward to seeing 
them in Finance estimates later. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The 
Department of Health Act 

 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to clause 1, I would ask the 
minister to please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Today I am joined by Mr. Cy Scheske who is vice-president of 
the international division of Saskatchewan Health, and Mr. 
Glenn Van Iderstine, director of the international health 
services, international division of Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
stated that Bill 60 will allow Saskatchewan to benefit 
economically from our knowledge and achievements in the 
health field. And I believe what you indicated . . . it allows the 
government to enter into commercial agreements related to 
health technology, expertise, and information. I'm wondering, 
Mr. Minister, if you could be a little more specific and outline 
this to some of the sorts of technology that you are referring to 
in the areas where we will benefit as far as the Bill and the 
reason for the Bill before us today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to the member's question, it is 
a combination of both the technologies which we have 
pioneered in Saskatchewan and will continue to pioneer in the 
future, the actual technologies, and some of our vast data base 
that has been collected in Saskatchewan over a number of years. 
 
Essentially what is being marketed is information, data, and the 
technology that is being developed in our province, particularly 
around the health reform initiatives because other jurisdictions 
in Canada and around the world are moving in these same 
directions. Because we're leading, many are looking to us for 
the technologies that we'll employ, also looking to us as they 
have in the past for a source of substantive data. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I understand as well, Mr. Minister, that this 
legislation allows for this division to conduct market research 
and establish partnerships to achieve these objectives. Who or 
what organizations would conduct market research for the 
Health department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to make it clear to members 
of the House, this enables us to do that actual research 
ourselves and to be in partnership to do that research ourselves. 
And to date we have partnered with both universities in the 
province using their academic facilities and academic resources 
to . . . And the point of the research is to explore where in a 
national or international or global context we might have 
possibilities for marketing our technologies and data. So we're 
using . . . Our partners in this case doing the research are the  



May 8, 1995 

 
2044 

two universities. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned about the . . . 
mentioned the fact that while many jurisdictions are looking at 
ways in which they can use our technology and our expertise to 
certainly enhance the delivery of health care in their nation or 
country, I'm wondering Mr. Minister, what . . . are we as well 
looking at gathering information from other countries that may 
have technology and have some expertise that we, to this point, 
have not achieved? It that part of this legislation as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It's not, Mr. Chair. It's not particularly 
related to this legislation, but certainly one of the roles that the 
international division plays is to work with other health care 
providers nationally and internationally and to share expertise 
and to learn from one another. In fact we're doing some of that 
work right now in Europe that's not specifically related to the 
parameters of this legislation, but it's part of the work that the 
international division is engaged in. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I think you mentioned a moment earlier that your 
involvement with universities is an area that this Bill allows for. 
And maybe that is part of the reference that is made to 
establishing partnerships. And now the question was, what are 
some of the specifics? Would those be some of the specifics, 
where you’re working together with the universities in 
developing this expertise and then helping other countries by 
sharing it with them? Is that what you're talking of, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Those who are with me today and were 
working very closely with this field say, yes, that's certainly part 
of it. That's exactly what is happening. And some of this 
exchange of information is just that. 
 
But I also want to emphasize that we're here looking at some 
opportunities where we can market some of our technologies 
and informations beyond the border, so there will be 
cooperative working relationships. But at the same time, we 
know we have some marketable data and marketable 
technologies that other people will be interested, I think, in 
securing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, you stated that in recent months, 
health officials from Wales, South Africa, the Republic of 
Georgia, and others have visited our province. And I'm going to 
give you three questions rather than just up and down. What 
were the purposes of each of these visits? Did any of the visits 
result in any sort of contract with our province? And were any 
promises made to conduct business together with these 
countries made during the visits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to the . . . and I may say 
that I'm not . . . I don't have a full contingent of the details of 
each of these, but here, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, are some 
broad comments. 
 
Our visitors from Wales that were referred to, were here to look 
generally at delivery of health care across Saskatchewan. The  

Republic of Georgia people who were here are very interested 
in organizing . . . You'll understand the change of the political 
climate in their nation and land, and they're particularly looking 
at organizing a health-care system. 
 
And very same was true from the people who have visited us 
here from South Africa. Again, they're into a new democracy in 
South Africa. They're charged as a new government with 
organizing an entirely new Department of Health and 
health-care delivery. 
 
Working with the officials from South Africa, we've moved 
onto another stage now into looking at sources of funding that 
we could use to work with them in helping organize their 
Department of Health. And we've identified, at this point, 17 
potential sources for that funding, and each of those are being 
explored to provide some resources to help us and to help them 
do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just hope that at the end of 
the day once this legislation's in place and we've got all these 
countries coming to this province to review what we've got, that 
we really have something to show them. I think in some ways 
some of the changes over the last two or three years may have 
some people really wondering. 
 
But we're quite well aware of the fact that certainly we all . . . 
and if we're going to move ahead into the 21st century, there 
will be change. And there isn't an area for our society that 
doesn't and will not see change over the next number of years. 
 
But it seems to me, Mr. Minister, I hope while we're working at 
change we're not just throwing out some of the technology and 
the expertise we had in the past, some of the services. Because I 
think that's what people are looking at, the fact that the 
reduction in service certainly has a major impact. 
 
So while we talk about what countries are looking for, I 
suppose most countries would look at us and think, well even if 
they've changed and reduced some of the services, it's still a lot 
better than what we have. 
 
And I can only hope that we can build on what we have, and 
certainly build into the future and work together with other 
countries in developing and building a health system, as even 
the United States is pursuing right now, a different method of 
how they deliver health services that meets the needs. 
 
And I guess what I would say, Mr. Minister, is meets . . . maybe 
we need to sit down and outline what are the basic, fundamental 
needs and how we perceive a universal delivery of health care. 
We may not, in the future, be able to deliver all the services but 
deliver what is essential to maintaining human life. 
 
Mr. Minister, you stated that Saskatchewan has received 
speaking opportunities and invitations from many other 
countries and organizations, including the Pan American Health 
Organization in Washington, D.C. (District of Columbia); 
Bolivia, Taiwan, and Northern Ireland. What were the specifics  



May 8, 1995 

 
2045 

of these invitations? And I know that some had more to do with 
the overall health reform than shared information and 
technology. 
 
And the second question: did any of these trips or invitations 
end up in any agreements to share Saskatchewan's health 
information and technology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm rather excited 
about some of the issues that are identified here with these. And 
I want to be clear, Mr. Speaker, these are used as illustrative. 
Other nations and jurisdictions have also been in touch with us. 
 
The Bolivian experience was an invitation to have health 
officials travel to Bolivia and speak about health reform 
generally. 
 
Again, in terms of Taiwan, again health officials from the 
department travelled to Taiwan. Interestingly, Mr. Chair, in 
Taiwan they are only now beginning to move towards a 
universal medicare system like we've enjoyed in Canada — 
which I may say is put at threat by some political leadership in 
this country — but the universal health care system we've 
enjoyed in Canada is now being adopted in Taiwan, and they're 
very anxious to learn from us. 
 
But further to that, Mr. Speaker, the Taiwanese government 
have dedicated one-half a billion dollars, $500 million, to 
developing a health information technology, and we're 
expecting at the end of this month or early in June, 
representatives from the Government of Taiwan to be in the 
province and undergoing further discussions with us. 
 
(1545) 
 
The Northern Ireland example involved a speaking engagement 
by the former minister of Health, Louise Simard. She was 
invited by the European Economic Community to address the 
conference in Northern Ireland, and speak specifically about our 
health care information technology in Saskatchewan and the 
areas in which we're developing that technology. 
 
And we are anticipating, by the middle of June actually, a 
nine-nation consortium, of which we will be a part, in terms of 
health care information technology. Now there has been some 
little delay over this as a result of turbot and fishing disputes on 
the east coast of Canada. Now that they seem to be resolved, I 
think we're back to levelling out that relationship with the 
European Economic Community, and we're looking forward to 
some very, very positive results as a result of the former 
minister's trip to Northern Ireland. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I believe that in this province 
certainly everyone would agree with the fact that we need to 
develop means of using our expertise, and certainly creating 
economic development. And I would certainly expect that your 
government would want to do everything it can to enhance 
economic development in this province as well. I think you 
need it as well as everybody else. 

And one would ask, what exactly are the economic benefits that 
you may expect from Bill 60? And do you have any sort of 
researches or specific numbers regarding the economic benefits 
that you perceive may come in the future, due to the passage of 
Bill 60? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chairman, I'm very happy to be 
answering the member's question in this regard because there's 
some very exciting and very positive things here. 
 
In terms of our expertise — if I may start simply with our 
expertise — when we are able to share that expertise in an 
international context we know that we are sharing that expertise 
with many in our world who are much less fortunate than we, 
whose health care systems, whose services, are rudimentary at 
best in some cases. And we know that in sharing some of our 
expertise, we are going to improve the lot of human life around 
the globe. 
 
This we do, Mr. Chair, with financial backing from the World 
Bank. We are able to access support from the World Bank to 
share this kind of expertise with nations and jurisdictions 
around the world which will truly improve the lot of human life 
on our globe. 
 
On the matter of technologies that we will be marketing, the 
profound benefit from the context that we're making around the 
world through our international division, the benefit of the 
export of technologies, is the benefit that will flow to the 
information technology firms here located in Saskatchewan. 
 
They will be exporting softwares that have been developed here 
in Saskatchewan. We will be working with them through our 
connection to the international division to make them 
international players in the health care field. And so the benefit 
of the technological expertise that we're marketing is a benefit 
that really flows to Saskatchewan companies, to Saskatchewan 
informational technology companies. 
 
And then, Mr. Chair, when I refer to the marketing of our data, 
this becomes a direct benefit to the government and therefore to 
the people of Saskatchewan as we're able to market this data. 
This has been an already fast-growing thing. We anticipate next 
year, for instance, that we will be able to raise $1.5 million 
through the marketing of some data that should be available to 
us, and I'm assured that that number is fast rising. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So while you're anticipating revenues of about 
1.5 million just for the marketing of the data, what are you . . . 
do you anticipate that any new jobs may develop as a result of 
this legislation being passed and brought into place, and how 
many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we don't anticipate any large 
increase of employment within the department itself, but we do 
anticipate significant job creation in the information technology 
field in our province. 
 
To be able to tap our firms into this international market-place  



May 8, 1995 

 
2046 

for health care data through the auspices of the marketing 
division, the international marketing division of the Department 
of Health, we know will have a significant impact on the IT 
(information technology) field in our province as we develop 
our own systems and then begin to market that technology. So I 
don't have exact numbers of jobs, but we know it's going to 
have a significant impact on the industry here in our province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Do you have any rough idea of the number of 
jobs. You indicate that you don't have an exact number. There 
must be some idea of what may develop, Mr. Minister. Maybe 
you could just give us an idea of what you anticipate may be 
there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, because we're working with 
the private sector in the development of softwares and 
technologies, we don't have hard and fast numbers available to 
us. They're going to have to make some of their own corporate 
decisions. 
 
But what we know is that this is a very significant development 
in terms of information technology in our province. And given 
the base of the industry which is now here and the expertise 
which is here, we just . . . we're very confident that there's going 
to be a significant impact on that industry and therefore job 
growth. 
 
But we don't have numbers because these will be corporate 
decisions made in the private sector here in our province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, maybe 
you could give us a bit of a clarification. The Bill allows the 
department to "develop health systems and health technology or 
expertise." If there is no dollar figure placed upon these 
initiatives, what sort of money are we talking about here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, just to be clear. What we have 
here is a Bill which is in essence enabling legislation, to put 
into law the provision to do this. When we begin to move in 
this field in a significant way of course, that would become part 
of the budget deliberations for the department. It would be 
identified in the budgetary processes. And so we don't have 
those kind of numbers here today. 
 
This is enabling legislation to give us the legal and legislative 
framework to move in that regard. So we're not coming here 
today with the financial plans for future. The member will see 
those reflected in future budget presentations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well when you talk about revenue, where will a 
person find the budget revenues going and where will they be 
accounted for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This is . . . the member may not like this 
answer, but it will flow back to the Consolidated Fund. I'm not 
sure I like it either. I'd like to have it a little more clearly 
identified to the department so we could follow. 
 
But just in the processes of government . . . As you know, as  

the auditor indicates, that things should flow through the 
Consolidated Fund. So when it comes as revenue to government 
— when we make a sale of some data, it comes as revenue to 
government — it flows not to the Department of Health but 
flows to the Department of Finance into the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Now there will be a careful, careful accounting and a careful 
monitoring of those funds and they'll be fully accountable and 
reportable. And I'm sure in the process of estimates we can 
identify them. But they will flow back to government through 
the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I think that's important. Because 
while we're talking about expertise, we're talking about the 
technology, we're talking about marketing, down the road we 
want to actually be able to say and look and find the line that 
would indicate the number of dollars that have derived as a 
result of the introduction and the passage of this Bill and the 
marketing of the expertise we have. 
 
So I think it's important that there is a clear line identified 
because certainly once it's . . . if it doesn't really reach your 
hands and you're still accountable for this legislation, you'd 
want to know exactly where that money is as well. And it might 
be appropriate to just make sure you've got a clear 
understanding with the Minister of Finance that you'll be 
coming to follow up because you want to know how well your 
program has done for you. 
 
Is there a limit to the amount of money that the department can 
spend on developing health systems or health technology or 
expertise in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, there will be, Mr. Chair, of course 
when we establish budgeting, as we do with each of our 
programs and initiatives. They will have a budgetary figure 
attached to them and the department will have to live within 
that budgetary figure. If that budgetary figure is exceeded, 
they'd have to answer to the minister, and to the Executive 
Council, to the government caucus, and eventually to the 
legislature and the people of the province. And so there will be 
parameters. 
 
And to date I may say that in terms of overall expenditures 
within the budget of the Department of Health, this department 
has been very good at working within its budgeted amounts. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, Bill 60 deals with exercising power 
regarding personal information within the meaning of The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. Just 
what sorts of situations would require this clause to be added to 
the Bill? Why is the clause added here? And has releasing 
health information been any sort of problem in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the member raises what I 
think is a very, very important question that has to do with the 
confidentiality issues when we're dealing with information and 
technology that comes from the health field. And so we've been  



May 8, 1995 

 
2047 

very, very sensitive about the need to protect confidentiality and 
ensure that the data is appropriately used. 
 
It has not arisen as an issue primarily because any inquiry or 
any exploration made to our government for this kind of data — 
whether it comes from another government, whether it comes 
from a pharmaceutical company or someone doing medical 
research — each inquiry must pass through what we describe as 
the ethical review panel. And so the questions being asked are 
reviewed very carefully. Those who will be asking the 
questions, seeking our data for purchase, will be monitored 
very, very, very, very carefully. And we take every measure to 
ensure that no personal data, no data can be related to any 
individual. And so I think it's a very important question that the 
member raised. I thank you for raising it and I want to assure 
him and all members that the matter of confidentiality of this 
data is absolutely assured. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I guess there's one real important 
question that needs to be asked and I'm not sure how the 
department addresses it, but I was just reading an article the 
other day  I believe it was in the most recent Reader's Digest 
 about computer hackers and the fact that so much of the 
information we are developing and designing now is actually 
being placed on computers. 
 
What I'm wondering is what the department is doing to indeed 
address this concern as we've just talked about it. And how do 
you protect yourself from an individual who may knowingly or 
unwittingly or accidentally gain access to a computer that may 
have a lot of sensitive information? What does the department 
do to protect itself from those circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I don't want to mislead the 
member, to pretend that I have a great deal of expertise in 
computer technology. That would become quickly apparent to 
the member and all members. Let me just back up a bit and say 
in response to the member's question, this has been a concern 
for some time. We've been computerizing data in Health for 
some period of time now. Even in the period of time before we 
were into computers, where we kept data simply in paper and in 
files, there's been always the issues of confidentiality. This is 
not a new issue. 
 
But as the computer technologies, the information technology, 
increases and improves, we do hear of more people gaining 
access to various databases and so on. I am assured by the 
Department of Health officials that in fact we spend a great deal 
of money and resource in ensuring that the data remains 
confidential. And they tell me of what's described as fire wall 
technology, which is expensive, but we secure it because it is so 
important. 
 
This fire wall technology means that data can be released  it's 
a one-way street where the data can move that way  but no 
one can come in. Please do not ask me how this is 
accomplished in the technical sense. But I am absolutely 
assured that we spend a significant number of resources and a 
significant amount of time to ensure, to double-check, to  

triple-check, that either by accident or by design, someone 
cannot access this database for other than the purposes that are 
intended. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And just to put 
your mind at ease, I'm not really an expert on computers as 
well, so when it comes down to the technical aspects on 
working, I'm as green as anyone else. 
 
But I do know that it is creating a major problem in major 
businesses; companies have had major problems because 
individuals have actually tied into, tagged into, their systems. 
Banks are finding some difficulties with it, and so I would be 
surprised if computer companies themselves aren't working out 
new technology to make sure that they can really protect 
themselves from this type of interference by individuals. 
 
As far as marketing health systems and technology to persons, 
other governments, international agencies, or commercial or 
non-profit organizations, one would wonder if this is an overlap 
of services already existing. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, when I say that, if there would 
have been a venue through the — or an avenue — through 
Economic Development branch of government that whereby we 
could have dedicated some of our marketing research even in 
the health field in that manner. Or was it . . . why did your 
officials feel that we needed a specific marketing agency out of 
the arm of Health versus working with Economic 
Development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think the simple answer here 
is that in this field, in the field of health data and health 
research, those who will be seeking to purchase information or 
data from us, or technologies, expect the level of expertise in 
health to exist at our end. 
 
For instance, we've just been able to secure an arrangement with 
the Food and Drug Administration of the United States to 
secure some of our data. They want to work closely with 
health-related, specific health-related, people  people that are 
working in the field with a great deal of expertise. That kind of 
expertise we couldn't expect to be present in the Department of 
Economic Development. 
 
And so that's why the unit is housed in Health because it draws 
on the health expertise as well as the IT expertise that's present 
in the department. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the other question is, does this create just 
another . . . add to the bureaucratic avenue of government, 
another level of bureaucracy? Are we creating a much larger 
level? And that's the question that we have to ask at the end of 
the day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, you see sitting beside me the 
one add-on for the international division; that's Mr. Cy Scheske.  



May 8, 1995 

 
2048 

We think his contribution to this department, to this 
government, to this program, is exceptional. It's going to do 
great things for the people of Saskatchewan but it is in essence, 
as we speak, a one-person division. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So what you're saying, as you indicated earlier 
when you were talking about the number of jobs you'd foresee 
coming, the reality is the avenue of government or the 
department of government is basically down to one or two 
individuals. The other jobs you're looking at would be derived 
from, if I remember hearing you correctly, I think you made a 
comment about the private sector and some of the expertise, 
and the development in that area. 
 
One further question I believe that basically wraps up some of 
the questions and the concerns regarding the Bill before us, Bill 
C-60 states that the department will be allowed to "enter into 
any agreements that the minister considers necessary for the 
purposes of exercising any power or function pursuant to this 
section." 
 
That appears to be a fairly broad mandate, one that seems to 
have no cap unless the minister creates one. What are the limits, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we believe that within the 
confines of the amendment to the Act there is some pretty clear 
definition about what is intended, and that definition therefore 
puts restrictions or puts the fence on the minister. 
 
I don't think the member's asking the question about sort of the 
total amount of the financial value. I would like to think that as 
we grow in this field in the future, that this could become a very 
substantial part of a revenue base for us to provide health care 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But we feel that the Act itself defines very clearly to 
commercial agreements with governments and private industry 
and so on, that the parameters are right there contained within 
the Act itself. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, so what you're saying basically, 
you're indicating that, in your mind anyway, the Act is fairly 
explicit as to the powers the minister would have and the 
broadness of the powers the minister would have as far as the 
mandate and the function of the minister. That's what you're 
indicating, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That's precisely it, Mr. Chair. And of 
course every minister of every department responsible for every 
piece of legislation is always subject to the scrutiny of this 
House and the public scrutiny, so there's always that set of 
parameters on the role as well. But we think that the legislation 
describes pretty clearly what we're about here and the minister's 
role in the area. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd just 
like to take a moment to thank the minister and his officials for 
having joined us this afternoon and responding to the questions. 
And can I say good luck in your further endeavours as you 
apply the principles of this Bill and market the technology and 
health expertise we've been building in our province through 
the past number of years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I too would want to extend a 
thanks to my opposition colleague for his helpful questioning 
today, and a particular thanks to Cy Scheske and Glenn Van 
Iderstine who are working in this field within the department. 
Thanks for their work in the field and thanks for their assistance 
to the members today. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Department of Health 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 
be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women's Secretariat 

Vote 41 
 
The Chair: — Before we proceed to item 1, I would ask the 
minister to please introduce the officials who have joined us 
here today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Hello. With me today is Faye Rafter, 
acting executive coordinator, Saskatchewan Women's 
Secretariat; and Joan Pederson, assistant executive coordinator, 
Saskatchewan Women's Secretariat. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 
minister and her officials joining us this afternoon. 
 
Madam Minister, I have a few questions I'd like to put forward, 
but first of all let me thank you for sending across the globals 
prior to the debate in the Assembly on estimates. I think it  



May 8, 1995 

 
2049 

certainly helps us and enhances us in raising our questions, 
rather than coming to estimates, having the globals introduced, 
and then trying to go through the globals and address a number 
of the other questions. So we appreciate that. 
 
First of all, there's a few questions I'd like to ask on the 
objectives of the Women's Secretariat. And a general question 
is . . . Madam Minister, I don't think a lot of women appreciate 
what the Women's Secretariat does for them. I would suspect 
that many women in Saskatchewan maybe are not even aware 
of the fact that such a secretariat exists, that the Women's 
Secretariat exists. And I feel, believe, that many women would 
feel that the money spent on wages is being wasted when it 
could be redirected to women’s shelters or expanding important 
programs in Saskatchewan, such as the breast screening 
program. 
 
I wonder, Madam Minister, do you feel that perhaps the 
975,000 set aside for this agency is an appropriate expenditure? 
In the 1991-92 Estimates, the Women's Secretariat received a 
total of 487,400; '92-93 was 786; '93-94 is 768; last year, 892; 
and now we see 975,000. 
 
I'm wondering, Madam Minister, could you give the 
explanations as to why this department has seen such a 
substantial jump in expenditures? And how do you perceive . . . 
do you perceive that these expenditures are certainly essential 
and beneficial to the women of this province? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There have been many ways that 
governments have tried to grapple with introducing policy in an 
integrated way throughout the whole network of policy and 
programs and services that governments are involved in, and 
the Women's Secretariat is really structured to raise the 
understanding of how government expenditures and 
government programs affect women. Because of course over 
the years most of these decisions have been made by men, who 
have been the, I guess, dominant players in the field of policy 
and financial decision-making. And quite often there has not 
been enough thought given to how these policies affect women. 
 
So really the purpose behind the Women's Secretariat is to bring 
some equity into the policy, program, and funding discussions 
that face governments, and to try to make sure that all of the 
population is served by the decisions that government makes. 
 
So part of the function would be a policy function where when 
new policies are constructed, the Women's Secretariat would 
review those with an eye to how are those going to affect the 52 
per cent of the population that are women. 
 
When they're dealing with program development, again are 
those programs going to be accessible to women, are they going 
to be meaningful and useful to women? Because women 
sometimes, by virtue of various constraints of the home, etc., 
don't have the mobility that men might have in accessing  

programs — the same in regards to education, employment, and 
a range of other policy areas. 
 
Now as government does expand its initiatives in this area, 
there then becomes educational work that is needed to be done, 
for example, in the area of sexual harassment. So with the 
introduction of sexual harassment in the occupational health 
and safety code, it required that people then become familiar 
with how you determine what is, in current day thinking, 
acceptable workplace practices and to train people to 
understand how to create a workplace where sexual harassment 
is not part of the daily feature facing women in the workplace. 
 
So I would say, if I had to summarize it, policy, program, 
education — those are the kinds of functions that are 
undertaken by the Women's Secretariat. And the Women's 
Secretariat has a very limited role in funding. We really have no 
funding capacity other than to operate other various functions 
that the Secretariat's involved in. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, when we see the expenditure of 
$975,000, where is that money spent? How many employees 
does the Women's Secretariat employ? And as far as the 
employment, how much money goes into administration, how 
much money into salaries, how much money into programs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The total for the Women's Secretariat is 
975,000 of which a substantial portion of that is the actual 
salaries for the employees — 671,000. Other expenses under 
186,000 are things like training, public education, awareness  
that type of activity. And then there's also rent at 118,000. So 
it's a pretty slim budget overall. 
 
Mr. Toth: — How many employees are paid the $671,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thirteen. 
 
Mr. Toth: — That's roughly about $50,000 a person I would 
take it. When we're looking at 13 individuals, do you have an 
associate minister and a deputy minister? What levels do you 
have in the Women's Secretariat, and how would the salary 
level break down? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'm not sure how much detail you want 
because, I mean, there's quite a bit of detail could be provided. 
And I think in the previous go round we did provide some of 
this information. So if you can just be a little more clear on 
exactly what you'd like, then I can give you . . . 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, what we'd like to know is 
who's employed at what levels . . . and what their areas of 
responsibility and the level of salary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We read the salaries into the record, I 
believe, the last time that we were in estimates. But at the 
management level, there's essentially three senior people, and 
that would be the acting executive coordinator, the assistant 
executive coordinator, and the senior policy analyst. Now these 
are all senior positions responsible for policy and program  



May 8, 1995 

 
2050 

implementation. The office manager would be the only position 
within there that's in the support range. 
 
Most of the positions here . . . let me just count them up. 
There's about eight positions that are really of the policy 
analysis variety and educational variety, so they would be 
teaching, like a teaching role. Then there's about three positions 
that are at the support level in terms of clerk typist, secretarial 
types of functions. Now I don't know if you want it more 
specifically than that, but that would be the general range of 
what's there. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I'm just taking a quick look, Madam Minister, to 
check and see if that's in the global questions, whether we've 
got the list of the individuals with their different positions and 
salary levels. I'm just not sure right off hand. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, this did go over to yourself. And it 
listed the in-scope permanent at 6.2; in-scope temporary casual 
labour service at .8; out-of-scope permanent at 2.7; and contract 
at 1.0, for a total of 10. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Regarding the 
objectives of the Women's Secretariat, the Women's Secretariat 
annual report list its objectives as number 1: 
 
 to research and develop policy on issues of concern to 

women; 
 
And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you could provide us 
with any information relating to this objective and whether the 
Women's Secretariat feels that they have reached the objectives 
they have established for themselves? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I'll give you . . . there's quite a long list 
here, and I suppose when you feel you have enough you can 
stop me, but I'll just go down the list here. 
 
One of the things that was worked on is the options for 
implementation of pay equity in Saskatchewan, trying to assess 
the experience of other provinces and looking how realistically 
it could be implemented here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The analysis of how the impact to the proposed federal changes 
to unemployment insurance would impact particularly on 
women workers, the impacts on women of the changes to the 
federal social security review with the Canada Assistance Plan, 
a paper on unpaid work and the link to the economic value of 
women's work, some research on inclusion of domestic workers 
under The Labour Standards Act. 
 
Quite a considerable amount of work on the mandate of the 
interdepartmental committee on family violence to develop a 
government-wide policy on family violence and violence 
against women, and some operating frameworks for 
implementing some of that. Research, information, and referrals 
to the public and other government departments who requested 
information on issues affecting women, and that would be 
providing a wide range of just information, statistics, etc. 

And the particular function of the department that's very time 
consuming is to work on a number of interdepartmental 
committees — everything from the child action plan steering 
committee, the committee to identify barriers to employment for 
equity groups, the interdepartmental committee on family 
violence, the social security policy and task group committees, 
the midwifery advisory committee, the victims services — 
there's a range of interdepartmental committees that they have a 
presence on. 
 
And that would sort of encompass for this past year a lot of the 
research that's been undertaken. I could, if you're interested, go 
into some of the areas that are being worked on into the future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, a couple questions here. One 
I'll basically just ask you — maybe you could just send it over 
in writing if it's fairly extensive — and that is: what policies 
were researched and policies that were developed? Maybe you 
could provide us with any areas of policy research and 
development and the papers that were developed regarding this 
research. 
 
And also I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if Women's 
Secretariat actually did a study into the impact of the abolition 
of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and how it affected women. I 
think mostly . . . the largest majority of individuals participating 
in that plan were women. And maybe you could address that 
and let us know whether or not any research was done in that 
regard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As far as the list of research, there's no 
difficulty providing that although there would be some 
difficulty with providing some of the research papers because 
not all of them are public documents. Some of them are done 
for the central agencies of government  like Treasury Board 
and whatnot, Executive Council  in giving background to 
decisions that would be taken by cabinet. So they're not all 
published or public documents. The ones that are available we 
can certainly send over. 
 
The issue of the pension plan is a very important and sensitive 
issue for women. And the issue regarding the previous pension 
plan that was implemented by the previous government was 
really an issue of affordability of the plan, not the need for the 
plan. 
 
There is definitely a need for a better method of making sure 
that women's work is pensionable and that adequate pensions 
are there. But it also, at the same time, has to be an affordable 
plan because in the absence of a direct wage to finance that 
pension or an employer, it then becomes a tax dollar that 
supports that pension. But we continue to be concerned about 
that area and are continuing to look at options for how we 
might be able to handle that . . . and also in cooperation with 
the federal government in terms of the income security review. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, you're quite correct in the 
fact that it has impacted women. You're also correct in the fact 
that it must be affordable. But one would have to ask, in the  



May 8, 1995 

 
2051 

way it was disbanded or abolished, I'm not exactly sure if 
enough of a review was given to the program to not only look at 
its merits and the objectives of the program, but also determine 
ways in which it could have been developed and maybe 
designed to be more affordable because I would suggest, 
Madam Minister, if we can get people to build for their future, 
to design a pension plan that they can work with, that the 
individuals contribute to, at the end of the day it really won't be 
any more costly than where we're sitting right now. 
 
And the fact is if . . . and especially in the case of a lot of 
women . . . fall into that category of being the  can I use the 
term?  retired poor. I'm not exactly sure if that's an 
appropriate term. But when we took a look at income support 
programs, if the funds aren't there, then we design programs at 
the other end to meet those objective needs of at least providing 
an adequate living for individuals. And unfortunately so many 
women fall into that area. 
 
(1630) 
 
And it would seem to me, Madam Minister, that it would have 
been appropriate to look at a way in which Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan could have continued to work. The government 
would have even been involved with minimal dollars. Because 
if you're going to put money in through income supplement 
programs, why not help people develop programs or pensions 
or income opportunities for them in the future? 
 
And I guess that's the question one has to ask, Madam Minister. 
What are you doing today to address the long-term goal of 
helping to build programs or initiatives that will create 
self-sustaining programs, if you will, for not only all individuals 
but in fact women across this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There's a number of steps we did take 
in terms of funded pension plans. For example, in 1992 The 
Pension Benefits Act was changed, and this gave better benefits 
to survivors and ensured a better situation for widows. 
 
The other piece of legislation you'll be familiar with is the 
prorating of benefits under the part-time workers legislation. 
And again if the province had not been in such extreme 
financial straits, we may have been able to take a broader look 
at the pension plan that the previous government had instituted 
where all of the matching dollars came from the tax base. 
 
Now into the future, I mean I think you're hitting on an 
important question that if we can't afford to fund all of these, 
then what can we do? And I think you're right that we may have 
to bring a different kind of solution to this. And some of that 
might be making sure that people have better information with 
which to do some of their own investment from a younger age 
in their own pension because none of us can really anticipate 
what's going to happen at the federal level. But if there are less 
public pensions available, then people will no doubt have to 
rely more on whatever they're able to set up for themselves. 
 
And certainly I would say there's been a big change in the past  

few years in the way women are approaching their own 
investments on their behalf. But more work needs to be done on 
this, and we will be looking at some of that in more detail over 
the coming year. And I thank you for your concern and interest 
over it. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Madam Minister, I think for far too long 
we've used the argument that we couldn't afford it. And that's 
why some of the radical decisions were made, and especially 
with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, that affected . . . the 
majority of the individuals being affected were women. 
 
Now you mentioned, Madam Minister, the part-time employees 
that have been addressed in some form, and yet I find many 
part-time employees still trying to struggle with their workload 
and the hours of work and whether . . . because of the way the 
hours are juggled, many times they just do not get the benefits. 
 
I also find, Madam Minister, that you've got . . . while we talk 
about affordability, we do have a pension plan in this province 
that just addresses pensions for a few people, and that's the 
government pensions. And many people in this province, 
whether you're working for a Crown, whether you're a teacher 
or a nurse or MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 
you're actually building a pretty good pension. And it's a 
publicly funded pension plan and much higher than what the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan would have achieved for the 
individuals that you were trying to address and the concern 
there. 
 
And I also can understand your concern when I hear the federal 
government talking about and the Finance minister talking 
about readdressing our RRSPs (registered retirement savings 
plan) and lowering that factor and maybe even reducing it. I 
think any government that would want to take away from 
initiatives that would help the taxpayers to build for themselves 
is certainly defeating the long-term purpose and goal of trying 
to help and make people more self-sustainable and help them to 
design programs that would indeed give them a level of living 
in their retirement that would be appropriate. 
 
And I don't think we want to build rich, if you will, pension 
plans. I think most people are asking for something that would 
be fair and equitable. So while you would suggest that we're 
facing such difficult circumstances, the Minister of Finance was 
telling us today that really things aren't as bad as they appear to 
be, that maybe things have improved substantially. And yet I 
think we've got a long ways to go. 
 
But I think . . . I guess what I'm saying is I'm disappointed that, 
Madam Minister, the initiative wasn't taken to . . . when the 
decision came to slash the pension plan, of really reviewing it 
before it was just chopped . . . because I think at the end of the 
day the reason it was disbanded so unceremoniously had more 
to do with politics than the reality of reaching out to meet the 
needs of individuals. 
 
So I guess I can just ask you again: what is the Women's 
Secretariat doing to address these needs that may arise for  



May 8, 1995 

 
2052 

women in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If there was any politics that I would 
say was operative in this whole thing, it's the politics of deficit 
financing by governments, and I'm just going to toss that one 
clearly back on your shoulders. If we had $15 billion that was 
blown by the previous government, we wouldn't have had to 
even consider measures like that. So I guess the politics of 
deficit financing is the issue on that particular score. 
 
As far as your concerns over the part-time legislation — of 
course this is not fully implemented yet and won't be for several 
months yet as all the regulations and the working through of the 
various workplaces and what not and the implementation of it 
. . . So you will not yet see the full effect of this Bill for several 
months yet. 
 
As far as the other point you raise — I mean really what you're 
saying, if in fact we're moving into a more broad-based pension 
scheme, I mean there's two ways you can do that. And one has 
always been the Canada Pension Plan which we've always 
counted on the federal government to assume responsibility for 
that. 
 
In the absence of that we would be in a very different scenario 
as far as looking at a provincial response to an issue of that 
magnitude, which really has only been in the federal 
government's capacity to respond to. 
 
And it also brings in issues of how we define work. If you're 
suggesting a much broader definition of work and to include a 
lot of the currently unpaid work of women into the definition of 
work, then that would certainly be a desirable objective, but it 
would also require then a relooking at the whole issue of 
taxation and what not. If we now are redefining some of those 
roles and some of the way we compensate for those roles, 
whether through negative taxation, some kind of tax credit 
system, or whatever we might get into . . . But I guess I'd just 
conclude by saying that the Women's Secretariat has no 
authority over pension plans. 
 
It is advisory to the process of the development of pension 
plans, and so when the government looks at the broader issue of 
pensions, we would certainly be in on that discussion but not 
totally directing the process. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess 
the reason we raise the question is because I believe the 
objective of the Women's Secretariat is to deal with issues 
affecting women. Certainly the Saskatchewan Pension Plan had 
. . . the majority of individuals involved were women. 
 
Also I maybe just need to remind you one more time, Madam 
Minister, while you keep throwing the $15 billion in my face, 
there was roughly $8 billion that was there prior to 1982 that 
the government continues to put on the back burner and says it 
was never there and that was all created during the 1980s and 
now we've gone from the . . . if you look at the auditor's report, 
the auditor's report goes from . . . shows that we're not at  

fourteen and a half, we're up at over $20 billion if all things 
considered. So if you want to continue the debate, continue the 
debate on deficit financing, we can certainly take some time to 
do that. 
 
Madam Minister, another objective I believe of Women's 
Secretariat is to educate the public on women's issues. What 
issues did the Women's Secretariat take on during the last fiscal 
year and how did they proceed to educate the public on these 
issues? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, one of the Bills that's been 
passed since we've been in government is The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act changes. And one of the parts of this was 
an addition of harassment as an area that's covered in the 
workplace. 
 
So there was quite a bit of educational work that needed to be 
done in this area because a lot of people seemed to consider 
harassment as just normal workplace practice. So there was 
considerable educational work done there — materials, 
workshop kits, employer's handbook — so that employers could 
understand when they were dealing with a situation that was no 
longer acceptable and what kind of measures they could take in 
their workplace to make sure that that didn't happen again. 
 
There was information to Crown corporations, non-government 
organizations, community organizations, and the private sector, 
through workshops and speeches, on a range of other issues 
including employment equity, pay equity, workers with family 
responsibilities, sexual harassment, the changing role of the 
family, and how the role of the Women's Secretariat could help 
facilitate some of those discussions and educational work 
within various workplaces. 
 
There was also training regarding The Victims of Domestic 
Violence Act and community consultations also that went on 
regarding that. There's also some work that's done in terms of 
liaison with out-of-province visitors and delegations that are 
interested in these particular topics and visit with us for the 
purpose of exchanging information. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, would Women's Secretariat get 
involved or try to inform individuals as to avenues they could 
follow if they've got a complaint, re employer? 
 
And what I'm coming to here is a call that I received last week 
about a number of individuals working in a business that are 
endeavouring to get their overtime acknowledged and overtime 
finance . . . or their overtime funds that comes to them. And 
they've gone to the Labour Relations Board, and it just seems to 
be an avenue where they're getting mixed views of how they 
approach the problem of applying for and getting the Labour 
Relations Board to deal with the employer, make sure the 
employer indeed follows up and certainly carries out his 
responsibilities. 
 
Does Women's Secretariat get involved or try to inform women  



May 8, 1995 

 
2053 

as to the avenues they should pursue if they're having difficulty 
in dealing with an employer and they find that other areas of 
government don't necessarily . . . that are supposed to be 
responsible don't necessarily meet that need? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What would indicate to the Women's 
Secretariat that they might get involved in an issue is whether 
it's determined to be systemic in nature. And a systemic 
problem being one that happens again and again and again as 
opposed to something that happens maybe once or twice. When 
something happens over and over again, it then suggests a 
problem with the system that continues to create that problem. 
 
So they might then, if that problem was happening mostly to 
women and happening over and over again, it then might 
become an issue that they would look at. But if it's just an 
instance of it happening, whether that was to a woman or a 
man, that would not necessarily be the driving factor. And 
certainly it would then be dealt with in the department that 
deals with those kinds of issues and that would be the labour 
standards area of the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the reason I raise it, because it just was 
brought to my attention, just to some of the comments, and the 
fact that it is women that are really fighting for this right now 
and I thought maybe the department, Women's Secretariat, 
might be an avenue that they could pursue if they still . . . but 
you're indicating that it isn't. 
 
I understand another objective is to consult and coordinate with 
government and community groups on issues which affect 
women. I wonder if you could provide a list of government 
departments and agencies the Women's Secretariat has 
consulted, indicating the issues discussed, the action 
determined from the consultations, and progress to date on 
those actions. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It's virtually every department of 
government actually, but the main ones that there would be 
quite an ongoing working relationship would be Justice, Social 
Services, Education, Health, Indian and Metis Affairs, Finance, 
Labour, sometimes with municipal services, things like housing 
needs, and various other departments  even Economic 
Development  as needed. 
 
But a lot of the departments now work together through kind of 
policy focus teams which are working on particular policy 
areas. For example, the child action plan steering committee, 
where there's people who come together from many 
departments to decide how to have the greatest impact on 
children's well-being. Or for example, the interdepartmental 
committee on family violence, which again takes all the things 
that might be done, whether in Education, Justice, a range of 
departments, and brings those together in a more strategic 
policy focus rather than each department doing their own thing. 
 
Mr. Toth: — The fourth objective I believe is to encourage  

women's participation in decisions that affect them. How does 
the Women's Secretariat act on this objective? And maybe you 
could provide the Assembly with some information on how the 
Women's Secretariat met these objectives and goals for the 
upcoming year. 
 
And in particular, I'm not sure if the Women's Secretariat is 
involved in educating women regarding the breast screening 
program. I know last year, I believe it was about a year ago 
now, there was a questionnaire went out asking, inviting, 
women to get involved in a research program. And my wife . . . 
there was information came out in our area. My wife certainly 
applied for it. And she just commented the other day that she 
hasn't heard anything since and she's wondering if the thing has 
just kind of died. 
 
I'm just wondering if the Women's Secretariat has . . . this is one 
of their areas where they participate, encourage women to 
become involved in decisions that affect them, and certainly in 
programs and initiatives that may affect their lives. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There are, I guess, two kinds of 
approaches that are taken to this. One is very specific kind of 
approaches, for example, working with Indian and Metis 
Affairs, treaty women, aboriginal councils. And this is on 
board-staff handbooks which really serve as instructional 
materials to assist people in becoming effective members of 
boards and thereby effective participants in decision making. 
 
The other kinds of things that are done are to monitor some of 
the results of the equity programs across government, to 
determine that in fact women are being considered seriously for 
boards, commissions, agencies, jobs, and to encourage women 
to, in various workshops and what not, to take that step and to 
run for office, whether that be municipal, provincial, education 
boards, health boards  generally to provide those kind of 
supports that will give people the skill in being part of a 
decision-making team that will then lead to taking other 
opportunities as they come up. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, there's a number of questions 
that I'd just like to bring to your attention — and maybe I'll raise 
them all at once and see if you can address them all individually 
— regarding women and some of the things that . . . legislation 
that's come down even at the federal level. 
 
How did Women's Secretariat act on behalf of custodial 
parents, mainly women, in regard to the Thibodeau case? Was 
there any involvement by the Women's Secretariat? 
 
How did Women's Secretariat act on behalf of women with 
regard to the stalking legislation? 
 
And was there any action on behalf of women in regard to 
drunkenness defence which is now being amended in Ottawa? 
 
What do you see as being the 10 key issues that the Women's 
Secretariat is currently dealing with or working toward? 
 



May 8, 1995 

 
2054 

What gains have been made in respect to child care and what 
gains have been made in respect to battered women? 
 
I know there's a number of questions, but I thought if I raised 
them all maybe you can address them all individually, rather 
than up and down addressing these questions that are fairly 
direct. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay, sorry to take so long in getting 
back to you here. In the Thibodeau case, that is primarily 
federal jurisdiction; but there was a federal-provincial working 
committee of senior officials that got together on making a joint 
submission to the federal government on that particular case. 
 
And the same would be true on the issue of the drunken 
defence. There is a federal-provincial seniors official group that 
made presentation to the federal government on that matter. 
 
In terms of the tax treatment of child support, again I'll mention 
that this is a federal issue. But the research and the federal 
consultations indicate that child support awards are often 
inconsistent, inadequate, and unpredictable, and that creates 
financial disadvantages for children following family 
breakdown, and also leads to increased litigation and 
enforcement problems. 
 
The Family Law Committee has tabled its report which includes 
recommendation on tax treatment, as well as proposed child 
support guidelines to establish adequate, consistent, and 
equitable child support. Because right now the settlements tend 
to be all over the map. And I think both from the point of view 
of the parent receiving support and the parent doing the 
supporting, there needs to be a little more rigour into this 
process. 
 
So the federal government is now considering the implications 
and we will support changes to the tax law that do not further 
disadvantage or impoverish children who are relying on support 
from a non-custodial parent. 
 
On the other issue of the stalking legislation, the Government of 
Saskatchewan supported amending the Criminal Code by 
adding a new stalking offence. Saskatchewan Justice proposed 
a change to the Criminal Code at the uniform law conference in 
1992 to cover stalking situations. 
 
There is a need for this type of legislation to protect women and 
children from being repeatedly followed and threatened by 
embittered spouses and boyfriends. And it really does seem to 
be an increasing problem. 
 
The stalking legislation will enable police to intervene and lay 
serious charges against anyone whose pattern of harassment 
poses a credible threat of harm. And the improvement is that 
they will not have to wait until a violent crime of rape or 
murder is committed before taking action. 
 
As far as the gains in child care, there was a child care review 
and what we've done is to bring child care policy more in  

keeping with . . . of sort of a change, I think, from people in 
how they want child care delivered. But one of the particular 
areas has been supports to teen child care, which is having quite 
a good spin-off benefit as far as teen parents deciding to stay in 
school and going on to employment and further education, 
rather than becoming dependent. 
 
The issue of battered women, Faye Rafter here chairs the 
interdepartmental committee, and we continue to do work on a 
wide range of fronts on this issue. Some of the specific results 
have been the domestic violence Act. And as well, a lot of 
public education is done on this matter. 
 
So this is an area that we just have to keep working away at, but 
there is quite a good organizational capacity now to both 
discuss the issue, and make decisions and take action to 
improve the protection of women. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, if a lady feels . . . or an 
individual would come to your office — and I guess it would be 
physically impossible many times to really come to the office 
— to seek the support of the Women's Secretariat, who would 
they contact? 
 
Say a person is in a battered situation, or say an individual is 
having some problems with child care, is there contact persons 
or individuals or agencies that contact could be made whereby 
these individuals would have an opportunity to talk to 
somebody within the department or within Women's Secretariat 
to discuss their problems, and seek some guidance as to where 
they should be going? 
 
I'm not exactly sure that a lot of women are in a situation where 
they necessarily always want to be running to the police; who 
may feel that they would just like to raise their concerns with, 
say, a law enforcement official, as they try to work out some . . . 
an understanding, especially if it's in a marital relationship. I 
think most women or most individuals — men or women — 
want to try and develop, and sometimes they need someone just 
to talk to, to try and find out avenues that they could work 
through rather than just proceeding into the legal realm. 
 
And what I'm wondering, who would a person contact and how 
would they go about it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Actually we could provide your office 
with some wallet cards that have been made up that direct 
women to the various services that support them in a range of 
problem areas. And if you're interested, we could get some of 
those over to your office. 
 
In the rural areas, the other method for accessing is through the 
rural stress line. And in the urban areas, there's mobile crisis 
lines and what not. 
 
The Women's Secretariat is more of a policy body, an education 
body, and working on really developing systemic solutions to 
problems affecting women. It's not a direct, on-the-ground 
service agency. 



May 8, 1995 

 
2055 

There's many women's organizations out in the community who 
provide those kinds of services. And we try to provide supports 
to them by making sure that adequate resources are directed 
their way and by providing information on their services 
through mechanisms such as the wallet card. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, did you . . . I'd asked you about 
10 key issues that Women's Secretariat is currently dealing with 
and working toward. I just don't remember if you got them all 
listed before, while we were talking about you were doing some 
work regarding child care, battered women, and stalking 
legislation. Are there any others that you're presently involved 
in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We continue to concern ourselves with 
the wage gap affecting women. As you know, women in 
Saskatchewan make 76 cents on the dollar that is made by men 
in Saskatchewan. So we continue to identify ways to close that 
wage gap. 
 
Some of those ways involve education. Some involve equal pay 
for work of equal value. There's a range of strategies, but we 
continue to look at how we can close that wage gap so that 
women have an equal ability to support their households. The 
analysis of this is quite an extensive task because there are so 
many different ways of approaching it and so many factors that 
affect it, but we continue to do that. 
 
Employment equity continues to be a pressing issue and that 
covers a whole range of issues from education equity to entry 
positions to promotional practices, labour standards that affect 
families and children; how to make more family-friendly 
workplaces, that would be a continuing concern; how to 
increase training and employment of women in trades and 
technology and non-traditional work areas; the development of 
indicators so we can more carefully monitor the status of 
women in Saskatchewan; whether in fact the policies that we 
introduce are having the intended effect; to look more closely at 
the economic situation of women over 55, particularly in 
regards of our discussions in federal-provincial talks on income 
security. 
 
To deal more closely with SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and 
Metis Affairs Secretariat) and aboriginal women's organizations 
to deal with the particular and serious problems facing 
aboriginal women throughout Saskatchewan; to continue to 
work on the strategy for family violence in a partnership with 
appropriate departments; to continue to work on issues 
affecting particularly rural women, work in family options and 
other factors that affect them in a particular way; and to 
continue to do work in the areas of new policies that have been 
implemented in labour standards, occupational health and 
safety, etc., to make sure that these are implemented as 
intended. And I think that must be ten anyway. I don't know. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Toth: — It almost seems like we could just keep adding it 
on and on and on. Madam Minister, I've got a few questions  

here regarding the globals that you sent over, and we did ask for 
some information regarding ministerial travel, and I don't see 
any information regarding that, whether there was any 
ministerial travel. We'd like a detail of the travel in terms of 
who travelled, the destination, purposes of the trip, who was 
accompanied on each trip, what was accomplished by the trips, 
the reasons for each traveller other than the minister, total cost 
of ministerial travel for the year, the cost for each trip, and the 
costs of each individual who travelled. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There was one trip in the fiscal year 
under consideration. There was one trip to meet with the chair 
of the women's advisory committee on the status of women. 
And while I was meeting with her on their year-end report as 
well as the future of that particular body, I also took advantage 
of being in the neighbourhood to visit the Lloydminster Interval 
Home to see how services were being delivered in an area not 
in Regina or Saskatoon, to see how they would be delivered in a 
different area of the province. So essentially that was it — one 
trip. 
 
Mr. Toth: — What was the cost of that one trip? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — A hundred and sixty dollars. 
 
Mr. Toth: — On your globals, we've got personnel report, and 
then you have in-scope permanent, in-scope temporary casual 
labour service. It also mentions travel expenses down 
underneath. And there's a total of in-province, 5,000; 
out-of-province, 5,600  for a total of ten seven. Was that just 
people from the . . . individuals from the department? Did that 
include ministerial . . . or what's the $10,000? What does that 
consume? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, these would be travel by senior 
officials. One trip to Ottawa for a meeting of federal-provincial-
territorial senior officials responsible for the status of women; 
another one in Toronto for an intergovernmental meeting on 
pay equity initiatives; another one in Ottawa, the 
federal-provincial territorial senior Status of Women officials 
meeting; in Banff, Alberta, a conference of the Canadian 
Association Against Sexual Harassment in Higher Education; 
and in Banff, Alberta, the Canadian Association Against Sexual 
Harassment in Higher Education. That would have been a 
different staff person that attended that same conference. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Could you just send over a breakdown of the 
individuals who have gone and the costs that would have been 
associated on the individual trips? And you can just send that 
over in writing following our deliberations. That's fine, Madam 
Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, was Women's Secretariat involved in any 
legal actions directed by the department? And if you were, can 
you give us the reasons for and the circumstances for any suits? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, there were none. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Madam Minister, in your personnel report I note  



May 8, 1995 

 
2056 

in-scope permanent employees have risen by 1.9 employees 
with a wage increase of over 74,000. Can you explain who 
these new employees are and why they were hired? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That amount covers two persons, both 
hired to work in the sexual harassment area. And they're both 
education and extension coordinators. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I also note that there was a decline in the in-scope 
temporary. Is this related to the fact that one of those 
individuals been then moved into in-scope permanent? Or are 
we talking about two new individuals working in the in-scope 
permanent, and the in-scope temporary employees fired? Or is 
that what happened in that regard? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There was a half-time temporary that 
was eliminated in the budget. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So while you eliminated one, you added two 
more on permanent then. True? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That had to do with shifting priorities, 
not with any other particular. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Because it would seem to me, Madam Minister, 
while it was cut in the budget, at the same time you increased 
the budget on the permanent side. So I'm not exactly sure if 
there were any real savings. 
 
Out-of-scope permanent employees went down by 1.3 for wage 
savings of nearly 100,000 over last year. Clearly, just going by 
the wage amount, this must represent a senior position. Has this 
position been abolished, or is it just temporarily filled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If you're referring to a senior position 
that hasn't been filled, that's where there's been some cost 
savings. But aside from that, we're not clear what it is you're 
referring to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I also note that you have a new contract employee 
working at the rate of 79,359. I wonder if you could detail this 
position in terms of name, job term, job description, benefits, 
office location, and normal place of residence for the person. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That refers to the secondment of Faye 
Rafter, and we answered those questions in a previous session. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 


