


















































April 26, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1175 
 April 26, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf 
of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition are all primarily from the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker, and Weyburn. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also would like to present 
petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
People have signed the petition from such places as Regina, 
Carlyle, Assiniboia, Kisbey, Moose Jaw, Arcola, Kenosee, 
White Bear, and many other southern Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
too to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Manor, Kenosee Lake, White Bear First Nation, 
Watrous, Carlyle, and throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina, but I notice a few from Wood 
Mountain, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names of people from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer  

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from Regina South. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 
present petitions of names from people throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from many concerned 
citizens in southern Saskatchewan, from Vibank, from Avonlea, 
from Glenavon, from Wolseley, from Grenfell, and a few from 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Carnduff, Carievale, and Glen Ewen, and also some from 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
from Regina, they’re from Leslie, they’re from Estevan, they’re 
from Pilot Butte. They’re all from throughout Saskatchewan. 
We even have one here from Edmonton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
day 39, the 39th time I’ve been up with my colleagues and the 
people of Saskatchewan to try and save the Plains Health 
Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 



1176  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
mainly from the Carlyle area, and Manor, and Wawota. I so 
present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
to you and to the other members of the Legislative Assembly, 
73 grade 4 and 5 students from Langham, Saskatchewan. I’d 
like to introduce them individually but maybe in the interests of 
time, we won’t. They’re sitting in the west gallery here. 
Teachers are Heather Dack, Debby Dear, Evelyn Kasahof, Bob 
Wardhaugh and several chaperons. And I will be meeting with 
them later at 11:30 in room 218, and for a photo as well. And I 
would ask the members to welcome them to the Chamber this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of our 
caucus to welcome two very important groups in our province 
who are in the galleries this morning. We have with us both the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
executive groups. And we’d like to welcome their leaders  
Sinclair Harrison with the SARM and Murray Westby with 
SUMA, and of course all of the other delegates. 
 
We would also like, Mr. Speaker, to pay a special good morning 
to Neal Hardy, a former member of this Assembly who of 
course is now with the SARM board of directors. And we’re 
very happy that they have taken the time to come out and watch 
the proceedings. 
 
We know that Neal will enjoy the day because he spent so 
much of his life here himself, and has gained a very great 
reputation with the people of Saskatchewan as a minister of 
honesty, of integrity. And the proof of that is the fact that he 
now sits with the board that he used to be the minister in charge 
of. So we would ask the members to please welcome them 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
introduce to all members of the House . . . we have with us 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) training cadets, first 
nations people from throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re here to do a 17-week upgrading and skills course. At the 
end of this course, Mr. Speaker, they’ll be able to apply to the 
RCMP. 

Along with them are Bruce Van Goozen, Dorothy Bird, Jean 
Jewers. Mr. Speaker, I would like to give them a welcome first 
of all in our language. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with them at room 125, at your 
boardroom, and we’ll have pictures and questions. I would like 
all members to please give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
also join with the member for Maple Creek in welcoming local 
government officials — the president of SARM, Sinclair 
Harrison, president of SUMA, Murray Westby; and other local 
government officials. I would like to welcome them here today 
and I would ask for the floor to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we are in the process 
this morning of taking a break from a meeting of the municipal 
round table and I appreciate members opposite taking note of 
these very important people who have joined us for question 
period while we’re taking a break for the meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’d like to introduce them individually and ask them to 
stand and be recognized. 
 
The president of SARM, Sinclair Harrison; president of SUMA, 
Murray Westby; board members of SARM, Neal Hardy. Oh 
sorry, the president of the rural administrators association, 
Audrey Trombley. I can’t see who’s behind. Directors of 
SUMA, Mike Badham, George Bristow, Doug Still; and 
administrator of SARM, Ken Engel; and of SUMA, Keith 
Schneider; and Merv Norton is in behind. 
 
And I would like to ask everyone in the Assembly to join with 
me in welcoming these people to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce my daughter Jeanette and her friend 
who are in Regina to take their massage therapy course. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Liberal caucus, 
I also want to welcome the people that are here for the policing 
program. It is of course that I agree with the member of 
Cumberland that it is nice to see native people be involved with 
the policing of their own communities and other communities. 
 
And I also want to welcome my former partners in SUMA. We 
sat up many hours in discussing issues of northern 
Saskatchewan. It’s nice to see them take an interest in what’s 
happening here, and we also encourage them to continue 
dealing with northern issues. So I would like to ask the 
Assembly as well, on behalf of the Liberal caucus, to welcome 
the policing students and the members from SARM and SUMA.  



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’m 
particularly pleased to see Mayor Doug Still from Humboldt 
with us today. Humboldt is, we say, the most thriving town in 
Saskatchewan, and it is certainly due to the work of Mr. Doug 
Still and others who do draw people together to in fact make it 
the most thriving community. So we’re pleased to have you 
with us, Mr. Still, and I’d like the Assembly to welcome Mayor 
Doug Still. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

10th Anniversary of Chernobyl 
 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, today marks the 10th anniversary of the nuclear 
disaster in Chernobyl, near Kiev, Ukraine  the only peacetime 
nuclear disaster, we like to say, as if that makes the event any 
less significant or the consequences any less disastrous. 
 
This modern-age disaster was brought about by our 
civilization’s insatiable appetite for energy  an appetite that in 
many places ignores all environmental and safety 
considerations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t like to say this out loud, but we should 
admit that here in Canada, where we have some investment in 
peacetime nuclear industry, we would like to say that this kind 
of disaster could not happen in a democratic country. That is the 
wrong lesson to take from Chernobyl. It happened once. It 
could happen again here or anywhere else, if production is the 
only good. 
 
The statistics of Chernobyl provide all the narrative we need  
over 160,000 people evacuated, 259,000 hectares of land 
removed from civilization, untold cancers and birth defects for 
years to come, and an official death toll of over 30,000 from 
radiation-related causes. 
 
The Saskatchewan Provincial Council of the Ukrainian 
Canadian Congress has prepared an information package on 
Chernobyl for use in our high schools, to be released today. 
Understanding, as well as eternal vigilance, hopefully will 
prevent another disaster like Chernobyl. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Retirement of Dave Ridgway 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues and I 
would like to pass along our best wishes to one of the classiest 
football players in Canada  Dave Ridgway. 
 
Mr. Ridgway announced his retirement this week after 14  

terrific seasons with the Saskatchewan Roughriders. He is one 
of the Riders’ most dependable players, kicking field goals 
almost automatically and scoring 3,151 points in the process. 
That’s why Saskatchewan fans and his fellow team-mates began 
calling him Robokicker. 
 
Mr. Ridgway was totally dedicated to Saskatchewan and loved 
playing for the people here. He was instrumental in bringing the 
Grey Cup back to Saskatchewan in 1989 with his dramatic 
last-second field goals against the Hamilton Ti-Cats. 
 
I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
expressing gratitude to Dave Ridgway for playing out his heart 
and soul for Rider fans for 14 years. We wish him well in his 
future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some of us may 
remember the Grey Cup of 1966. All of us remember the Grey 
Cup of 1989. And I bet that each one of us can replay in 
exquisite slow-motion detail in the VCR(video cassette 
recorder) of our minds the last-second field goal which clinched 
the cup for the Roughriders. 
 
Dave Ridgway has retired. Robokicker, the Rider who kicked 
that field goal and 573 others, along with 541 converts and 111 
single points for a total of 2,374 career points, is hanging ‘em 
up. 
 
If those points were votes, Mr. Speaker, Dave Ridgway would 
make  and quite possibly will make  a very respectable 
showing. 
 
For the moment though I know that all members and all 
Roughrider fans will realize that Dave Ridgway’s retirement 
from football is one of those significant moments by which we 
mark the passage of time. We will still support the team but for 
a while there’ll be a hole in our enthusiasm. 
 
We mark his retirement because of his football achievements of 
course, but quickly we should also recognize that Dave 
Ridgway is an involved, contributing citizen to our community. 
And it is important to note that he chose to retire rather than 
wear the uniform of another team. That kind of loyalty we 
understand in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an ardent Roughrider fan, I bid and I won at an 
auction a few years ago, the kicking shoe of Robokicker, used 
when he kicked eight field goals in one game, July 23, 1988, 
against Edmonton. That shoe, Mr. Speaker, has for me a very 
pleasant whiff of nostalgia for an era just ended. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Imperial Selects Female Midget Hockey 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
proudly once again to add to my weekly sports report from the 
Humboldt constituency. Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize  



1178  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

the Saskatoon Imperial Selects, who won the Western Shield, 
emblematic of female midget hockey supremacy in western 
Canada. 
 
The Selects won the provincial gold medal and advanced to the 
western Canadian championships held recently in Winnipeg. 
They were victorious over teams from Alberta, Manitoba, and 
British Columbia. 
 
In particular I would especially like to pay tribute to two girls 
from the Humboldt area who played with the Selects, Chantale 
Benning and Nicole Knittig. These girls helped their team win 
provincial gold and walk away with top honours at Westerns. 
 
Congratulations to the coaches and players of the Saskatoon 
Selects and in particular Chantale Benning and Nicole Knittig. 
We’re very proud of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

IPSCO Anniversary 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to mention a 
special anniversary. On the northern outskirts of Regina in the 
constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is a site that is still 
strange in a land-locked agricultural province. I am talking 
about IPSCO, Mr. Speaker, which is celebrating its 40th 
anniversary, a celebration kicked off with a luncheon yesterday 
and continuing with several other events over the next while. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic importance of IPSCO to Regina and 
to Saskatchewan is well-known. It has close to 800 unionized 
employees with a total of around 1,100  that is 1,100 
individuals and families, Mr. Speaker, whose livelihood comes 
from IPSCO. 
 
On this 40th anniversary, there is much to remember and much 
to look forward to. But two memories among many are worth 
bringing forward. One, this steel mill in the middle of the 
Prairies was begun in 1956 because the government of the day 
knew that progressive social policies need an economic base. 
Tommy Douglas backed the loans which founded IPSCO, and 
the government took an equity position which it held for years 
 an early example of partnership between government and 
industry. 
 
Two, the steel workers union has been a part of IPSCO since 
1957 and have been a vital part of its development since. My 
congratulations to workers and management, past and present. 
We wish IPSCO 40 new years and more of productivity. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shellbrook Credit Union Expansion 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday, 
April 24, the Shellbrook Credit Union opened a 3,000 
square-foot expansion to their facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1961 the Shellbrook Credit Union began on  

Arthur and Winnie Berg’s coffee table. From there it moved to 
Agnew Motors and to John’s Shoe Store. In 1974 the credit 
union moved into a permanent building. In 1961 the credit 
union had assets of $13,000. Today it has assets of 39 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Shellbrook Credit Union has been an 
important force for the economic growth in that community. In 
addition to the ordinary financial services that it provides, it has 
been an important partner with local chamber of commerce in 
promoting Shellbrook retail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a credit union activist for over 20 years, 
and I’m not surprised that the credit union is doing so well. 
Over the years people working together to help one another 
build a network of financial institutions right across this 
province, and in doing so they built Saskatchewan cooperative 
and community values from the bedrock of ongoing success 
from our credit unions and for our province. The credit union 
way is indeed, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan way. 
 
I ask every member in this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating the Shellbrook Credit Union in their hard work 
and success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Optimist Oratorical Contest 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I was 
honoured to be a judge at the oratorical contest sponsored by 
Optimist International of White City area. 
 
The contestants were young men and women from grades 6 to 
9. The winner of the boys’ contest was Jeremy Matlin, speaking 
on the Quebec referendum. And the runner-up was Jason 
Selzer, the power of advertising. Both are from Greenall School 
in Balgonie. 
 
In the girls’ contest the winner was Krista Fogel of Pilot Butte 
 Holocaust remembered. And the runner-up was Kerry 
Ekberg of White City School speaking on polylingualism in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very impressed with the overall quality of 
the presentations last night. The topic given to the students was, 
now is the time. The presentations were thoughtful and well 
delivered. The evening left me with the impression that the 
future is definitely in good hands. 
 
The Optimists have done an excellent job of helping young 
people to develop public speaking skills. It is important to 
express yourself clearly and distinctly, no matter what you do in 
life. The oratorical contest is just one of the many activities that 
this Optimist Club is involved in. They also maintain a park, 
support the community centre, offer scholarships, organize 
family and bicycle safety events, support a number of youth 
groups, drug awareness programs, services for hearing 
impaired, and other programs. I’d like to congratulate Irene and 
Rick Temple for their work, Albert Sikma, the club president in 
the White City Optimists, and the winners of the last night’s 
contest for their excellent presentations. Thank you, Mr.  



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Northern Health Care 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister — my 
question is for the Minister of Northern Affairs — Mr. 
Minister, for years northern Saskatchewan has been suffering 
from the lack of program support and the lack of health care by 
the provincial governments. Health care is a deep, deep concern 
to the people of La Loche. 
 
Mr. Minister, the hospital there is nothing but old trailers 
pushed together. And, Mr. Minister, in Ile-a-la-Crosse the 
hospital is an old brick building that is in dire need of 
replacement. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you stand in this House today and tell the 
people of the North what plans you have to improve the quality 
of health care in the northern Saskatchewan, including the 
Athabasca constituency? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to report 
that in regards to training programs in regards to that issue, we 
have established not only NORTEP (northern teacher education 
program) program in northern Saskatchewan but the NORPAC 
(Northern Professional Access College) program. That is the 
top-notch program in health education for people from northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would also like to report, Mr. Speaker, that in regards to today, 
we will be going to northern Saskatchewan, and we’ll be 
talking about the La Ronge health centre, you know, a 
commitment by the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 
in regards to health facilities in northern Saskatchewan that we 
never saw anything of with the previous government when they 
were in power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, the member should be 
looking at the Liberal Party in Ottawa. They have devastated 
cuts of $114 million, not only in education and social services 
and housing, but also in health, Mr. Speaker. That’s where he 
should be directing his question to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan; this is not 
Ottawa. During my last visit to the northern community of La 
Loche, I visited the building that residents are forced to call a 
hospital. Let me describe the scene for the Legislative 
Assembly. Ceiling panels littered the floor, while they waited 
for someone to repair faulty wiring. The roof was leaking and in 
a horrible state. Staff morale was low and the doctors were 
severely overworked. 

How can the minister sit there and tell this Assembly that health 
care is important to his government when he knows how dire 
the hospital situation is in the northern part of province? Where 
is his compassion, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, our commitment to health 
care in northern Saskatchewan is miles ahead of the 
commitment by welfare from the Liberals in Ottawa, I’ll tell 
you this much. 
 
In regards to what’s happening in health care facilities, we have 
a long-term plan, Mr. Speaker. We have met with the people in 
La Loche in dealing with the situation. We will be, of course, 
dealing with this in the future in regards to the money that may 
become available. But, Mr. Speaker, the cut-backs by the 
Liberal government in regards to health care in this province is 
not only devastating for all provincial citizens, but for the 
citizens in La Loche and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, this problem has not 
materialized overnight. The lack of commitment to health care 
in the North has been ongoing for many, many years and many, 
many governments. Housing shortages, unemployment, 
isolation, and road conditions all have a detrimental effect on 
health delivery. 
 
Although this government is more than willing to develop 
northern resources at a rapid pace, they have yet to make any 
real commitment to health care in northern Saskatchewan. Will 
the Minister of Northern Affairs or his Premier make a 
commitment to channel some of the profits derived from 
northern resources back into health facilities so desperately 
needed by northern residents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to again make 
this known. Today we’ll be announcing a $14 million facility in 
northern Saskatchewan at the La Ronge health centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, in this constituency we will 
be moving up Athabasca region at Stony Rapids. We will be 
having a long-term plan in regards to La Loche, Mr. Speaker, 
and he’ll be very pleased; at some point in the future we’ll be 
also announcing that. 
 
But I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker, in regards to 
commitment. In regards to commitment, for the very first time 
in northern Saskatchewan, in elected control of northern 
Saskatchewan, we had elected boards of education with the 
NDP government. We had elected municipalities in regards to 
the Northern Municipal Council Options 80 proposals  again, 
controlled by Northerners. We’ve allowed the first elected 
controlled boards in education and health with NDP 
government again, Mr. Speaker. That is our commitment. 



1180  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Waiting-lists 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just this morning, 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke with Mrs. May Mole from Regina Beach. 
This woman is on a six-month waiting-list, waiting for an ENG 
test at the University Hospital. The test would check her inner 
ear and nervous system. She is already suffering from dizziness 
and fears that her condition could be drastically worse by the 
time she gets the test. She is also suffering from MS (multiple 
sclerosis). I know she has sent the same letter outlining her 
concerns, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier and to the Minister of 
Health, as well as to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we bring yet another example of 
people crying out for health services in this province. Can the 
Minister of Health tell us today when this begging will end? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I thank the member for the question, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve been in Ottawa, as the member may know, so I 
haven’t had a chance to actually look at this letter, which I see 
has been copied to me. But I certainly want to do so and check 
out the situation and report back to the member. I really 
wouldn’t want to discuss Mrs. Mole’s circumstances in public, 
but I certainly will look at the case and get back to the member. 
 
I want to say to the member though, Mr. Speaker, that actually 
the waiting-list for referral to specialists and tests and 
hospitalization in Saskatchewan is not worse than in other parts 
of the country. I think it’s actually somewhat better. And the 
member should know as well that the waiting-lists have not got 
worse with health reform in the last few years; in fact they’ve 
got better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think the member knows that if you go back 10 years or 
20 years, waiting-lists have always been a problem. They’ve 
always been a political football. They continue to be. 
 
I’ll certainly look into it and we’ll certainly work . . . do 
everything we can to improve the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 
finally hear that the minister is really interested in what’s 
happening to the people of this province and will take a special 
interest in each and every case that we bring forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d also like to see the minister stand up in this 
House and take responsibility for the quality health care service 
that this government has promised to people of Saskatchewan. 
Mrs. Mole turned to us simply because she has nowhere else to 
go. She’s getting no response from Sask Health along with the 
other hundreds that are calling us daily. 
 
It’s no secret to the people of Saskatchewan this government’s 
health reform has created long waiting-lists. And many times, 
Mr. Speaker, it means a difference between life and death. 

Will the minister now admit in this House today, Mr. Speaker, 
that their wellness model is nothing more than a sham and a 
detriment to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as has been pointed out 
many times in this House, and I’ll point it out to the member 
again, one of the things that is really causing us difficulty in the 
health care system is the lack of commitment from the Liberal 
Party on health care. And the fact is that as of April 1, we lost 
$50 million from Ottawa for the health care system. 
 
I want to say to the member, in terms of our health care system 
in Saskatchewan and health reform, Mr. Speaker, I had the 
opportunity to communicate with some U.S. (United States) 
veterans about health care. And I got a letter recently from the 
Paralyzed Veterans of America and they said to me  and this 
makes me proud about our health care system  they said, 
among other things: 
 

I also found your recent reorganization of your health care 
delivery system to be both innovative and well planned. 
Our federal and state governments here would do well to 
incorporate some of your ideas. 

 
And how true that really is, Mr. Speaker. We have a wonderful 
system, a good health care system. Sometimes the waiting-lists 
may be a bit too long  we should work to improve it  but 
we’re very proud of the medicare system we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highways Asphalt Purchases 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions today are to the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, 
it is my understanding that the Department of Highways 
purchases a great deal of asphalt from Montana, even though 
there are two refineries in the province  Husky in 
Lloydminster and Saskoil in Moose Jaw. 
 
Now we support your government buying from the lowest 
priced supplier, but we have to wonder, why is an American 
company able to provide us with asphalt so much cheaper than 
Saskatchewan companies? 
 
Is it because of our uncompetitive tax structure? Mr. Minister, 
why does Saskatchewan Highways purchase most of its asphalt, 
hauled by Kock Oil, from the United States instead of from the 
refineries at Lloydminster or Moose Jaw? Is it because our tax 
structure is so bad and makes it so hard for Saskatchewan 
refineries to compete on a level playing-field in this market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Highways, I’ll say I understand the member’s 
question to be why, with all the road work going on and the vast 
amount of highway construction we’re doing . . . where is the 
asphalt being purchased. 
 
I don’t have the breakdown on where the asphalt is being  



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

purchased, but I will endeavour to take notice and bring the 
answer back to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  I want to remind the minister that if he’s 
taking notice on a question, then he must simply do that. Next 
question. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental question for the Minister of Highways, and the 
minister can answer for him. Now, Minister, Saskatchewan 
asphalt producers face an even further disadvantage when 
competing with the U.S. firms, so you might just as well take 
note of this problem and solve both problems at the same time. 
 
When Canadian asphalt is trucked into Montana, it is hit by a 
10 per cent penalty under the Montana preference policy. 
There’s a similar penalty in North Dakota. However, when U.S. 
asphalt comes north across the border, there are no such 
penalties. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what discussions have you or your 
government had with the Montana and North Dakota 
governments about having these penalties removed? What steps 
are you taking to level out the playing-field, to make it more fair 
for Saskatchewan companies to compete in this market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I find it very 
interesting, that question, which verges on protectionism, 
coming from that member of the party that fought for free trade. 
Now they’re saying, what are you doing to protect our industry. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, he can’t have it both ways. 
He can’t be part of the Mulroney crew who forced and jammed 
through the Free Trade Agreement and now pull your support 
away from the Devine administration and say now we want 
protection for our industry. 
 
And what I would ask the member opposite is, sit down and 
have a chat with himself and ask, where am I on this issue. Do I 
want free trade or do I want protectionism? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

District Health Boards Finances 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. In January, Mr. Minister, 
the Provincial Auditor provided you with a number of reports 
on individual health districts. The auditor’s report shows that 
the health district boards are not getting the information they 
need to do a good job of managing their health districts. In fact 
the auditor said some boards don’t even know if they’re 
running deficits or surpluses because they’re not getting 
adequate information. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government has had these reports for several 
months now and we have yet to hear what you are doing to 
address these serious problems. How can health boards operate 
effectively if they aren’t getting the financial information they  

need, and what are you doing to address the problems raised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Actually it is not correct, Mr. Speaker, to 
say that we haven’t announced an action plan with respect to 
this matter, because we did announce last fall that we’re 
undertaking a project to review the financial accountability in 
the health boards, and in fact we’re proceeding with that. And 
we’re just in the process of hiring people in the private sector, 
through a tendering process, Mr. Speaker, to work with the 
boards about financial accountability. And we’ll certainly be 
doing that and they will be reporting this year. 
 
I want to say to the member, that actually one of the other 
things the Provincial Auditor said is that some considerable 
progress has been made in improving accountability through the 
health boards in the last three years, more so than we’ve ever 
had. There are still some problems we have to work on. 
 
And in summary, Mr. Speaker, I would just add that we do want 
to work on these deficits. My experience has been it isn’t 
always the best advice to get, advice in terms of dealing with 
deficits, from the members of the Conservative Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Members Conflict of Interest Legislation 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the last 
comment certainly could draw a lot of discussion and debate, 
but there’s no point in getting into that right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further question, and this one is to the Minister 
of Justice. Mr. Minister, last fall the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner launched an investigation into whether a 
member of cabinet had used his position to help his son get into 
a university class. While the member was cleared in that 
particular investigation, the concern was raised that the conflict 
of interest Act was too vague in dealing with matters of this 
nature. In fact the former minister of Justice said the Act was 
flawed because it doesn’t include adult children in the 
definition of a family member. He promised to review the Act 
and to make the necessary changes. 
 
Mr. Minister, has this review taken place? Will you be making 
the changes to the conflict of interest Act as promised by your 
predecessor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for that question. The matter that he’s talking about is in the 
process of the legislative review. The timetable that we usually 
use is that the matter goes into legislative discussion and 
consultation. And that would be a matter that would most likely 
come into the legislature next year, given our normal process of 
consultation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1182  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

Mr. Toth:  A further question to the minister. And the 
former minister asked where I got the information. Well it’s 
Star-Phoenix, Wednesday, October 18, 1995. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, we still get the same standard answer. We 
really aren’t getting an answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a solution. We have a piece of legislation 
or a Bill that we will be presenting to this Assembly. In fact 
later this day, or immediately following question period I will 
be introducing a private members’ Bill to amend the conflict of 
interest Act to deal with this loophole. Our Bill will expand the 
definition of family to include adult children. 
 
Mr. Minister, the former minister committed your government 
to review and address this loophole. Our legislation does just 
that. Will you support us in this legislation, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for the second question in this area. The issue here is reviewing 
the conflict of interest legislation. As we’ve stated previously, 
we look carefully at suggestions made by the members 
opposite, and we will include these suggestions in our review of 
this legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Funding 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this morning is for the Minister of Education or her 
designate. Mr. Minister, it should come as no surprise to you or 
your government that school boards are already being forced to 
compensate for education cuts. In some school divisions, 
they’re talking about implementing a four-day week. 
 
Mr. Minister, shortening the school week will have 
ramifications not only for schools, but entire communities. 
Working parents will have to fork over an extra 40 or $50 for 
child care if they can even find that. Rural day care is not 
always easy to find, Mr. Minister, and it will be the parents who 
will be forced to drive their children back and forth to activities 
when school buses aren’t running. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you even considered how your deep cuts to 
education will affect Saskatchewan communities and who will 
be forced to make up the lack of government funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With respect to the question asked by the hon. member, I think 
the preamble to his question indicates where he stands on the 
issue. I don’t know where the minister stands on the question, 
so I will bring the question to the notice of the minister and she 
will bring an answer to the House. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from members 
opposite about the effect on education of the federal cuts and 
we’re wanting to hear what this provincial government has to 
say. I want to know why when the federal government cuts  

funding, it’s offloading on the provinces, but when this 
government cuts funding to municipalities, school boards, and 
health boards, it's challenging to them. 
 
Mr. Minister, other school boards are also looking at their own 
solutions to government cuts. They know that this government’s 
decision to increase the equalization factor by 2 mills will end 
up costing school boards $12 million and they know that it is 
the boards who will have to do the government’s dirty work. 
 
With program cuts, grade discontinuance, and school closures, 
we will likely see a massive upheaval of our entire education 
system. How can the minister continue to stand in this House 
and say education is funded adequately when the whole 
education infrastructure is crumbling around the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the member knows that 
that’s simply not true. He also knows, Mr. Speaker, to the 
extent that we’re having trouble in this province with funding a 
lot of our programs is because of the great fiscal pressure being 
put upon us by the Government of Canada. Now every time we 
raise it in this House or anywhere else, these people go into 
some kind of a funk trying to disassociate themselves for what’s 
happening in Ottawa, but the fact of the matter is that it’s 
happening. As I’ve said before, everybody in Saskatchewan 
knows it with the exception of those 10 people across the aisle 
from me today. 
 
Now not only that, but we’re now visited with the prospect of 
changes to the GST (goods and service tax), when we had 
understood that the GST was going to be eliminated entirely. 
Now we find that changes to the GST are being contemplated 
which will in fact make the situation worse in Saskatchewan if 
they’re to be implemented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Service Districts Act 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Municipal Government. The member for 
Rosetown-Biggar yesterday gave an example of RMs (rural 
municipality) in the Rosetown area sharing offices and services. 
He commended them for this, and I join him. If voluntarily 
done, we are not against sharing services, but local governments 
do not need a $20 million cut-back in funding to force 
amalgamation. 
 
Will the minister now admit that local governments are already 
sharing services and there is no need for The Service Districts 
Act legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Oh, Mr. Speaker, we have 
acknowledged many times in this House the amount of 
intermunicipal cooperation that’s going on in this province. We 
have . . . well I won’t name municipalities, but we have in the  



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

south-west 107 rural municipalities looking at a transportation 
rationalization scheme. We have 21 rural municipalities in the 
mid-west that tender for gravel collectively. We have in the 
Humboldt-Watson area a very progressive waste management 
project. And we have all over this province, Mr. Speaker, 
numerous, numerous examples of municipalities that are 
cooperating to provide services more efficiently and effectively 
to the people they’re elected to serve. 
 
Those decisions are made locally. We respect that. We respect 
the integrity and intelligence of local governments to make the 
right decisions. We’re cooperating with them, Mr. Speaker, to 
try to help them meet the challenges of the future. Everyone’s 
cooperating with the exception of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Strike 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my second question is for the 
minister in charge of SaskTel. This government now has two 
SaskTel presidents on payroll costing approximately 170,000 
each year. They are also paying $50 an hour overtime to 
management personnel to replace SaskTel unionized workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel’s top management also set up a 
re-engineering program to brainwash middle management. That 
caused many health and stress-related problems. It also has 
caused much mistrust toward top management and this 
government by those same employees. Now, Mr. Speaker, a 
strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that all these problems 
have been caused by the inefficiencies of the political patronage 
appointments that this government has running SaskTel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all we have one 
president at SaskTel  one president  one president who is 
receiving remuneration than is less than half of what his 
counterparts in the rest of the telecommunications industry and 
Crown corporations in other provinces would be receiving. 
 
We have, in addition to that, some consulting services, but we 
have one president. We have unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, at this 
time, a labour disruption at SaskTel. There are those pillars in 
the labour movement, Mr. Speaker  the right to associate, the 
right to negotiate, and the right to withdraw services. 
 
We believe in the collective bargaining process. I’m sure that 
the issues that make people take this kind of a very profound 
decision are very complex, Mr. Speaker. But the solutions that 
we’ve had from the members opposite, offered up, are 
right-to-work legislation, back-to-work legislation, replacement 
workers  that’s the suggestions we’re getting from the other 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe in collective bargaining  that’s our solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Heritage Preservation 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
always say that I’m preaching gloom and doom and I never 
offer any solutions. 
 
Well today, I’d like to offer a solution that would benefit both 
taxpayers and help preserve our Saskatchewan heritage. The 
way the law stands now, there is no incentive if someone would 
like to donate money to save or maintain a heritage project. 
 
The government does not have a way to issue a tax credit. And 
I’m not speaking about a federal tax credit; I’m speaking about 
something that would be uniquely Saskatchewan  something 
that would work with our Saskatchewan income tax and for our 
projects. 
 
An example of a heritage project is our UGG (United Grain 
Growers Limited) elevator in Regina that will be hit with a 
wrecking ball this week. I believe that if people could receive a 
tax deduction, more money would be donated to these projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance consider this 
suggestion and take a positive step towards preserving our 
cultural heritage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
positive suggestion by the member opposite. As I’ve indicated 
in the past, I think this is a better approach, to be more positive 
about ideas you have. The only flaw in your suggestion is 
you’re talking to the wrong Minister of Finance. This is a 
federal taxation issue and I would urge you to work with us to 
make sure that that change occurs. 
 
But while you’re at it, and if you ever get through to Mr. 
Martin, who now admits that he is sorry about the fact that 
they’ve broken their promise on the GST, maybe you could also 
get a hold of Mr. Chrétien who says he isn’t sorry, and Sheila 
Copps who refuses to resign, to make sure that they also know 
that you’re opposed to that tax change as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskPower/Krivoy Rog Power Station Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m pleased to rise this morning to share with you some 
comments. 
 
Members will recall that the Premier led a trade mission to 
western Europe and Ukraine in October 1995, and one of the 
initiatives undertaken at that time has borne fruit. And today 
I’m pleased to inform this House that SaskPower Commercial, 
the subsidiary of SaskPower, has entered into an agreement 
with Canadian International Development Agency to modernize 
three thermal power units in Ukraine. 



1184  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, under the contract, 
SaskPower Commercial will provide technical and managerial 
assistance, including consulting and training support, on the 
rehabilitation of three 300-megawatt units  and these are 
roughly the same size as Shand  at Krivoy Rog Power 
Station, 400 kilometres south-east of Kiev. And my apologies to 
anyone who may in fact speak Ukrainian. 
 
However, unlike Shand, Ukraine’s 40 coal-fired plants that 
provide 69 per cent of the country’s electricity are inefficient 
and environmentally unacceptable. SaskPower has striven to 
balance the need for environmental protection and preservation 
with the need to provide dependable, reasonably priced 
electricity service to its customers. 
 
The measures incorporated into Shand have received 
international recognition and SaskPower has developed a 
technical and training infrastructure it can pass on to Ukraine. 
 
While this first contract, Mr. Speaker, is modest  it’s in the 
neighbourhood of 3.5 million  the potential for SaskPower 
international is great. SaskPower hopes this project will create 
the nucleus of a Canadian-Ukraine business team that will be 
capable of providing assistance to other rehabilitation work that 
will be required in many thermal plants in Ukraine and other 
Commonwealth of Independent States countries. 
 
In carrying out this project, SaskPower Commercial will draw 
on talent from within SaskPower and other Canadian utilities, 
will provide approximately 15 to 20 person-years of work. 
 
There’s a special link, Mr. Speaker, between the people of 
Saskatchewan and Ukraine. One of the reasons that draws 
Saskatchewan and Ukraine together is heritage. Many people in 
this province and indeed western Canada are very proud of their 
Ukrainian heritage. It’s something that we are proud of and 
must never forget. 
 
The government commends SaskPower and its subsidiary, 
SaskPower Commercial, for the initiative it has shown in 
creating this opportunity, one that fosters goodwill, good health, 
and good business. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would first of all like to thank the minister for his advance 
notice and allowing us an opportunity to review the statement 
and the agreement that’s been reached. It affords us an 
opportunity to review these types of agreements and offer our 
observations and perhaps suggest that these kind of 
international relations are indeed necessary, where we have to 
go beyond our own borders to obtain contracts and 
opportunities for further . . . not only further developing some 
of these countries, assisting them and ensuring with our 
knowledge and technology that the type of incident that 
occurred that a member opposite made in a former statement, in 
Chernobyl, does not once again occur. And if we can any way,  

help to advance our technologies to those countries to assist 
them to improve their way of life. 
 
I as well have roots and connections from heritage from that 
part of the country, and the Polish people and the Ukrainian 
people do rely a great deal on these types of assistance and as 
well are very proud of that kind of heritage. 
 
So I applaud the government for doing that and I also would 
like to add that I hope that some of those positions and the 
actual employment positions can be attributed to people directly 
from Saskatchewan. And that hopefully it will be our folks that 
will be involved and we do not have to draw on people with 
technical knowledge from other provinces. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too are 
pleased that SaskPower has entered into this agreement which 
will help improve the economy of Saskatchewan and that 
SaskPower continues to be able to provide its knowledge to the 
world. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also unfortunate though that 
SaskPower is not able to aid in the decommissioning of the 
Chernobyl plants and in providing other electrical generation 
capabilities because the Premier of this province broke the 
AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd) agreement, which would 
have helped to develop electrical technology further in this 
province. 
 
It’s also very nice, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has recognized 
the Shand and Rafferty-Alameda projects in his statement  
that the Shand project is, in his words, efficient and 
environmentally sound. We always knew this, Mr. Speaker, that 
these projects were good projects; that they did meet the 
environmental recognitions that were needed in this province. 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan would 
like to have reasonably priced electrical service in this province. 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 79  An Act to amend The Members’ Conflict of 
Interest Act respecting the definition of “family” 

 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move a Bill to 
amend The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act respecting the 
definition of “family” be now moved and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 80  An Act to amend 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a Bill 
to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

(1100) 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Motions for Interim Supply 

 
The Chair:  Order. Order. If the committee will come to 
order we will proceed  both sides of the House, please. I will 
ask the minister to introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. Seated to my right is Bill Jones, the deputy minister 
of Finance. Immediately behind me is Kirk McGregor, the 
executive director, taxation and intergovernmental affairs 
branch. To his right is Larry Spannier, executive director of the 
treasury branch, behind Mr. Jones. On my extreme right is Jim 
Marshall, executive director of economic and fiscal policy 
branch. And behind him is Kent Walde, director of Public 
Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would again 
thank the minister, and welcome his officials here today. 
 
It is a pleasure again to speak to the interim supply motion 
brought before the House today. Mr. Chairman, by bringing this 
before us again today, the minister gives us yet another 
opportunity to discuss some of the spending decisions of this 
government. 
 
In recent weeks, in response to our questions, this government 
has posed questions in return about where our caucus stands on 
certain financial matters. They seem to think that we somehow 
have a contradiction with what we have been saying. For the 
benefit of this government this should be straightened out, Mr. 
Chairman. Because, to borrow one of the Minister of Finance’s 
all-too-often-used phrases, they just don’t understand. 
 
The minister keeps saying that when it comes to government 
spending the member from Thunder Creek wants massive tax 
cuts, while the member from Wood River wants more spending 
for health care. The minister says that the member from 
Humboldt wants more money for social services. I’m afraid that 
it’s this sort of characterization . . . which is just that; it’s 
characterization, Mr. Chairman. It’s a fictional representation of 
the events, not a real one. It’s time this government examines 
the real facts with respect to their spending. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we raise issues such as we did yesterday, and we 
will again today, on occasions like when this motion is brought 
before us, because we believe that this is just not responsible 
spending. If there was responsible, fair, and accountable 
spending in government, there would be less need for more tax 
revenues. 
 
When the minister raises the questions to us about our policies, 
I would remind him, it’s his policy decisions that are in 
question here. When the members opposite question why this 
government wastes copious amounts of money on health  

consultants instead of nurses, the people of Saskatchewan 
believe that this is a fair question. 
 
If things like this were ended, there would be more money 
available for health care and essential services, Mr. Chairman. 
Services would be delivered more effectively. And the minister 
knows this. The minister knows this to be the case. 
 
I would simply ask the minister at this point in time, will the 
minister commit that you will not spend any more money 
wastefully with respect to the interim supply motion before us 
here today? Don’t waste any more money on consulting for 
these next two months, and put more money towards front-line 
health care working. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to be relatively brief and 
then I will get to . . . relatively brief in responding to your 
comments, then I will get very briefly to your question. 
 
You began your comments with a reference to the real facts. 
The real facts are it all began in Saskatchewan. It was here that 
we defined, first among Canadian provinces, a plan to balance 
the budget. It was here that we announced it. It was here in 
Saskatchewan that it was first accomplished. It was here in 
Saskatchewan that the trend towards responsible fiscal 
management began, and which is putting this country back on 
the road to fiscal health. 
 
Prior to Liberal and Conservative administrations in the ‘70s 
and ‘80s, this province had a worldwide reputation; this country 
had a worldwide reputation for sound fiscal management. 
Thanks to a Liberal administration, followed by a Conservative 
administration, we lost that. 
 
Thanks to what began here in Saskatchewan, and the fact that 
we were able to communicate to the public the need for sound 
fiscal management, it has become a national trend. And I think 
Saskatchewan people can take some pride in once again, in 
once again doing it our own way and in once again providing 
leadership for this nation on the key issues of the day. It began 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  You mentioned the . . . you asked 
about front-line workers in the Department of Health. I want to 
just say that this is not an ideal opportunity to get into details of 
other departments’ estimates. Each one will come. None has 
been closed and I’m not sure the extent to which your House 
Leader’s communicated this. I’m sure he has. But we will . . . 
none of them are closed. We’ll try to accommodate you in 
calling back departments whom you want to take a second run 
at. You’re not closed to the Department of Health. 
 
Let me just say with respect to the Department of Health in 
general in response to your question, it has been our goal in 
health to ensure that so far as possible, front-line workers are 
retained and the cuts, where it’s possible to do so, is done in 
administration and not in the people who are on the front line. 
 
The Minister of Health could give you more detail on this but I  



1186  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

believe it to be a fact that we have, in the staff reductions which 
have taken place in the Department of Health, there have in fact 
been a greater percentage of out-of-scope people who have 
been laid off than in scope. The out-of-scope people have 
carried more than their fair share of the baggage, for which we 
appreciate and for which we thank them. So the suggestion that 
this is all coming at the expense of front-line workers simply 
isn’t accurate. The opposite is true, I say to the member for 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would thank 
the minister for his comment in response. But I do feel though 
it’s worthy of a little bit further comment with respect to health 
care in a general sense, because money is wasted on less 
essential things. The opposition is forced to come to this House 
and raise questions about unfortunate and sad incidents which 
happen in our health care system. We do so to get the 
government to be vigilant in trying to prevent what government 
officials insultingly describe as fallen sparrows. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I fear for the sick and meek in our population 
when their human dignity is reduced to the importance of 
sparrows by some of this government’s Health officials. I 
would just ask the minister, how much of the monies that you 
would be requesting here in this interim supply today would be 
going towards paying the Health department spokesperson who 
spoke in such a crass fashion about our sick. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I am not . . . again, detailed questions 
should really be reserved for the Department of Health 
estimates. Let me just say in general, I think it’s a very poor 
practice to be attacking public servants in this Assembly. We 
have access to the Assembly and it is a considerable privilege. 
We’re given an absolute immunity in what we say. But with 
that privilege goes responsibility  the responsibility not to use 
it in an irresponsible fashion. When you attack public servants 
who, by nature of their employment, are unable to respond, you 
skate very close to using the privileges . . . abusing the 
privileges which are given when you’re elected to this 
Assembly. And I think members opposite ought to be very 
cautious in dragging public servants into the debates in this 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chairman, I would thank the minister for 
his response. I would just mention though that this particular 
individual is on record, is quoted in the newspaper, this Health 
department spokesperson, as referring to these individuals as 
being fallen sparrows. But I will just go on. 
 
Another example of this sort of non-essential spending, Mr. 
Chairman, has been the creation of a new Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and the hiring of another consultant 
to look at our universities. It’s fine to review this situation. Here 
again, however, we have the government spending another pile 
of money on something that will not teach anything to our 
students and will not help anyone get the training they need, 
and this is all wasteful. 
 
We have a capable civil service. We didn’t need to hire any 
more consultants for education when we already have 
Saskatchewan people who are knowledgeable on  

post-secondary education. We also have many interest groups 
and communities, and  I dare say  political parties willing 
to offer their opinions. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chairman, we already have enough cabinet 
ministers to handle the load. Sure there may be a few less than 
the Tories were when they were in power, but no one knows 
how having more will make our education system any better. 
Instead of waiting 18 months to reduce the cabinet, I think the 
Premier should do it immediately. 
 
Mr. Chairman, at the same time that the Premier says he must 
keep this large cabinet around to reform government, his 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education does something that 
completely undermines the Premier’s arguments. If the Premier 
needs to have a larger cabinet to reform government, why then 
does the Minister of Post-Secondary Education need to spend 
$44,000 on hiring a consultant? And I would just like to pose 
that question to the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, with the consent of the 
House Leader, who is handling the Finance interim supply in 
the absence of the Minister of Finance — is in a speaking 
engagement in Saskatoon, a long-standing speaking 
engagement — I want to say a word about this because this 
involves cabinet which is the responsibility of the Premier. 
 
The question specifically relates to the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education. I want to tell the member  I’m 
sure he knows this  that it is not our doing. This is not Ottawa 
bashing. It’s a fact. It’s not our doing that Ottawa has 
withdrawn from skills training, post-secondary manpower 
training, from the national delivery of these kinds of programs. 
It’s not our doing. 
 
To be quite frank with you, I’ve expressed my view to the 
Prime Minister; we need to have national standards and they 
should be involved in this. But because of the Quebec and other 
situations, this is a manpower training area that they’ve pulled 
out of. 
 
Secondly, it’s not our doing that there is a reduction of about 
$25 million in post-secondary education, coupled with the 
whole block transfer reductions, of which have been a large 
amount of debate in this legislature. 
 
Now when you have those factors combined, what would you 
do? 
 
(1115) 
 
Would you say that we should somehow minimize the 
importance of training our youth for tomorrow’s economy  
today’s economy? That we should not develop programs like 
JobStart, Future Skills, and their subsequent emanations? That 
we shouldn’t look at universities to see how they’re performing 
in the 21st century, especially given the fiscal squeeze, that the 
Minister of Education who’s responsible for K to 12 working 
flat out 24 hours a day wouldn’t be able to handle because of 
the obligations which are involved? What does one do? 
 



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

I say the reasonable response to this is, if you want to train our 
people, our kids  forget about the kids; even adults who need 
job retraining, given the changing nature of the economy  
we’ve got to devise those programs. That’s a full-time job. And 
it should be a top priority and it should tie into economic 
development, which it does, and it should tie into social 
services, which it does. And it means negotiations with the 
federal government, which it does. It means interprovincial 
relationships and standards because it’s now a provincial 
responsibility, which it does. 
 
This is a sensible move. And the hon. member opposite can say, 
well it doesn’t matter. You can reduce the cabinet to one, two 
 I mean pick any number that you want. But I tell you in the 
honest and efficient administration of public service, there is 
only so much that a minister to do. And if you want that person 
to dialogue with the public and to listen to the public and reflect 
the best policies going, you need a Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education. 
 
Now what about the question of Mr. MacKay  $44,000. What 
we want here is a facilitation of the two universities themselves, 
recognizing the need to eliminate overlap and duplication and 
for themselves to examine the courses that should or shouldn’t 
be taught and for themselves to take a look at the administrative 
mechanisms that should or shouldn’t be established. And for 
themselves, mindful of their university autonomy and other 
responsibilities in the history of the universities, to come up 
with the 21st century answer for post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. MacKay’s job is to get them around the table to facilitate to 
that, to ask questions, to stimulate thought, stimulate debate. 
Not in the political way, not in the Saskatoon versus Regina 
way, not in a partisan way, but in a very intellectual, honest 
effort to come up with the very best system that we can afford 
in the light of the cut-backs by the federal Liberal government 
in Ottawa, which is a fact. 
 
Now you’re not going to buy that, and you won’t buy it, and 
this will be my last comment as I take my chair. In the 
consequence, if you were in government and you didn’t do 
what we did, my criticism of you, if I was in opposition, would 
be  and it will be, by the way, even in office — of you people 
is that you are ignoring the future of our young people in 
Saskatchewan. You’ve turned your backs on them. You don’t 
care enough about them. You don’t care enough about the 
universities. You don’t care about the SIASTs (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology). You don’t care 
about Future Skills and job training. You simply don’t care 
about them. You’d lump them in with all of the problems that K 
to 12 faces, and those are numerous by themselves as we know. 
You don’t care for them. 
 
You know, I’d like to think you don’t believe that. I’d like to 
think that you’re making this statement because it’s the political 
statement to make; that it may be a short-term political hit for 
you people in a positive way. And goodness knows, if I may say 
so parenthetically, you need all the benefits and boosts that you 
can get these days. 
 
But I’d like to think — to the critic, to the Finance critic —  

who, and I don’t mean to say this in a patronizing way, who I 
think is very sincere about his job as Finance critic and is 
probing in-depth as much as he can on these issues of Finance, 
that truth would prevail, and that your position in a credible, 
long-term way would endorse what we’re doing with respect to 
cabinet and the size of cabinet and the obligations which are 
tied into it. That’s the explanation for it. 
 
I want to make one last point. We lost five ministers before the 
last election  three to the election process, two for personal 
and other reasons. I reappointed those five; same cabinet size. 
One additional is Post-Secondary Education for the reasons that 
are articulated. That’s the size of the cabinet  not inordinate, 
not too large, proper, efficient, and sensible. And that’s why 
this government is functioning the way that it is, with approval 
in the financial and other markets of the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair:  Before we continue, I want to bring to the 
committee, I think that the debate is getting way off track here 
 and remind them at present that we’re not dealing with 
estimates. We are debating a resolution as it pertains to an 
interim supply Bill. We’re not voting individual department 
estimates here. Supply Bills are to issue money required in 
advance before complete parliamentary sanctions. And debate 
should focus on the need to grant, reduce or refuse supply in 
respect to the resolution. 
 
So I want to bring this back, that we’re getting a little off track 
here. I invite the members, not only the members asking the 
questions but the ministers answering the questions, to keep 
their answers and their questions focused on interim supply and 
that we will discuss department policies and details at a later 
date in estimates. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I certainly 
mean no disrespect to your comments just now, but we as 
official opposition certainly did enjoy the opportunity to get the 
Premier involved here today in the interim supply debate. We 
certainly in no way would wish to narrow the scope. It has 
certainly been opened up to be a much broader issue, and we do 
feel there are a lot of serious concerns that need to be 
addressed. So we certainly welcomed the opportunity to have 
the Premier . . . and we are very glad that the minister allowed 
the Premier to make those comments. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I and my colleagues certainly would have no 
problem in continuing. And certainly if the Premier does wish 
to get up and make a few more comments again, we would 
appreciate it, sir. So if would just . . . 
 
The Chair:  I want to tell the member from Thunder Creek 
that I have stated before that we will get into the estimates of 
departments. That is not in interim supply which is what we are 
into now. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. But once 
again though, Mr. Chairman, we in the opposition fail to see 
how what we’ve heard here equates with being responsible, 
accountable, or fair in terms of spending. If the money to pay  



1188  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

another deputy minister, another minister, and his ministerial 
assistants were going to the people who really need it  which 
is the very essence of debate in terms of this interim supply as 
far as we’re concerned, the money is needed for those who need 
it most  if that was the case, then we would gladly say 
everything is fair about it, Mr. Chairman. But unfortunately we 
can’t. 
 
Today, Mr. Chairman, the minister here is asking for more 
money to carry on those same sorts of practices for yet another 
two months. I say put an end to this sort of stuff today. Don’t 
simply ignore it as many of your back-benchers have been. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in the motion before us today, the government is 
carrying on a fine parliamentary tradition of allowing grievance 
before supply. Although we are new in this institution . . . and 
we appreciate the importance of this tradition. While we are 
grateful for this tradition, we are not very happy that there are 
so many grievances. We wish it could be otherwise. Among 
those grievances, Mr. Chairman, are concerns about how the 
government raises revenues as well. 
 
After getting the budget, I decided that I really wanted to know 
how much this government is getting from taxpayers, in 
revenues from taxes. In 1990-91, this government was getting 
as much as $1.998 billion. In this year’s budget, the government 
estimates it will get as much $2.9 billion. Between this year and 
last year, there’s an increase of almost $100 million in revenues 
alone — works out to be in the increase of 3.3 per cent over last 
year in terms of revenue. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the members opposite like to use numbers. 
They worry more about numbers than they do about people. In 
fact if they spent less time worrying about telling us what they 
think of figures that we present to them, they might actually be 
able to do something about the people behind all of those 
numbers, which again, as I say, is the essence of our interim 
supply debate here today. 
 
They might actually be able to do something about the 70,000 
unemployed and under-employed that we have here in this 
province at this time. They might actually be able to do 
something about the 80,000 or so people that we have on 
welfare. They might actually be able to do something about the 
fact that Regina and the east-central area of this province 
experienced negative job growth. And I would just like the 
minister to make a comment about that, if he would. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I’m going to again . . . and I’m going 
to withdraw from this debate, you’ll probably be very pleased to 
hear, because of other commitments. But unfortunately, the 
question that needs, I think again, a response by the Premier. 
 
I can’t believe that the member from Thunder Creek . . . I 
cannot believe that the hon. member honestly believes that 
because there is a Department of Post-Secondary Education that 
we are duplicating costs. I mean do you honestly believe that? 
Because if you do, I got to tell you what the facts are. 
 
Mr. Dan Perrins, fulfilling his job as deputy minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and the Post-Secondary Education’s  

functions  if we had not split them into two departments  
would still be the obligation of the public purse because he’d be 
in the Department of Education from K to 12 to post-secondary. 
That’s where it was located. 
 
All we’ve done is move those people out of K to 12 and put 
them into a separate department; there is no extra cost involved 
in this matter. There may be an extra cost involved with respect 
to executive assistants 2 and a secretary 1 or 2, and whatever is 
associated with the actual minister’s office but, with the 
greatest of respect, that is minimal compared to the issues that 
are before us. 
 
So when you get up and you say in your opening statement, 
here’s what’s happening, you have two departments and 
doubling of costs, this is either wilful misleading of the 
situation or a lack of knowledge; either way, not a very 
acceptable position to take. 
 
The second issue the member raises is the question of taxes. 
Look, in this budget we are confirming tax reductions in regard 
of the aviation fuel tax, a relief now made permanent by the 
way  it was only one-year experimental. 
 
We are continuing the manufacturing and processing rebate 
designed to stimulate those who are manufacturers and 
processors in Saskatchewan. That’s a great job creator, by the 
way, which ties in to your third question. 
 
The debt surcharge is now being made complete  that’s $55 
million of tax relief annually to the ordinary consumers, the 
ordinary taxpayers, not to business people but to all of us who 
filled out our income tax at about this time of year. 
 
Now if the hon. member says we should be doing more, I agree 
with him  we should be doing more. But we are cutting and 
you’re not acknowledging that. And we are cutting in the face 
of a cumulative debt on the Crown and general revenue side of 
$14 billion. 
 
We are cutting taxes in the face of the fact that there’s about 
$850 million a year  two months’ interim supply  going for 
interest payments on the public debt, interest payments alone. 
And that’s a remarkable accomplishment to be able to balance 
the budget, cut back on the debt, forecast surpluses, which we 
hope  we going to do our best  to maintain, and provide tax 
relief and do it in a way to stimulate jobs. And the member will 
not give us any credit for that. 
 
(1130) 
 
I think this is not a credible position. You can maintain it, but 
it’s not a credible position. This is a position which is 
acknowledged in the province and outside the province as being 
a very positive development. 
 
Now with respect to jobs, I think this number can be debated 
and argued ad nauseum. But the Statistics Canada numbers are 
correct. Since 1992, we have over 10,000 full time permanent 
more jobs, since that period today, than 1992. 
 



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

Is it enough? No. Do we need more? Yes. What’s our game 
plan? Partnership for Growth, Partnership for Growth with the 
21 objectives, because this community helped draft that for us. 
They like it. 
 
There’s no instant fix to jobs. We’re not going to, as you 
suggest when you raise all these issues about the people who 
need jobs, we’re not going to go to the Tory or the Liberal line 
of large-scale hand-outs or grants. We’re not going to bankrupt 
the province. The business community doesn’t want any of that. 
 
What we have is a policy which is very focused, very targeted, 
and very successful  very successful. It’s not perfection. It 
isn’t what we would want. But we’re working away at it 
steadily and the lines are up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Pardon me? 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. I want to say this discussion on 
government policy has gone on far too long, I think, and we 
would get back to interim supply, which the debate has to focus 
on the need to grant interim supply, and it should stay on there. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And just before 
the Premier leaves, I would thank him for entering into the 
debate today. And I do believe that it has enriched the debate 
here today to just broaden the scope a little bit. And I’m sure I 
can express this on behalf of my colleagues as well, that I feel 
that it hasn’t in any way done any detrimental damage to the 
debate, certainly. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to toss out another figure here 
to the members opposite, and they might correct it. It’s a shame 
that the Premier does have to leave right now, because I’m sure 
he would like to correct it too. And I would strongly urge him 
to do so. But the figure, Mr. Chairman, is 46 per cent. And I’ll 
repeat it once again for the benefit of the members opposite, 
and once again, it’s 46 per cent. 
 
Well the members opposite I’m sure are curious about where 
this number comes from and what it would mean. Well the 
number shouldn’t worry them. They shouldn’t worry about 
remembering it, because we’ll do our share of reminding them 
over the next little while because it’s one . . . it’ll continue to 
haunt them for quite some time, Mr. Chairman. Because 46 per 
cent is the amount that tax revenues have gone up for this 
government since 1990-91. 
 
So the Premier, when he entered the debate, can speak of the 
tax relief that’s been provided. But it’s incremental, to say the 
least, when you see how much tax revenues have increased 
since that time, thanks mostly to massive tax grabs by the 
government . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. I want to say to the member, I’m 
having a little trouble myself relating this to interim supply 
again. I think we’re on to government policy and government 
estimates in individual departments. I would ask him to tie this 
into interim supply and ask the question, please. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this figure is alarming 
to the people of this province, and this is why I do . . . I will get  

to make a point here if you would just allow me just another 
moment here. Because the reason I brought the number to the 
attention of the House was the member from Regina Coronation 
Park and the Minister of Finance, they’re always talking about 
how they must correct our numbers in debates just such as this 
interim supply debate. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just want to correct them on this number. I just 
ask them to correct us on this number. I’d say, go ahead, but it’s 
correct  46 per cent increased revenue since 1990-91. 
 
You know, people would like this to be corrected, and the 
Premier acknowledges that in saying he would like to provide 
further relief. So the people of this province would like the 
government to correct this. They want them to do something 
about it. The fact that while they can hardly save for retirement 
 the people of this province  they can’t find jobs and pay 
for homes or even essential needs, the government has got 46 
per cent more in tax revenue. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Chairman, that the government can’t offer a more 
substantial tax break to the people of the province even though 
they’re getting 46 per cent more money? All they seem able to 
do is cut services and continue to collect more tax revenue. The 
46 per cent, Mr. Chairman, does not include the millions more 
the government collects in utility charges, or even the boom it 
gained off of resources through royalties and land sales. 
 
The members opposite should get right to it and they should 
correct this number. Today, however, they’re asking for two 
months supply of money just to carry on the same old practices. 
I say, correct the problem and get beyond the number so that 
fewer people in the province are suffering. 
 
The Minister of Finance has stated that the best way to 
encourage economic development is to reduce the tax burden. 
Well if a government has so much more tax revenue coming it, 
then surely it can do something to ease the tax burden a little bit 
more substantially. Easing the tax burden . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. We’re still going back to the 
individual departments, and I think we’re on to discussing of 
policy and taxation and so forth. And that it not what interim 
supply is. I think those are to be dealt with in estimates. 
 
And this is several times now that I’ve warned the member that 
we have to stay within the realms of interim supply, which is 
the granting of funds for the operation of government. The 
individual policies and estimates within departments will be 
handled in estimates, not in interim supply. I would ask him to 
put his question to the interim supply motion that is before the 
House. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I’ll try and 
confine my comments to the debate here today. But I do feel 
though that this has been of significant benefit. I do believe that 
the public welcomes the expanded scope of this debate here 
today. And I would . . . 
 
The Chair:  I want to say to the member that the ruling was  



1190  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

made and it has been stated before that there are other 
procedures and other ways and means to challenge departments 
or to question departments. Interim supply is not that place to 
do it, and I would ask him to hold his questions within the 
generality of interim supply. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chairman, I just have to make a 
comment with respect to the government and the spending in 
the Crown corporations, if I would. 
 
Last year the government chose not to take millions that were 
left in the liquor and the gaming fund and they also avoided 
taking 60 million that was offered as a dividend from the 
Crown corporations. Instead, the government chose to take 188 
million that originally was planned to use in the gross revenue 
insurance program. 
 
Why would the minister value spending money on the Crown 
corporations more than on the families of this province? 
 
Mr. Chairman, for the benefit of the minister who was 
otherwise involved, I would just like to ask him why does he 
value spending more money on this government’s Crown 
corporations than he does on our families in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This process can go on for ever. If 
you’re allowed . . . if the members opposite are allowed to 
begin their comments by saying, you spend money on X and 
therefore I want to ask about X, no matter how obscure or far it 
may be, or how great an issue it may be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Or how much out of order it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Or how much out of order it is. The 
interim supply has a relatively narrow purpose. You’re voting a 
month, or two months as the case may be; you’re voting a 
month or two month’s supply. This is not an appropriate place 
to raise general questions of tax policy or spending on Crown 
corporations. This is not a general discussion of revenue and 
taxation in the province. This is not what it is. 
 
I say to the member from Thunder Creek. I don’t want to . . . 
I’ll put this diplomatically. You should either accept the ruling 
of the Chair or you should challenge it  and there’s a process 
for doing that. But you simply can’t go on ignoring it which I 
think is what you’ve been doing. 
 
The ruling of a Chairperson, while I shouldn’t be commenting 
on it, is patently in keeping with the long-term traditions of this 
House. And certainly we were not allowed when we were in 
opposition to engage in this kind of a broad discussion. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Chair, in all due respect to the challenge you 
have before you with this discussion, we take our lead on what 
has been done in the past. In fact from Hansard March 31, 
1993, it appears as though this NDP government allowed one of 
the members opposite to go into a five-page dissertation as a 
preamble to his question. And so of course, believing that that 
was correct, right, and just in 1993, we question why it is not 
right at this time. 
 

The Chair:  I want to simply state that the Chair that is in the 
Chair right now has said that the questions today are more in 
line with the estimates when we get into departments. I have 
made that ruling, and I will stay with that ruling, and I will ask 
the members to narrow it down to interim supply which is 
simply granting of two months of funds for the government to 
operate on. 
 
The departments . . . the policy and the departments of spending 
within the departments, policy of the departments, is to be done 
in estimates not in interim supply. The ruling has been said, and 
I will ask the members to focus on interim supply. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, just to clarify. My colleague 
from Thunder Creek . . . The assurances that the monies that are 
being asked for are not only adequately but appropriately being 
directed for the various departments and for the expenditures, 
just to clarify that the blame that has been laid about the 
cut-backs with respect to various funding programs, and then 
the comment by the government that that has all back-filled, it’s 
just to ensure that monies that will be paid out to the various 
departments for the next month or two months, or whatever we 
agree on, are appropriate and sufficient and adequate. 
 
The Chair:  I guess I want to clarify here that if the ruling of 
the Chair is being challenged there is a proper procedure for 
that. Either the Chair is being challenged, or the ruling will be 
upheld. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, I apologize. It was not merely a 
challenge, but merely an explanation on the process and 
procedure that we believed was proper to follow based on the 
past experiences. I apologize if it appeared to be a challenge. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the minister 
or the Premier. Last month at about this time, the House gave 
the minister a sum equal to a twelfth of all the spending for the 
year. 
 
Over the last year, we’ve heard the Provincial Auditor suggest 
that the government should be providing an annual report about 
its financial performance. It would be a simple opportunity for 
the government to put together a document which compares 
proposed expenditures against actual expenditures. More 
importantly, it would show results of the program spending 
against the intended, or proposed, goals and targets. 
 
And I’m sure that the minister and the Premier would at least 
agree with the principle that planning is not complete without 
final reporting to show whether intended goals were achieved. 
 
Now today, here, Mr. Chairman, the minister and the Premier 
here are asking for another two-twelfths supply. And I would 
suggest that before this be given by the House, it would be 
appropriate for him to briefly report or outline to members of 
the House whether the intended results were achieved from the 
last interim supply that was given to this government in the 
House. 
 



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Chairman, I will of course abide 
by your ruling presuming the question is in order; so that being 
in order, I’ll have to give a response. 
 
We have a business plan and an accountability plan  it’s 
called Public Accounts. When we table the budget, it’s a 
forecast. When we table the Public Accounts you can go back to 
see whether or not what we said in ‘94-95 is accurate by the 
Public Accounts in ‘94-95. 
 
We do that with the Crown Investments Corporation. We do 
that with all the Crowns in Crown Corporations Committees. 
We do that. 
 
All you have to do is just pick up the ‘94-95 Public Accounts, 
which is a public document, take a look at the budget ‘94-95 
and say, okay, where has the government misled? Where is it 
off base in its plan? 
 
Our plan is the budget. It sets out a four-year plan. One which, I 
might add amongst others, receives high marks internally by 
journalists in the business community and in the fiscal 
community, and externally. 
 
Now does the plan succeed? You’ll know when we table Public 
Accounts. That’s why we have a Public Accounts Committee. 
You get in there and you ask the detailed questions in Public 
Accounts Committee. You don’t ask the questions in interim 
supply. All we want is two-twelfths or whatever it is  is it 
two-twelfths that we want now?  two-twelfths for the 
funding. 
 
If you want to take the Department of Finance and spend 10 
days or 10 months with the Department of Finance and go every 
tax policy and detail, pass interim supply, we’ll call the 
Department of Finance right now. The officials are here. Let’s 
not waste their time. Let’s call them and let’s call the 
Department of Finance estimates. 
 
If you don’t want Finance, you want Executive Council, let’s 
shut her down right now; interim supply, vote it, and call the 
Executive Council and I’ll be here for 10 hours, 10 minutes, 10 
years. Whatever you want. 
 
I mean how can it be said that we don’t have this 
accountability. There is no other government that has this level 
of accountability. I might add here, by the way, talking about 
the address, budget address of February 1995, the Provincial 
Auditor’s report of the financial statements, “represent the true 
state of the government books.” 

 
So I mean, you know, I’m not trying to be hard on you on the 
process of it. I am being hard on you on the process. We don’t 
want to limit debate. You can debate anything you want about 
the estimates on a department-by-department basis, I repeat 
again. 
 
That’s not what we’re doing here. What we’re doing here is 
voting two-twelfths for the government to function. And if you 
want to pass that today, within the next two minutes, we’ll call 
the department of your choice. You can keep us there for ever  

on the department’s spendings on a detailed basis. 
 
You can’t expect us to answer for every department. Believe it 
or not, the Department of Finance does not answer for every 
department. That’s why we have ministers. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would thank 
the Premier for his response. However with respect to the 
annual report for government, I would just remind the Premier 
that his own members in the Public Accounts Committee that 
he referred to, just passed a motion recently to just study the 
matter of having an annual report. 
 
So his suggestion that there is one at this time is not quite . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order. I think we’re doing the same thing. 
 
I want to inform the members that the rulings that I’ve made 
here today are consistent with rulings made back in 1990, ’91, 
’92, and ’93, so we’re trying to hold some consistency here. 
Now the Chair is trying to be consistent with what interim 
supply is, but it doesn’t seem like we’re getting much 
cooperation from either side here. We’re getting too long on the 
questions which are not zeroed enough, and then the answers 
are also getting wide astray here. 
 
So I’m going to stay with the consistency of the rulings and I 
ask them to come back to interim supply which is simply the 
granting of monies for the government. And any other questions 
on policy or whatever is handled in estimates by departments 
and by the ministers. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Chairman, we’ve been asked as opposition 
to support the government motion to spend one-sixth of their 
budget at this time, and I guess it’s obvious that we’re having 
difficulty supporting this motion because we aren’t aware if the 
revenues that are expected on the other side is something that’s 
actually matching. 
 
Is it a fair question to ask if the projected revenues are also in 
the same way? Are they coming in in the same way that the 
projected expenses are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer to 
that question is that the budget was passed on March 28 . . . 
sorry, introduced on March 28. It has not been yet passed. The 
fiscal year ‘95-96 closed on March 31. We are today on April 
26 I guess, or 27. We only have 26 days by which to judge the 
revenues. These are done basically, are they Mr. Jones, on a 
month-to-month basis? On the month-to-month basis. And so 
far as we know, the deputy advises me, they’re on target; the 
revenues are target. 
 
May I make one general observation. Why our record is 
received and approved internally but as importantly externally, 
by rating agencies, for example the credit worthiness of the 
province, is because the goals and the targets that we set on 
revenues and expenditures have for four years, roughly been 
met. I would say more than roughly  have been met, 
essentially. 
 



1192  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

And what the investment community and the business 
community likes, is that for four years we have a solid track 
record of, as I said  it’s kind of cliché, but I mean it  a 
promise made is a promise kept. There is no guarantee, as the 
member knows opposite, with respect to oil prices for example. 
We make a prediction on oil prices which will affect our 
revenues, but if something happens in the United Nations with 
Iraq, prices could go one way or the other. 
 
We don’t know what the prices are going to be with respect to 
wheat. All we can do is take our best economists and fiscal 
forecasters and put them together and come up with the best 
estimates of revenues that are possible. 
 
For this current year, the one-twelfth, two-twelfth that we’re 
asking you to vote, we don’t have the knowledge yet. It’s 26 
days or 27 days. The deputy says in the first beginning days of 
this year, they look like they’re on target. But you can’t be 
certain until we get the monthly numbers in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I rise as Government House Leader 
and not as the minister in charge of interim supply. This House, 
I think, has functioned reasonably well because our staffs have 
worked together reasonably well. I think there was an 
understanding, Mr. Chair, among the staff that these set of 
questions would go on. And I would like to honour that, 
although I respect the rulings; in fact I’ve supported them. 
 
What I think we might do is by leave, agree that this interim 
supply be given a broader scope for at least the balance of the 
morning. 
 
An Hon. Member:  But not set a precedent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  But not set a precedent; that’s right. 
That’s putting it well. We do not set a precedent, but for the 
balance of the morning, because of the discussions that went on 
among our staff, we will give the interim supply a broader 
scope. And we’re prepared to give leave to do that. 
 
The Chair:  Leave has been asked by the Government House 
Leader that the scope of questioning for this morning only, on 
interim supply, and not to set a precedence, be broadened for 
. . . like I say, I repeat, for this morning only. I can do that and 
I’d loosen up the rules and move from the rules if leave is 
granted. If leave is not granted, we will follow the rules. The 
Government House Leader has asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Chair:  The questioning then can go to a broader scope 
this morning. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Just a couple of questions on interim supply. 
Obviously the purpose of the Bill is simply to allow 
government to continue to operate without having to go through 
the whole scenario here. But how does the government 
currently supply their third parties? Is there a difference 
between the school boards or the health districts or the 
municipal governments? Is it quarterly or is it biannual? How  

does regular payments go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Actually, transferring the money to 
things like health regions or schools or whatever varies from 
department to department. The departments, in discussion with 
the third parties, which I think is your question . . . how do the 
third parties actually get their money? Do they get it monthly, 
quarterly, yearly? 
 
The departments work out with the third parties, be it the city of 
Regina or the transition houses or whatever. You know, I just 
picked those two right out of the air. They work out the 
arrangements with them. And it varies from department to 
department, and it will vary within a department. So there’s just 
no general rule. In some cases it’s monthly, in some cases it’s 
quarterly, and in some cases it’s annually. So it varies with 
department and will vary within a department. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I’d asked this question 
previously to the Minister of Finance, and I was a bit confused 
with the response. But will there be any substantial losses 
incurred by the third parties as a result of this interim supply 
motion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  If the interim supply is passed on 
Monday, as I think has been expected by parties, there will be 
no late payments. The last authorization took us to April 30, 
and I understand that this interim supply is for the month of . . . 
starts the month of May. So the answer to your question is there 
should be no loss of . . . there should be no late payments if the 
interim supply were passed by April 30. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess in the second part of the question, 
will the government itself realize any savings by this interim 
supply motion versus the quarterly or the annual contributions 
that you make to a third party? I’m saying that obviously with 
the tremendous budget that we’re talking about here, there may 
be substantial savings that does not require the government to 
meet. So what are you planning to do with those savings, if 
there are any, and what the figure is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, there will be no savings. Once 
we pass the Appropriation Bill in the end of May or whenever, 
then the departments will have the authorization to spend the 
full amount, and they’ll work out permanent arrangements. This 
is an interim supply. This authorizes the department to spend 
two-twelfths of the total funds. And there’s no savings. There’s 
no additional cost to the system. There’s no additional savings. 
This simply allows the departments to carry on until the 
Appropriation Bill is passed, as I say, probably the end of May. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. I 
realize there’s been a bit of a problem on how much latitude we 
have in the questioning, but what makes it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Go ahead, toss me your worst. I’ll bat it 
out of the park. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well no, I’m not going to toss you my 
worst. But what I will do in the cooperation that you’ve showed 
with leave in having the questions a little more broad ranging  



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

. . . but at least when you come and ask for the . . . which I 
thought we were going to deal with one-twelfth but you’ve 
brought it in as two-twelfths supply. At the time you begin the 
proceedings, why not then table the amounts that you’re asking 
for each month of the two month supply? 
 
I mean, let’s see the detailed list. Why do we have to always 
come forward and ask for it? Give us the list, and then we’ll 
work our questions, and maybe we’ll even be able to keep them 
a little bit narrower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In fact, we will do that. If I can get 
the assistance of a page, I will table . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’m sure the page will make as many copies as you need. 
I’ve got two. Okay, I think I’ve got a third one. I’m just 
checking these are all the same. Well here’s three. That ought to 
keep you going for a moment. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Just another question on the losses versus the 
savings. I guess if a government is required to give up $10 
million in one day as opposed to $20 million in one day, there’s 
obviously got to be some kind of savings earned, either to 
interest or less money borrowed or whatever means. So you’re 
absolutely positive and sure there’s no savings as a result of this 
interim supply? 
 
In essence it’s going to cost you less money to give out for a 
shorter period of time, so we would assume that there was 
savings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, it doesn’t cost the . . . We don’t 
expect to be late because we do expect this to be passed by the 
30th of April. And so long as that’s the case, then with the 
authorization . . . this legislature will authorize the departments 
to spend the money and do so on time. 
 
If it were to drag into May . . . and one would hope that would 
not be the case. But if, speaking hypothetically, if the matter 
were to drag into May, I don’t know that it would cost the 
government any money or save the government any money, but 
it would cause an enormous amount of hardship for 
somebody’s who’s waiting for a welfare cheque, for instance. 
 
But it doesn’t actually  if we’re late or early  it doesn’t 
actually save the government or cost the government any 
money. A late one, such as we had in April, may cause some 
hardship, but it won’t cost or save any money. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Now 
you’re talking about certain departments. There are certain 
peoples that are not going to get their cheques on time . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, they’ll all get them on time? But 
what you can table today, no doubt, is exactly which 
departments send out what cheques and when they have to go 
out. I mean surely they don’t all have to go out on the first of 
the month or the thirtieth of a month . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . It covers two months, but can . . . 
 
All right, let’s deal with one department. Take Social Services,  

all right? So can you send us a list of when the cheques go out 
in each department or each segment of a department, so we can 
have some idea, you know, when you’re accusing the 
opposition of holding up people’s cheques. Show us what 
cheques. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Let me give you some examples. I 
certainly couldn’t give you an exhaustive list; that would 
number in the thousands or tens of thousands. Let me give you 
an example of the sort of cheques which go out on May 1. 
That’s perhaps an appropriate response to the member’s 
question. 
 
Foster parents, their cheques normally go out May 1. If it’s 
passed by April 30, it goes out on time. If it isn’t, it doesn’t. 
Shelter workshops, their payment is due May 1. Activity 
centres, their payment is due May 1. Transition houses, due 
May 1. Group homes, due May 1. Early childhood intervention, 
these are NGOs (non-governmental organizations), due May 1. 
Personal family violence service, due May 1. Group homes, due 
May 1. 
 
That’s an example of the sort of payments which are due May 1 
and which we are very reluctant to be late with. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to ask the 
minister, in view of the fact that the Minister of Social Services 
is given authority by order in council to grant certain amounts 
of money to different organizations, my question is whether or 
not these . . . are these in lump sums, or are they also monthly, 
or cheques that go to these organizations? And if they are lump 
sums in fact, then a number of organizations would be having 
that money on hand rather than having to wait for monthly 
cheques. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I say to the member from Humboldt, 
there’s no general rule. Some are lump sums. Some are 
monthly. It depends on the arrangement they have worked out, 
will often depend on a variety of different factors: their needs, 
the maturity, and the confidence in the relationship between the 
department and the NGOs. It depends on a lot of factors. There 
isn’t any single rule that they’re paid by, and therefore your 
question is hard to answer because there’s no single system. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If there is a lump sum 
given out  in some cases, as you have stated, you thought 
there would be  is then the interim supply that has been 
designated for the total cost of maybe that organization, I guess 
a need for that unfounded for, I would say. So I’m just 
wondering whether or not . . . if you could comment on that, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, the legislature authorizes 
two-twelfths, and as a general rule  there may be some 
exceptions to this lurking around some where  but as a 
general rule they only get two-twelfths until the Appropriation 
Bill is passed when the session wraps up. I suppose the end of 
May. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the 
concerns I have, Mr. Minister, is Municipal Government. I see  



1194  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

you’re asking for . . . in asking for two-twelfths, $31 
million-plus . . . That’s pay cheques. Can you tell me what else 
that money will go for, like what we’re asking for here to be 
paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This particular department has got 
two-twelfths of its funding. It would be used, some for salaries, 
some for grants, and so on. There’s no . . . it’s very hard to give 
you a quick summary of the answer. This will go for all . . . The 
department gets two-twelfths. It’s to be used for all the things 
the department uses money for: some for salaries, some for 
supplies, some for grants to municipalities, etc., etc. So there’s 
no single rule. The department gets two-twelfths. They’ve got 
to manage it until the Appropriation Bill is passed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
then if that’s the case and this is the normal two-twelfths, 
one-twelfth, I have a big concern here because rural 
municipalities work on futures. And they’ve been cut back so 
much in the last five years that many of these RMs are working 
on operating money until they receive their futures. And I 
would suggest that one-twelfth will not come near covering the 
futures which these RMs and municipalities normally receive 
this time of year. And you’re going to create a big hardship if 
this one-twelfth will not cover these futures. 
 
Can you explain at this time what these futures amount to. And 
will one-twelfth, or two-twelfths, whatever is passed here today, 
cover these futures? And let’s not create a hardship for the 
municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m not familiar with the detail of 
how the RMs manage this. I only say to the member that this is 
the traditional way this is handled. This system hasn’t changed 
in the 22 years I’ve been here and I’m sure in the 80 years 
before that. This is the traditional system which we’ve always 
followed. 
 
The departments get two-twelfths of their spending. It is up to 
them to manage it. I don’t think  but you might want to ask 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs when her estimates come up 
 I don’t think the RMs generally get their grants until well 
after the session normally adjourns. The department manages it, 
and the RMs have managed it, and this hasn’t changed in 
recorded time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But I think you 
can sympathize with my concern because I do know as a past 
reeve of an RM that in April or early May we always received 
our futures. And in many of the last few years, we have had 
operating money borrowed to keep running until these futures 
came in, and then we carried on. So it’s a great concern to me, 
and I know it is a great concern to municipalities out there. And 
I would certainly hope that we didn’t get caught short here and 
that they were delayed for two months, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, I’m sure the Department of 
Municipal Affairs would be able to manage it. And these kind 
of discussions go on between the department officials from the 
Department of Finance and the officials from Municipal Affairs 
. . . how much do you need and so on and so forth. 

And I remember when we were in opposition. We’d scan this 
thing with enormous care . . . enormous detail I guess. I 
shouldn’t say enormous care, but enormous detail. Sometimes 
we’d find a department which got a little more than 
two-twelfths, and we would leap upon this as if we just 
uncovered a scandal of enormous depth. In fact this is the 
explanation. Departments, the Department of Finance put their 
heads together and they work out all of these problems so that 
they can manage it until after the Appropriation Bill has passed. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, my 
question around the appropriation of the combined 
three-twelfths, if indeed the two-twelfths is granted, is in the 
area of education. As my colleague from Saltcoats has 
indicated, I think school boards operate much on the same note 
as RMs do, maybe even more so because they rely on a funding 
grant monthly. 
 
From my past experiences, I know many times government did 
not pay a portion of the grant to school boards until well into 
May and June, and it causes much liability. Many school boards 
are overdrawn right now millions of dollars because in rural 
Saskatchewan taxes usually aren’t paid in January, February, 
March, April, May, and we’re . . . Even though you’d look 
outside today, you wouldn’t know that May 1 is around the 
corner, but it is, and that’s the fifth month. That’ll be 
five-twelfths of a school board’s spending very, very soon. 
 
My question then is when this interim supply is granted, will 
the boards of education have received five-twelfths of their 
share, or will they still be receiving only three-twelfths based on 
the interim supply, if that is the combined amount that we 
appropriate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  If these are problems, they’re not 
new ones. They’re very traditional. Again it’s up to the 
Department of Education to take its two-twelfths and manage 
that until the Appropriation Bill is passed. 
 
I could suggest a solution to members opposite; we could speed 
up the estimates process, pass the Appropriation Bill, and then 
they can send the whole kit and caboodle out to them. So you 
may want to give that some thought. A quick and early end to 
the estimates, a quick and early end to the debate on the 
Appropriation Bill, and we’ll have resolved this problem. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for your suggestion, Mr. Minister. 
But the fact is we have a lot of questions about the various 
amounts of money that are being spent and the choices that 
were made as to where that money is being spent. 
 
My final question around education . . . and I know you’ve 
indicated that you’re saying the department has the choice as to 
where they spend the money that has been granted by the 
interim supply. My question then is, in the light of capital 
projects, for instance in school boards, your budget indicates 
that there will be capital spending. Will this interim supply 
grant that monies to allow the capital projects to proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m sorry my attention was 
distracted. I will have to ask the member to repeat the question. 



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

Mr. Krawetz:  Yes, Mr. Minister, my question is around the 
capital projects in the area of education. Will interim supply, 
granting three-twelfths, if that is what our decision is, 
one-twelfth plus the two-twelfths, will that allow capital 
projects to proceed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I think the general answer to the 
question is yes, but the real answer is that they, the Department 
of Education together with the school boards working in 
cooperation, must manage the projects such that the cash flow 
is manageable within the two-twelfths allotments which we’re 
giving them. 
 
I think the answer to your question is yes. I think by and large 
the department contacts the divisions, the school divisions, and 
they tell them that the project in the Canora school, the 
gymnasium is on. And they begin to do the planning. They just 
got to manage the cash flow so that it fits within the time frame 
and the procedures of this legislature, which as I say are as 
traditional as the ornamental woodwork in here, actually. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Deputy Chair, my question is regarding 
programs that will be put in place as the result of the budget and 
department changes that have not yet been introduced. So by 
allocating this funding, the two-twelfths, there will be money 
put forward to departments that won’t actually be needed yet 
because that program hasn’t been started. Can you just give me 
some clarification on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, the member is of course correct. 
This authorizes the departments to spend the money. It certainly 
doesn’t require the department to spend the money. Heaven 
forbid. And they don’t have to spend it within the two months. 
They don’t have to spend it by the end of the year; in fact we 
encourage them not to and to turn it back. 
 
I’m not sure we entirely do as good a job of encouraging them 
to save money as we might. I sometimes think we should have 
incentives for departments which underspend. But certainly 
they’re not required to spend it, just simply authorized to. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Deputy Chair. One of the 
questions here on your interim supply, you have servicing the 
public debt, 813.217 million. I notice that the first interim 
supply has zero on there, and as well, the two-twelfth, second 
interim supply, also has zero. Is this to infer that we’re not 
paying the debt as quickly as we should be in terms of the 
month-to-month scenario? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I had to get an explanation on 
that myself, so we’re both the wiser here. The interest on the 
public debt, to which I gather you were referring, is a statutory 
expenditure, that is, it’s authorized by law and thus does not 
require the authorization of this legislature. Thus no part of the 
two-twelfths is being used for that, because it’s authorized by 
law and we don’t need to authorize it. That’s why the zeroes are 
there. That will be spent and interest will be paid on those 
bonds where the debentures were. It calls for it, but it doesn’t 
happen because we authorize it. So we’re not authorizing it   

it’s authorized somewhere else; that’s why it’s zero. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Yes, I guess the second part of the question 
is: so when you have the zeroes in the first twelfth, which I 
understand, and the zeroes in the two-twelfths, which I also 
understand, is that saying that we’re not paying the debt this 
month or next month but rather at the end of the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No. Because it’s authorized by law, it 
means that we don’t have to authorize the expenditure. This is 
not a list of what we’re spending; this is a list of what we are 
authorizing the government to spend. We don’t have to 
authorize the expenditure on interest; it’s authorized by law. So 
the expenditure will be made, it’s just that we’re not authorizing 
it. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I understand that part of it, that it’s going to 
be paid regardless of whether we hold this up here or not, and I 
appreciate the response. 
 
My question is, in reference to the public debt, are we paying 
that daily, weekly, monthly, or are we paying it semi-annually, 
quarterly? How is the public debt being serviced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It depends upon the nature of the 
obligation. You know, there’s quite a . . . there’s long-term 
bonds; there’s short-term bonds; there’s daily borrowings; so on 
and so forth. It depends upon the nature of the obligation. In 
some cases it’s yearly; some cases it’s semi-annually; it’s 
quarterly; it’s monthly; it’s weekly; and in fact in some it’s 
daily. It depends upon the nature of the obligation. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And I would 
just like to express my gratitude and the gratitude of our 
colleagues here today for having been granted some latitude in 
terms of our questioning. It was appreciated. And we did 
appreciate, as I said earlier, the Premier’s participation too. 
 
With respect to broadening the scope again a little bit, Mr. 
Minister, I know that the two-twelfths doesn’t include any 
spending that’s made in the Crowns, in our Crown 
corporations. And the Provincial Auditor has repeatedly said, 
and he did so yesterday even in fact, that all spending should be 
placed under the purview of the legislature. His opinion as an 
accountant was that anything done with public money shouldn’t 
be such that it can’t be made public. And I’m sure with the 
release of the spring report next week we’ll hear the same 
again. 
 
And here before us today we can obviously see that this is just 
money for the departments, as we’ve been talking about. 
However, there’s a full 40 per cent of public money that’s spent 
or earned in the Crowns and it only falls under the scrutiny of 
the Crown Corporations Committee which in turn is dominated 
by government members with their marching orders to help the 
government avoid being accountable. It lacks substantive power 
and freedom. 
 
Those comments in turn do bring me to a question, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Why, Mr. Minister, is Crown spending not included 
more under the purview of the legislature? 



1196  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well in a very real way, it is. It is, 
through the Crown Corporations Committee. It isn’t part of this 
process, because the Crown corporations don’t get their money 
from us. That’s not a hundred per cent true. Members will see 
in the sheet which I sent over a few moments ago, after the total 
budgetary expense there’s been some reference to Crown 
corporations. There is some money which we vote which goes 
to Crown corporations. 
 
By and large though, SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) don’t get 
money from us. They get it directly from people who use their 
services. They charge for insurance policies, for natural gas, for 
electricity, for telephone service, and they use that money. So 
we don’t authorize its expenditure because they don’t get it 
from us. That’s the real reason. 
 
In fact, however, the Crown Corporations Committee does 
provide an opportunity for members of the Assembly to 
scrutinize the expenditure of Crown corporations. It is 
something that . . . I remember being chairperson of this 
committee some time ago. At the time, we had the only Crown 
Corporations Committee in Canada. I don’t know if that’s still 
the case, but I know there are very few. 
 
You certainly wouldn’t want to be part of that cabal in Ottawa 
who manage there, because there’s no such Crown 
Corporations Committee. It may not be unique any more. 
Perhaps it is, I don’t know. But most legislatures do not have 
Crown Corporations; most legislatures do not have the 
opportunity to opt to pass upon the spending of Crown 
corporations. 
 
It is true the Crown Corporations does not authorize the 
expenditures. But at the end of the day, what are we doing here? 
You’re calling the government to account. If there’s something 
lacking in our approach or our management, you appeal to 
public opinion. That’s really what you’re doing. In de jure I 
suppose you are authorizing expenditures. De facto, you’re 
calling us to the bar of public opinion. And if we pass the 
muster, we do. And if we don’t, you’ve scored a triumph. 
 
You get the same process in Crown Corporations. You have the 
opportunity to call the Crowns before the bar of public opinion, 
and have them judged wanting or not wanting. And it’s true the 
Crown Corporations has a majority of government members. So 
does this place. It is true that at the end of the day the Crown 
Corporations are very likely to pass the annual reports. We are 
very likely to pass the appropriation Bill in due course, 
whatever your views on it. 
 
Your real power, the trump card that you’ve got in your sleeve, 
is not the ability to refuse the appropriations Bill. With 10 
members, you can’t do that. Your real trump card is your ability 
to appeal to public opinion. 
 
And you have exactly the same ability, if you use it, in Crown 
Corporations. I am not sure of recent times  and I don’t mean 
just last month or so  I’m not sure in recent times the Crown 
Corporations Committee has been utilized as effectively as it 
might have been. But it can be very effective in calling Crown  

corporations before the bar of public opinion. It can be 
effective; use it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, as soon as some of your members opposite would quit 
the heckling, we’ll get on with it. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
I find it interesting that the minister would get in talking about 
Crown Corporations . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  A very effective committee. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well sure it’s an effective committee if in 
fact you can get responses. But yesterday, I sat in on the Crown 
Corporations Committee with the Deputy Chair, of course, and 
other members . . . and posing several questions and we went 
through the same process yesterday where in fact we can’t get 
the answers that we’re asking . . . we question them. You know 
it ended up being, you know, a terrible fight in there yesterday, 
and it doesn’t have to be. And the problem yesterday was the 
same as today. You have information that you could have and 
should have brought forward, and you don’t. And you don’t. 
And look at what you’re doing today. 
 
You’re coming forward, asking for two-twelfths of the money, 
and the budget will be voted on in very near future. Why didn’t 
you leave it at one-twelfth? Just because you don’t want to be 
scrutinized in another 30 days. You’re trying to bypass 
something. I don’t know when the last time, in fact, before a 
budget was passed, that you were asking for two-twelfths. 
One-twelfth sufficed last month. Why not again this month? 
 
There again, it’s gamesmanship. That’s what it is. 
 
But I would like to know, Mr. Minister, you‘re about how for 
22 years or 20 whatever . . . 27 years that you’ve been in the 
House, and the process hasn’t changed. And yet accounting 
principles have changed. A few years ago, the government 
changed to accrual accounting. So tell me how that change is 
affecting your interim supply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I have been handed a brief history of 
the interim supply . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Do you have that with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I just happen to have the music with 
me; that’s right, as the member from Wood River points out. I 
could read this for you if you want, but this is accurate, and it 
establishes that two-twelfths has been a norm. There have been 
exceptions. Legislatures also voted on occasion one-twelfth. 
But going back . . . and this document goes back to the 
Blakeney era. In fact it goes back to the Thatcher era. 
Two-twelfths has been the rule rather than the exception. Lots 
of times they voted one-twelfth. I’ve not counted this up, but I 
think it’s fair to say in the majority of cases two-twelfths has 
been voted. This is the norm. What we are following is the 
norm. 
 
What you have is one good opportunity, and I agree you didn’t  



April 26, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

get it at the beginning of April. That’s why we only asked for 
one-twelfth in April. 
 
The events, the budget, and the weekend, did not give you a 
very adequate opportunity, but in each legislature you want one 
good opportunity on interim supply, and this is it. But I think 
you will find it’s not something you’re necessarily going to 
want to repeat at the end of May. There’s only so much time in 
a legislature. You want one good crack at interim supply; you 
want to deal with these issues. But then you probably don’t 
want to revisit this. You probably want to spend the time at the 
end of May in other ways. 
 
And I think that’s why the tradition has grown up that at least 
the second vote-off is usually two-twelfths. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. Well 
firstly the lecture wasn’t appreciated but the question . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well it was enjoyed by me, though. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well sure it was enjoyed by you. But what 
you forgot to do is give me an answer to how, in fact, interim 
supply is affected by your changes to . . . with accounting 
principles now that we’re on accrual accounting. That should be 
changing what happens here. That was the question. If you want 
to deal with that question, fine. 
 
Or otherwise we’ll come back in May if you want to cut it to 
one-twelfth, and bring in one-twelfth next month and give us 
the shot then. Now that we’ve had to fight with this government 
time and time again, as we did yesterday in Crown Corps, as we 
did this morning, to have a little bit more latitude in asking 
questions. You claim you’re open and accountable. Prove it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I had to refresh my memory. We 
went to accrual accounting in ‘94-95 so we’ve had . . . this is 
the second, third year I guess. I am told that this process of 
interim supply did not change with the change in accrual 
accounting. While it changed many things about our budgeting 
process, it didn’t change this process at all. 
 
This process of getting interim supply was unaffected by the 
change to accrual accounting. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, but 
it should have. As the member from Saltcoats was asking 
before about questions regarding futures . . . is that right? 
Futures on highways, roads? Because now you can’t spend 
money into the future without having it spent at the time, or in 
the budgeting year that the announcement is. 
 
So now if we’re going into say a spring session of road building 
or construction, that would put a lot heavier burden on 
municipal government. So can you tell us how that relationship 
works with accrual accounting and interim supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It really has not affected it. Accrual 
accounting changes the way we show our . . . the way we spend 
our money and the way we handle the cash flow. It doesn’t 
really affect that. 

I point out, for the benefit of the members opposite, that what’s 
being done this year is a process which has been followed 
before and hasn’t changed. That is, that going back to, and I 
can’t go through this extensively, but going back to at least . . . 
well ‘90-91 the legislature got prorogued in the middle of the 
thing. Actually we never did finish the session in the summer of 
’91. 
 
But prior to that, in each case actually, we . . . the first cut, the 
first tranche if you like, has been one-twelfth. And then the 
second tranche has been two-twelfths. And I think it has largely 
met the needs of members who need one good go  perhaps at 
the most, two  at interim supply. It’s not something you want 
to waste, not something you necessarily want to do every 
month. So this is a pattern which we’ve followed in the past. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
in the next year there will be a full review of the constitution as 
required by law. And I know your government shares the 
concerns of many Canadians about the future of our country 
and the role the province might play in keeping that country 
together. And given that your Department of Intergovernmental 
Affairs is a small one, I wonder if you could clarify something 
for us here today. 
 
With Mr. Bouchard saying that there may be some potential to 
renegotiate the constitution and with your Premier calling for a 
first ministers’ meeting, I believe with the Finance minister, is 
there not a potential for some significant overruns on costs 
here? 
 
And the increased activity like this  albeit it it’s important 
activity  it could significantly skew the spending so that the 
two-twelfths asked for here today, with respect to your 
department, is in fact not actually two-twelfths but it might be 
less than that. And could you comment on that please, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, there is a significant risk. When 
my departmental estimates come before the Assembly, you will 
note, you will I’m sure, note an overexpenditure. 
 
Part of the reason was because of the unexpected result of the 
referendum on October 30. No one anticipated the result until 
very shortly before the event. And thus thereafter there was a 
flurry of activity. 
 
Depending on what the new Premier of Quebec does, there may 
or may not be yet another flurry of activity, and it’s almost 
impossible to predict. And indeed, within each department we 
don’t always manage to stay within budget, although these folks 
are pretty firm in trying to get the departments to do that. 
 
What we do undertake to the Assembly and what so far we’ve 
been able to deliver on, in contradistinction to any other 
government during the ’80s, what we have been able to deliver 
on is that we have been able to overall manage the government 
within the sums allotted by this government, and we have 
generally been able to avoid overruns. Now last year we got the  



1198  Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1996 

forest fires and so on; $60 million worth of water — that’s 
awfully hard to predict. 
 
I think I have the concurrence of members perhaps at this point 
in time to move that the Assembly rise, report considerable 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker:  Before adjourning the House, I just want to 
caution all members to drive safely and carefully in returning to 
your constituency this weekend. I wish you all a good weekend 
with your families and constituents. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:37 p.m. 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1175 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1175 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1176 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1176 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1177 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
10th Anniversary of Chernobyl  

Pringle .......................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
Retirement of Dave Ridgway  

Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1177 
Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................1177 

Saskatoon Imperial Selects Female Midget Hockey  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1177 

IPSCO Anniversary  
Murray ......................................................................................................................................................................................1178 

Shellbrook Credit Union Expansion  
Johnson .....................................................................................................................................................................................1178 

Optimist Oratorical Contest  
Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1178 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Northern Health Care  

Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1179 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................1179 

Hospital Waiting-lists  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1180 

Highways Asphalt Purchases  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................1180 
Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................1180 

District Health Boards Finances  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1181 

Members Conflict of Interest Legislation  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1181 
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................1181 

Education Funding  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 

Service Districts Act  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1182 
Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1182 

SaskTel Strike  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1183 



 

Heritage Preservation  
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1183 
Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................1183 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS  
SaskPower/Krivoy Rog Power Station Agreement  

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1183 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1184 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 79  An Act to amend The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act respecting the definition of “family”  

Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
Bill No. 80  An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act  

Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1184 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

Motions for Interim Supply  
Shillington .......................................................................................................................................................................1185, 1190 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1185 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1186 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1190 
Draude .............................................................................................................................................................................1191, 1194 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1192 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1192 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1193 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1194 

 


