
























































June 24, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3097 
 June 24, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would request 
leave of the House to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chairman, there are two guests in your 
gallery that I would like to introduce, two students from Vickers 
School, Jennifer Brooks and her brother, Cameron. They’ve 
come here to the legislature and they’re touring it today and 
learning a little bit about government, and they want to sit here 
and watch us. And they’ve brought their parents, Frank and 
Joanne Brooks, to the legislature with them. And I would ask 
all members to welcome them here to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 
the piece of legislation that’s before us, we have been talking a 
bit about insured health services and how it relates to this Act 
along with private clinics in the province. I’m just wondering 
why you deemed it necessary in the Act to include some 
specific terminology under insured services, such as the 
magnetic resonance imaging services, which is of course the 
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) or the computerized axial 
tomography or the CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan 
and the diagnostic and therapeutic radioisotope procedures in 
nuclear medicine. Why did you have those specifically listed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The reason for the inclusion of those 
services is they are not actually insured services within the 
meaning of The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, but 
they are services that the province pays for so they are included 
specifically. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Is there any thought then, Mr. Minister, to 
having those included under the medical insurance Act, and the 
reasoning that they are not under that to begin with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We’ll certainly take that suggestion under 
advisement. At the present time, since they’re not insured 
services, they have to be referred to specifically in this 
formulation of the legislation. 
 
Mr. McLane:  You’ve talked considerably about the insured 
services as being part of services that are carried on in hospitals 
in the province. Is that the only place that we have insured 
services being provided for? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, that is not the only place that insured 
services are provided. Obviously, insured services are provided 
at doctors’ offices as well. 
 
The intent of this legislation however, is not to interfere with 
what goes on in doctors offices; it’s intended to deal with 
services that are provided in hospitals. And it’s intended to say 
that we ought not to have private facilities competing with 
hospitals, requiring people to make payment for medical 
services, that those services should be provided through tax 
money, publicly, in the public sector. 
 
Mr. McLane:  So then when we’re referring to the licensing 
of agencies or facilities throughout the province, what exactly 
does that pertain to then, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What section is the member referring to? 
 
Mr. McLane:  No particular section, Mr. Minister, I’m just 
talking about the licensing of facilities. When you’re talking 
about facilities needing a licence, are we only talking about 
hospitals; or are we talking about some of these offices that do 
provide some insured services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We’re talking about private facilities that 
would provide insured services. Those facilities would be 
required to be licensed. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And those would include doctors’ clinics, any 
other facility that would provide that service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Doctors’ clinics per se would not be 
covered by the legislation except to the extent that they would 
purport to provide insured services that are normally provided 
in hospitals. If a doctor’s clinic purported to go beyond what 
they presently provide to provide a service that is presently 
provided in a hospital, the doctor’s clinic would have to be 
licensed for that purpose. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you give us an example of that service 
that would be . . . that would require the license? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, if a physician, for example, wanted to 
do cataract surgery in his or her office, that’s a service that is 
normally provided in a hospital at the present time which is an 
insured service. If a physician wanted to set up a clinic in his or 
her office to provide cataract removal, the physician would 
have to be licensed for that purpose. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. Going back to the 
accreditation operator, for example, the member from Wood 
River has talked a bit about the powers that this Act does give 
to the minister in charge. And that certainly applies to the 
accreditation program and the operator, whereas, of course, the 
operator would be . . . could actually be chosen by you, and the 
program can as well be dictated by you and certainly you have 
the right to withdraw a licence from an agency or the right to 
grant one. That’s pretty broad power for the Minister of Health 
as I see it. 
 



3098  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

And I’m just wondering, why do you think that it needs to be 
that way as opposed to a laid-out criteria reviewed by some sort 
of an advisory board or a group of that nature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  These are broad powers. I would not 
describe them as unusual powers. The reasons for a licensing 
provision would be to ensure that any private facility that 
wanted to be licensed to provide ensured services within the 
medicare system should be publicly accredited in a public way 
to ensure that standards relating to competence and public 
safety were met. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. As the 
licensing agreement works for the individual agencies now . . . 
Of course within the districts you have the affiliates, and you 
also have other agencies as I alluded to in an earlier discussion 
today. What is the procedure for those agencies to ask for a . . . 
request a licence? Is it up to the district to request it on behalf 
of all agencies within the district, or are the affiliates and the 
others separate applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Affiliates are specifically excluded from 
the definition of health facilities in section 2(1)(i), so they are 
not required to be licensed pursuant to this Act. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And the other agencies within a district, 
where they might not be an affiliate, who applies for the 
licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  They would apply to the minister for a 
licence. 
 
Mr. McLane:  The individual agency would apply for the 
licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The operator, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  For example, in the matter of the General 
Hospital in Regina, it would be the General Hospital that would 
apply for the licence, or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, the General Hospital is operated by the 
Regina Health Board. They would not be required to apply for a 
licence pursuant to this Act. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Anybody that’s . . . let me ask you this 
question then, Mr. Minister. Anybody in the province that is 
providing an insured service has to have a licence under this 
Act; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That is not correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you then explain who needs a licence 
under this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. An operator defined as a health 
facility would need a licence under this Act. A health facility 
would be a place that provides an insured service that is 
presently provided in a hospital. 
 
But according to section 2(1)(i) of the Act: 

“health facility” means . . . (a) place . . . where a 
diagnostic or therapeutic medical procedure is provided, 
but does not include: (if the member would look at the first 
page of the Bill): 
 
. . . a place or facility operated by the minister, a district 
health board or an affiliate, as defined . . . (by) The Health 
Districts Act; 
 

In other words, the sorts of places we would expect at the 
present time would be providing health services, such as 
hospitals or clinics run by the province or affiliates, do not need 
to be licensed. But if somebody comes in and they want to 
provide an insured service  that is, a service covered by 
medicare  for profit and for fee, they have to be licensed by 
the public through the provincial government. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
know obviously when we’re going through the licensing 
requirements, you of course have a lot of control, which is a bit 
of a surprise then when we see that beyond the control and 
beyond everything you can do in regulation in controlling who 
gets a licence and for what, then you can attach terms and 
conditions onto the licence, as in section 8. So can you give us 
some examples of terms and conditions that you would impose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It’s possible, for example, that a person 
applying for a licence may be competent to provide a procedure 
in one manner but not another manner. And the accreditation 
committee which would be a committee of the college of 
physicians and surgeons . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think 
the member, Mr. Chair, is indicating that he’s having difficulty 
hearing me so I’ll repeat the answer. 
 
It is possible that the accreditation committee of the college of 
physicians and surgeons may approve someone applying for a 
licence to perform a procedure in one manner but not another 
manner. So putting a condition on the licence that the operator 
could perform the procedure in the manner approved by the 
college would be an example of the sort of condition that you 
might want to attach to the licence, out of reasons pertaining to 
consumer protection and public safety. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Are any of the terms and conditions that 
you place upon those that require a licence . . . could you in fact 
impose terms and conditions that would move them beyond 
where they would  Mr. Chair, it’s getting a little noisy in here 
 take them beyond where in fact they would rather not go? 
 
Let me give you an example of affiliates that . . . Because 
they’re still going to need a licence if they’re going to have 
insured services offered in . . . Oh they’re not? Oh well then 
you might as well stop me there and fill me in on . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I just indicated to the member from 
Arm River a few minutes ago, health facility, if you turn to the 
first page of the Bill, it does not include a place operated by the 
minister, a district health board, or an affiliate. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Where are you looking? 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3099 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I am looking on the first page of the Bill, 
section 2(1)(i), which says, “health facility” means . . . And as 
you can see, it says it means a place or facility where a medical 
procedure is provided but does not include, and the first 
subclause is: a place or facility operated by the minister  that 
would be a provincial facility  or operated by a district health 
board or an affiliate. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well then, Mr. Minister, let’s just back up 
to the affiliates. Can you tell us how they have their licensing? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  They’re licensed under The Hospital 
Standards Act. And standards under The Hospital Standards 
Act and The Health Districts Act apply to them. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, I believe the member from Wood River is 
having difficulty hearing my answers and I certainly don’t want 
the member from Wood River to have difficulty hearing my 
answers. And I think the member is raising a point of order 
without raising a point of order that he would like the House 
brought to better order, as I understand it. 
 
The Chair:  If the member would like to raise a point of 
order on the decorum of the House then he could rise in his 
place and do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well then, Mr. Chair, I will rise on a point 
of order on the decorum and the noise that’s in the House but I 
shouldn’t have to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I sympathize actually with the 
member from Wood River. If he asks a question and I’m giving 
the answer he’s entitled to be able to hear the answer, as far as 
I’m concerned. And the answer is . . . I almost forget the 
question. 
 
But the answer is that the affiliates are approved under The 
Hospital Standards Act and they must meet standards under The 
Hospital Standards Act and The Health Districts Act. Their 
status is not affected one way or the other by this legislation. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see in section 
14 there’s additional information there: 
 

14(1) The minister may: 
 
(a) request from a licensee any information that the 
minister reasonably requires for . . . 

 
Give us some examples of what you would reasonably require 
for the purpose of this Act and why you would have to have a 
special section just for additional information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well for example, you might want to know 
the qualifications of the licensee. That is, whether the licensee 
met the qualifications under The Medical Profession Act and 
was properly licensed pursuant to that Act, and whether the 
facility proposed to be used by the licensee met public health 
requirements. 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, could 
you describe briefly for us how an insured service is brought 
into the . . . or brought under The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act. Who decides what’s going to be an insured 
service under that Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  They are medically necessary services, and 
the cabinet has the power to specifically include or exclude 
medical services in the case of any doubt. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. So then, Mr. Minister, under the 
regulations portion of this Act, 29(d) to be . . . example, where 
it talks about prescribing: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 
regulations: 
 
(d) prescribing medical procedures that are insured health 
services; 
 

So basically, you have the total discretion as to what will be an 
insured health service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Not quite. If you look at the definition 
section with respect to insured health services, certain services 
are set out which can be considered insured health services. 
And the regulation must be considered within the context of 
that provision as well. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Then in 29(e) it also gives you the 
power to prescribe a place or facility that are not health 
facilities. So then you could actually designate a facility as a 
health facility that isn’t one at this present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, that section says the opposite of what 
the member is saying. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you explain that to us then, Mr. 
Minister? It seems to me quite clear that you may make 
regulations to prescribe places and facilities that are not health 
facilities. So you could indeed create a health facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, it is the opposite. The member is 
saying, you could create a health facility. What the clause the 
member is reading says is that you could prescribe a place or 
facility not to be a health facility. So it is the opposite of what 
the member is saying. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well I beg to differ with the minister. 
Reading that, one of the first things that comes to mind when I 
read it, and as I read it over and over, it to me doesn’t say that, 
what you’re saying it says. I think it says that you can actually 
create a health facility. Maybe we’ve got a problem in 
terminology here that needs to be changed and maybe there’s a 
difference from you being a lawyer and me being a farmer that I 
don’t understand that. But when I read it, and I read it over, 
that’s not the impression that I get. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’m sorry if we have a 
misunderstanding. But what the clause the member is referring 
to says is that, going back to the beginning, it says that the 



3100  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

cabinet  it says Lieutenant Governor in Council, but it means 
cabinet  may make regulations, and then it says, (e) 
“prescribing places and facilities that are not health facilities.” 
Therefore what it says is the cabinet can make a regulation 
saying something is not a health facility. The member is saying, 
this gives you the power to say something is a health facility. 
And what I’m trying to say to the member, and I don’t think 
you have to be a Philadelphia lawyer to say this, is it doesn’t 
say that the cabinet can say something is a health facility. It says 
the cabinet can say something is not a health facility. 
 
Now why does it say that? It says that because, as we talked 
about this afternoon, there are certain services and facilities 
where you may wish to make a decision that this should not be 
caught by the Act, that there are some services that should be 
provided in the private sector that need not be within the public 
medicare system. And obviously this clause would be intended 
to jibe with what we were talking about before, that although 
the goal of the legislation is to say that medically necessary 
services should be provided within the public system, there may 
be some services that ought not properly to be provided in the 
public system, and this is one of the clauses that would enable 
government to do that. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I’ll have to 
take your word for that, but I would almost have thought that a 
group of educated lawyers maybe could have come up with a 
little better phrasing of that particular line. Moving on to 
section (h) of 29 within your regulations, is that pertaining 
whatsoever to affiliates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Nothing in this Bill pertains to an affiliate 
because an affiliate is not a health facility within the meaning of 
this legislation. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 
section 16 it deals with the opportunity to be heard: 
 

16(1) The minister shall not amend a licence, suspend or 
cancel a licence or refuse to issue or renew a licence 
without giving the applicant or licensee, as the case may 
be, an opportunity to be heard. 
 

Can you explain to the House what this means? How would 
they be heard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What it means is that if somebody makes 
an allegation against someone operating a health facility, which 
allegation might be serious enough to cause the minister to 
suspend or cancel a licence or refuse to renew a licence, the 
minister would not do so without giving the licensee against 
whom the allegation was made an opportunity to give his or her 
side of the story. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So what would they do then, Mr. 
Minister? Would they come to you in your office or is there 
some sort of a tribunal or go to the courts? What would be the 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It would not involve a court proceeding. It 
would involve affording them the opportunity to present their  

side of the story. And the legislation would not require any 
particular sort of hearing, and it wouldn’t necessarily be a 
formal hearing. 
 
If I was involved in this kind of situation, I think it would 
involve the people coming to my office and, having been given 
notice of what was alleged against them, having the opportunity 
to prepare their side of the story and then to actually tell me in 
their own words, in whatever manner they thought appropriate, 
what they thought the situation was. So I think I would sit down 
with them. 
 
Other ministers might take a different approach. They might say 
that it should be in writing or in the form of an affidavit. The 
legislation is not clear. This is not an uncommon provision in 
legislation. But the point is the person against whom the 
allegation is made has the right to be fully and fairly heard. And 
I feel that, you know, the best way to do it probably is to sit 
down with them. But other ministers may have a different view. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, don’t you think it would be 
much more appropriate in fact without having to come to your 
office and convince you personally that in fact there perhaps is 
no basis for the allegations, that it should go before a panel of 
professional people or people who deal in the health care field 
that could give this a more . . . a hearing which would be 
somewhat more broad than perhaps what they would have in 
your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I don’t feel that’s necessary because it 
is implied by the principles of our law that people have to be 
given a fair hearing, and if that is not done, then the minister 
would be subject to a judicial review in the courts. But 
moreover, if the minister made a decision which was contrary to 
law, which would include not giving the people a fair hearing, 
then pursuant to section 17, which is the following section, the 
aggrieved party would have the right to appeal to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. So that if the person was not fairly dealt with, 
there would be procedures under the law which would be 
available to the licensee. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh well, Mr. Minister, that’s interesting 
that then you would talk about clause 17 with the appeals 
because clause 17 deals with any decisions on a question of law 
only. So it’s not dealing with in fact concerns that would be 
dealt without outside of the Act, you know, perhaps where 
some would say, you know, where we live in reality. But you’re 
talking about dealing only with the legal aspect of the Act itself 
when you’re dealing with the question of law only, so that I 
don’t think is much of an appeal process. 
 
Because firstly, if in fact the opportunity to be heard is going to 
happen in your office and the only appeal is whether or not you 
followed the law, it sounds a lot like the North American Free 
Trade Agreement, and I recall your party was fairly firm on 
saying that we shouldn’t look at, you know, the question of law 
only, that it should be broader than that. 
 
And so I could only think that you would want . . . I notice the  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3101 

Leader of the Third Party is really chirping in and I hope that 
he’s that anxious to talk when it’s back to The Election Act 
tomorrow because he’s got a lot to say on that. 
 
Now if in fact we’re talking about a decision on a question of 
law only  Mr. Chair, we absolutely have no control in this 
House tonight, do we?  a decision on a question of law only, 
so when we get to that clause, Mr. Minister, I think that we 
have to broaden clause 17. 
 
So at that point, I will be moving an amendment to clause 17 of 
the printed Bill by deleting from subsection (1), the words “on a 
question of law only” and adding immediately after the words 
“judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench” the following: 
 

on any question of law; or on the ground 
 
(a) that there has been a breach by the minister of a 
provision of the statute that is relevant to the decision 
appealed; 
 
(b) that the decision is founded on an erroneous 
apprehension of fact or that the minister has, in making the 
decision, failed to take into account all relevant facts; or 
 
(c) that the minister in making the decision has not 
afforded the person a reasonable opportunity to be heard or 
has otherwise not acted in accordance with the principles 
of fundamental fairness. 
 

So when we get to that clause, I will move that amendment. But 
for now we’ll send it forward. And I’ll send a copy, Mr. 
Minister, wherever . . . so, Mr. Minister, we’ll send a copy of 
that over to you right away. 
 
And basically what we’re saying here is that it’s just going to 
broaden it somewhat so that we’re not dealing with a question 
of law, only in fact. And you may well, as the minister, being in 
the position where in fact if they’re coming to your office to 
look at this opportunity to be heard under section 16, you may 
well want to have a little more latitude there by them also. So I 
think you could see that it’s something positive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well we’ll certainly take that under 
advisement and I thank the member for those helpful 
suggestions which we will look at quite seriously even as we 
continue to speak. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening, 
Mr. Minister, and to your official here this evening. 
 
I’ve listened this afternoon and this evening to the discussions 
back and forth here. And what really strikes me the most about 
this very Bill is just its very presence. What would cause the 
need for such a Bill as this? 
 
Now I’ve heard the minister talk that it’s to defend public 
policy. But then I’ve also heard the minister say that there are 
no private facilities at this point in time in the province that 
would require to be regulated by an Act such as this. 
 

I’ve also heard, well I guess the same line of argument, that it’s 
preventative in nature. So if that is the case then it would seem 
perhaps that you have had private facilities perhaps threaten to 
come to our province and to open up shop, so to speak. 
 
Would you be able to elaborate on that? Detail perhaps what 
facilities may have actually threatened to come to the province 
and set up shop in that fashion? If you might just comment on 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Is the member referring, Mr. Chair, to 
private facilities which would provide insured services under 
the medical care insurance Act? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, I am referring to that very thing  
private facilities which would be offering insured services 
under the medical insurance Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I cannot refer the member to any particular 
applications in that regard. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well that would seem quite strange to me 
then. We’re talking about introducing a piece of legislation here 
that we’re arguing is in the public good, but there is no facilities 
of this nature presently in the province that require the public to 
be defended from. And you’re also saying that there are no 
facilities that have ever . . . or there’s nobody that’s came and 
threatened that they might open these sorts of facilities in this 
province. 
 
So that would almost suggest to me that perhaps what we’re 
creating here more than anything is perhaps a bit of a paper 
tiger on the part of this government. Perhaps maybe the real 
reason for this very Bill is more a political one than it is a 
public policy one. 
 
It would seem that perhaps given the government’s record of 
damaging our health care system in this province, that a paper 
tiger at this time would serve their political interests quite well. 
 
If you set up a notion that you have to defend from these sorts 
of facilities entering the province, when in actual fact you’re 
saying that there hasn’t even been any, well as I say, a paper 
tiger like that might serve you quite well to deflect criticisms 
off of your government for what has been a failing record in 
terms of health care in this province. Could you maybe just 
make some comments on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I’d be happy to comment on that, Mr. 
Chair. I’ll modify my last answer to the member by saying that 
actually there was a group of one or more ophthalmologists, I 
believe in Saskatoon, within the last few years that wanted to 
set up a private clinic to do cataract removal. And it was 
indicated to them by government that government would not be 
supportive of that measure. 
 
Yes, the Bill is preventive. We are saying as a government that 
we believe in the medicare system and that medical costs 
should be shared by the people and paid for through the tax 
system as opposed to the U.S. (United States) style of medicine. 
And the member says, is that a political statement? Yes, in one  



3102  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

sense that is a political statement. And let me say also to the 
member that opposition to that principle, opposition to 
medicare, opposition to sharing medical costs as we do in this 
province, your opposition to that also, if I may say so, is a 
political statement on your part. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Minister, we already have a 
publicly funded system of health care and that’s thanks to the 
Canada Health Act. And a universal system of access and 
single-payer system should entail that no one would ever want 
to use a private facility for insured services such as what we’re 
defending the public from here tonight. 
 
If a universal single-payer system was working properly in our 
province, then there would be nobody knocking at the doors of 
such facilities as this asking for insured services of them. What 
this is here tonight, is an expression of the failure of your 
government in terms of underfunding health care in this 
province. 
 
This is you trying to do some damage control; trying to create, 
as I say, a paper tiger  a paper tiger that you can go and 
defend the people of this province from when in fact, you’ve 
told us here tonight, you’re defending the people of this 
province from maybe a couple of ophthalmologists. That’s the 
only example that you can recall in the past couple of years. 
 
So what I would suggest here is that what you’re trying to cover 
up here more than anything in introducing an Act like this, is 
the very fact, as I say, that you’re grossly underfunding our 
universal health care system in this province. Otherwise you 
wouldn’t have anybody interested in that. So you might just 
want to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I disagree with the member. The 
history of the province is of course . . . The member refers to 
the establishment of public health care in this country and refers 
to the Canada Health Act. I want to say to the member, who 
may not be aware of this, that actually hospitalization was 
pioneered in this province in 1948 by the government of T.C. 
Douglas over the opposition of your party. Medicare was 
established in 1962 in this province under the leadership of 
Woodrow Lloyd over the opposition of your party. 
 
The Liberal Party and the Canada Health Act came a little bit 
later. But I will say to the member that at least with the federal 
Liberals, they adhere to the principles of the Canada Health Act 
and have convinced the province of Alberta to adhere to 
principles such as are in this Bill, i.e., that we should have a 
public medicare system. 
 
The Saskatchewan Liberal Party stands alone as a Liberal Party 
in opposition to this kind of legislation. It is the policy of the 
Liberals in Ottawa to support the Canada Health Act, to support 
the public medicare system, at least in words, although in 
funding the federal government and the Liberals are 
withdrawing funding. 
 
But this party of 10 people in this legislature, in terms of having 
a right-wing, pro-U.S. style of medicare viewpoint, stands alone 
among Liberals in Canada as I know it. Very right-wing party.  

Perhaps trying to outdo the third party, the Conservatives, who I 
understand also oppose this legislation. 
 
But your thinking that we should have an American-style health 
care system, I suggest to you is not mainstream thinking in 
Canada today. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t 
know where you get these words to put in my mouth but it 
certainly isn’t the case, what you’re suggesting there. 
 
But you know what? I would just like to know, if you’re out 
defending the public here in this regard, how many people, how 
many groups, approached you about establishing this very 
legislation here today? How many people did you consult with? 
Because I would maintain we’re more in tune with what the 
people in this province have to say about health care than what 
any member opposite is. 
 
So what groups have you consulted with? What groups came 
forward saying, we want this particular piece of legislation? 
What groups did you consult in with respect to drafting copies 
of this Bill up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We consulted with the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations, the chiropractors association, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Optometrists, and the Saskatchewan 
physiotherapy association. I believe we have also spoken to 
representatives of the Saskatchewan health care coalition and 
individual members of the Saskatchewan association for 
community clinics. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I think 
the member for Thunder Creek has some valid points. And it’s 
always nice to hear the chirpers from the third party chiming in. 
It’s very unusual that we ever hear them because it’s most 
unusual that they’re ever here. And I’m very happy to hear them 
tonight, that there’s at least one over there that’s listening to the 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Minister, back in 1991-92 when your government was 
proceeding with the wellness model and the health reform, a lot 
of people in the province had hoped that that would mean 
exactly what it says  a true health reform taking into 
consideration all the options that we have in a great province 
like Saskatchewan. And recognizing that times do change, Mr. 
Minister, times have changed since 1948 and they will continue 
to change over the next two or three decades of which we’re 
going to be around in this province, I hope. 
 
And so people were really hoping that the health reform would 
turn into exactly that, and really it hasn’t, Mr. Minister. We hear 
you saying on your side of the House . . . and that’s fair, you 
have your arguments for defending Tommy Douglas and all he 
did, and what medicare stands for, and it shouldn’t change. And 
irregardless of how many people are hurt by that, how many 
people are suffering on waiting-lists or having to go  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3103 

out of province or out of country for their services, we can’t 
veer from that because that’s the old myth of party line, the old 
socialist philosophy and the old riding-on-the-back-of-medicare 
and Tommy Douglas. 
 
But the people are clearly saying, as you heard us in question 
period today, saying, hey things have to change. And we’re not 
advocating that we throw out the Canada Health Act and that 
we don’t have a publicly funded system, but we’ve got to look 
at other options to augment that system. And that’s what people 
are asking for. That’s what people are wanting to do. 
 
In this Act, under this legislation, you really have all the powers 
that it takes, Mr. Minister, whether it’s you or your predecessor, 
or someone that will be deemed to look after health in the 
government of the day, by controlling everything. And most of 
it’s done through the regulations. 
 
And you keep talking in this House about the powers that the 
district health boards have got; that you’ve devolved the power 
from the provincial government down to the district health 
boards. You’ve devolved a lot of debt down to them but I’m not 
sure how much power has gone down to them, Mr. Minister. 
 
And under the regulation you talk again, and of course you say 
that this Bill doesn’t really apply to the health districts or any of 
their agencies or any government-run agencies, but indeed it 
does. When you’re affecting . . . whether you’re talking about 
the quality and standards of service to be provided at the health 
facility, you’re talking about construction, alteration, 
maintenance, repair, and location of health facilities under the 
regulations as it pertains to another private clinic, you’re 
basically dictating to the health districts what they’re going to 
have. They’re not going to have anything different in the 
district. You’re going to decide what they can have out in those 
health districts. 
 
So where does the power come from, Mr. Minister? What 
powers do the district health boards have? They’re limited by 
the funding; you’ve done a great job of that. You’ve got them 
limited to what they can have for funding in this province 
through your grants to them. They have no other way of raising 
money. You’ve looked after that. And now you’ve got people 
out there saying, hey, we’re not prepared to let our health 
facility or any beds close in our community, and we’re prepared 
to do whatever it takes to get that done. And the people in 
Central Butte and the people in Canora and Kamsack and all 
over this great province of ours are saying, hey, we’re not 
prepared to sit back and let our services be eroded by a 
government that’s not willing to look at the big picture. 
 
And so when you’re talking about private clinics and other 
people providing services in this province, you’re not being 
very open-minded. And people out there recognize that, and 
they’re getting a little perturbed with you, to be quite frank. 
And so they’re prepared to put in some dollars. Your 
government’s not prepared to look at any other options. 
 
People in Central Butte, the night we were out there, were 
talking about 30, $40 a person. That’s what they talked about. 
And they had worked out some numbers, and they felt they  

could sustain some services they deemed valued and necessary 
within their community. And that’s the type of dollars they 
were looking at per capita. The people in Kamsack-Canora area, 
they had similar views, different dollar figures, but not very 
high. 
 
Shortly after those discussions, Mr. Minister, I heard you say 
that, hey, we’re looking at at least a thousand dollars. Now to 
me, that’s fearmongering. You’re trying to scare people off, 
saying, oh, we got to have a large amount of money if we’re 
going to sustain some of these things. Well that’s not true, Mr. 
Minister, and you know it isn’t. 
 
So why aren’t you prepared to look at some other options? Why 
isn’t your government prepared to be open-minded on health in 
a society where things are changing? Your Premier, your leader, 
talks about, in the last election, looking out the window and 
looking into the new millennium and making some changes and 
doing it the Saskatchewan way. And all we ever hear is about 
what the Americans . . . how bad their system is. And we 
certainly don’t want to get into a situation where we’ve got 
American Medicare, that’s for sure. What you’re talking about 
. . . our neighbouring provinces and what they’ve done and how 
they’ve hurt us and how the federal government isn’t doing this 
or that. 
 
But at least the people here are willing to look at some options. 
And you’ve got an opportunity here to make some changes and 
to really save medicare in this province. Because if we don’t 
make some of those changes, we’re going to have a lot of 
people dying on routes to hospitals that are many, many miles 
too far away for them and any services that they can’t access. 
 
So I think that you’re not being very open-minded, Mr. 
Minister. And I guess the questions would be, is why aren’t 
you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  In answer to the member’s question and 
statement, let me say that one of the things that the minister 
should do under this legislation in deciding whether to license a 
private facility is consult with the district health board. The 
district health board and the community should have some say 
as to whether we go into private facilities. 
 
The member raises the question of premiums and I realize that 
premiums have been proposed, as I think user fees are 
proposed, by the Liberal Party, with respect to the health care 
system. Let me say to the member that the reason I have 
difficulty with his suggestion is . . . first of all let me say that if 
people in a particular municipality, through that municipality, 
want to raise money to give to the health board to put toward a 
particular facility or program, there’s nothing stopping people 
from doing that. If people want to raise money in that manner 
collectively and pool the money, make a deal with the health 
district board that they will raise a certain amount of money and 
give it to the board and the district will do something in return, 
there’s nothing in law that says they can’t do that. In fact the 
law contemplates that they will do that. 
 
But I want to say to the member that when you propose a 
medicare premium, let me remind you that in the province of  



3104  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

Alberta, the premium for a family is 900-and-some dollars per 
person. In the province of British Columbia, it’s some . . . per 
family, I should have said. In the province of British Columbia, 
it’s some similar amount. What I am saying is that we should 
raise the money to pay for health care through the income tax 
system. Why do I say that? Because first of all it is a 
progressive system in the sense that, if I make $80,000 per year, 
I pay a certain amount of income tax and somebody that makes 
$30,000 a year pays a lesser amount of income tax. The tax 
system is progressive in that sense. If you have a premium 
where everybody pays $900 per year for their family, then if I 
make $80,000 a year, I pay $900. If I make $30,000 a year, I 
pay $900. And I say that’s not fair, because those who have 
more wealth should pay more  a very simple principle. It’s 
the principle of progressive taxation. 
 
There’s a second reason. The second reason is, if I have a 
premium where everybody has to pay a certain amount of 
money for their family for medical care, then I as a province 
have to set up an administration to collect that money. You 
have to pay for a bureaucracy to collect that money. If you do it 
through the income tax system, Revenue Canada, which is 
already in place and collects our provincial income tax, simply 
collects the money. It makes more sense to do it that way. 
 
Reason number three: if you have a medical care premium, as 
the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan proposes, then if I don’t pay 
the premium, because of provincial bureaucracy that you have 
to set up to collect it, doesn’t get it  it isn’t paid in  you 
haven’t paid it, you show up at the hospital; what am I going to 
do as a health care system? Am I going to say you can’t go into 
the hospital or go to the doctor because you haven’t paid your 
premium? No, that’s not a humane system and that’s not the 
way we should go. 
 
The system we have now is the best system. And if I may close 
on this point, I would rather have our medicare system where 
we pay for it through the income tax system, than have the 
American system where you might pay $9,000 per year for 
medical care coverage through a private insurance company. 
But there’s deductibles, so that if I have a baby I pay $9,000 
U.S. extra, but if it’s a Caesarean section maybe $13,000 extra. 
It doesn’t cover everything. Forty million people are uninsured 
and health care costs continue to be the leading cause of 
personal bankruptcy in the United States. 
 
And you get people like Preston Manning  and sometimes 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party  who say 
that we should go for a two-tiered system. Cut our taxes, get rid 
of our medicare system, and have some kind of private system. 
To which I say, to Preston Manning and the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party, I can cut your taxes. I can cut your taxes by 
thousands of dollars tomorrow. I can just get rid of the public 
medicare system. But then what I have to do is say okay, your 
income taxes are lower, but as in the United States, you have to 
go out and pay $9,000 to get some kind of private insurance 
that isn’t going to cover you for everything anyway, and there 
are deductibles, and every time you get sick it’s like going to 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance)  the adjuster  
you have to justify that you should get treatment. 
 

And so I plead with the Saskatchewan Liberal Party to get off 
this kick of privatization of medicare. And the member from 
Wood River objects to my saying that, but what we have heard 
in this session is the member from Kelvington-Wadena saying 
we should go to a U.S. style of medicine because she says it’s 
more compassionate  which I reject because people aren’t 
covered. 
 
We have you, Mr. Member from Arm River, saying that people 
should have to pay for their medicare coverage. And we have 
other, similar comments from members of the Liberal Party. 
 
And my appeal to you is to say actually, the Canadian medicare 
system and the system in Saskatchewan is a very good system 
 it’s the envy of the world. It doesn’t mean that there aren’t 
problems. There are problems with the system, with any system, 
but it’s a darn good system. 
 
And I had a conversation with a doctor sometime ago where he 
said well, you can get back surgery faster in the U.S. than you 
can in Canada. I said to the doctor, listen doctor, before you 
throw those American statistics at me as to how long it takes to 
get back surgery in the U.S., you’d better factor in the 40 
million Americans that have no health care coverage and never 
get their back surgery because they don’t have the money to pay 
for it and they don’t have insurance. And until you do that, you 
keep those U.S. statistics to yourself. 
 
So in answer to the question, I say you’re asking what kind of 
system we should have here? We should keep the public 
medicare system that we pioneered in this province. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I agree that we need 
to keep our publicly funded, administered system. There’s no 
question there. But your government seems unprepared to 
adequately fund it. And what you’re doing is you’re causing all 
these problems. 
 
It’s not the member from Arm River that brings forward to this 
House that the people want to pay $38 a head; it’s the people 
out there, the people of Saskatchewan, that are asking for it. All 
they’re asking is for you and your government to be open, to be 
open-minded. They’re desperate. They’re losing their services. 
They’re seeing their health services eroded, their health 
facilities across the province being eroded, by a lack of funding 
from your government. 
 
Now you can stand in this House and talk about the 
American-style health system and fearmonger the people of the 
province. People in this province won’t stand for that because 
they know full well what happens down in the States. There’s 
many people that travel throughout the United States, and they 
know what health care is like down there. 
 
But the problem is, is that you’re not prepared to fund it up 
here. In Saskatchewan your government has downloaded to 
health district boards to such an extent that it’s at the point of 
collapse. You can go to any public meeting you want, Mr. 
Minister, across this province, given any week, any week of the 
month, any month of the year, and you will find a health 
meeting  a health district in crisis. 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3105 

And so all the people are saying is, hey, help us. Be 
open-minded. Let’s solve this problem. We’re willing to help. 
And your government is not prepared to listen. 
 
You talk about raising the money through the income tax. It’s a 
wonderful idea except that people are so sceptical of 
governments any more, particularly your own government 
who’s broken umpteen dozen promises since you came into 
power  that they’ll give the money but then the money’s 
liable to go toward a project such as the CCTA (Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement) for heaven’s sakes, instead 
of health care. 
 
So how can they ever trust a government such as this to ensure 
that the money that they’re willing to put forward through the 
tax system is put towards where it’s supposed to be and to 
where it’s needed? There’s no credibility. 
 
What we’ve got right now in the province is a system of 
rationing, Mr. Minister. We see people all over the province on 
a waiting-list, waiting for services. We see it every day in all 
corners of the province. And what are they to do? They suffer. 
They have nowhere to turn. They have public meetings. They’re 
fighting with their district health board. They’re fighting with 
the members of the board who are probably friends and 
neighbours of them, because they don’t know what to do and 
where to turn. And yet you’re not prepared to listen to them. 
 
Earlier in this session we talked in one of the Bills about 
capitation. Now that’s a direct system out of the United States 
where they use it down there in the insurance system. We all 
know that. And yet you said you were looking at that. Someone 
in your own department has written, in some notes 
accompanying a piece of upcoming legislation or a Bill, that 
hey, we’re moving into new funding system for doctors  
capitation is one of them. That’s what they use in the States in 
many areas. 
 
So I’m not sure why you’re reluctant to be open-minded and 
look at different avenues. People are fed up. People are 
suffering because you’re not willing to look at different 
alternatives. 
 
And many of these things you’re trying to do, Mr. Minister, in 
this legislation is being done through the regulations once 
again, and that poses a big problem for myself. You’re trying to 
govern, your government is trying to govern this province, 
through the regulations. They don’t want to be upfront and put 
things into the meat of the Bill and so everything is done in 
regulations. 
 
(2000) 
 
And because of that, in respect to this Bill, Mr. Minister, when 
we get to that section, I will be proposing an amendment once 
again regarding the legislation. And I’d just like to read that for 
your information and for the House at this point in time, that 
we’ll be asking you to: 
 

Amend clause 30 by deleting the words “on proclamation”  

and substituting the words “upon consideration and 
acceptance by the Committee of the Whole of the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of regulations 
proposed pursuant to section 29”. 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well let . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order. Mr. Minister, can I interject for a minute. 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the other members of 
the legislature, an old friend of mine who is here with us this 
evening, Mr. David Lange, sitting behind the bar here. David 
represented the legislature for two terms in the 1970s from the 
seat of Bengough-Milestone, and I’d just like all of us to 
welcome him here this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
Bill No. 82 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, responding to the member, Mr. Chair, 
I certainly appreciate what the member is saying and it’s true 
that district boards face tight budgets, as indeed the government 
does, and municipalities, and universities, and school boards, 
and so on. But I want to say to the member, I don’t know if I’ve 
mentioned to the member in the past that the federal 
government has cut health care spending in the country. I 
believe it’s the biggest unilateral decrease to health care 
funding in the history of the country. And I don’t know if I’ve 
mentioned to the Liberal Party that the federal Liberals have 
actually cut health care funding to the province of 
Saskatchewan by about $50 million as of April 1 of this year. 
And on April 1, 1997, the federal Liberals are going to take out 
$100 million from the health care system, their share of our 
funding. 
 
So I agree with the member that budgets are tight but I would 
say this to the member. This year the people of Saskatchewan, 
through our government, will be putting into the health care 
system $47 million more than they did last year. And next year 
it goes up to $100 million because of federal Liberal cut-backs. 
 
I don’t know if the member is aware of that but I agree with the 
member that money is tight. We’re putting extra money into the 
health care system, and I hope the member will acknowledge, 
and I’m sure as a fair-minded person he will, that the Liberal 
Party in Ottawa, contrary to the red book, has certainly not been 
as helpful as we all, I’m sure, had wished. 
 



3106  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

In terms of the waiting-lists, I want to say to the member that 
the waiting lists in Saskatchewan have actually been getting 
better except in three areas, namely orthopedic surgery, 
ophthalmology, including cataract removal, and gynecology. 
One of the reasons for orthopedics and ophthalmology has been 
a dramatic increase in the number of people that are undergoing 
those procedures. 
 
But generally speaking, the waiting-lists for Saskatchewan are 
quite comparable to other provinces. But I do appreciate the 
member’s comments, and I am just as concerned with the 
underfunding of health care, particularly out of Ottawa and the 
Liberal Party in Ottawa, as the member is. And I know he 
shares my concern that at some point we have to stabilize 
funding in this regard. 
 
I would appreciate actually the member’s support in talking to 
the federal government, and I’d be quite willing to jointly, 
along with the Liberal Party and the third party, make 
appropriate representations to the federal government. And if 
the member wishes to meet with me in that regard, I’d be quite 
happy to arrange a meeting with the member. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, just to change the pace a little bit if 
I may, are you aware of the number of orthotic and prosthetic 
services that exist in the province, Mr. Minister, that are 
currently in existence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m sorry, you said . . . the second word 
was prosthetic. What was the first word? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Orthotic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No I am not aware of the number of 
services available. 
 
Mr. Osika:  The reason I ask, I was just wondering if, with 
this new health legislation brought in to deal with private 
clinics . . . allow for private orthotics and prosthetic clinics. Is 
any part of that legislation . . . will that deal with those types of 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I don’t believe this legislation would 
apply to those services because this legislation applies to 
insured health services. If you look at the definition in section 
2(1)(f), that are primarily provided within a hospital. And with 
respect to orthotic and prosthetic services, I do not believe they 
are primarily provided in a hospital. 
 
I believe they are primarily provided through SAIL 
(Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) and its agent, the 
Abilities Council. I could be corrected in that regard, but that’s 
my recollection, is that generally speaking these are services 
provided outside of the hospital. And I think SAIL, which is the 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living as the member will 
know, has contracted this service to the Abilities Council. And I 
believe for example, if you need a prosthetic leg that you go to 
the Abilities Council as opposed to a hospital, and they take the 
appropriate measurements, and they create an artificial leg for 
you. And because it’s not provided primarily in a hospital, this  

legislation would not affect the matter one way or the other. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and again, forgive me. 
I understand that when a Saskatchewan resident goes out of the 
province for these services  orthotic and prosthetic services 
 SAIL will pay the orthotist and prosthetist in those provinces 
at Saskatchewan rates, but will not do the same for 
professionals in this province. Is there any reason for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That may or may not be correct, but what I 
would say to the member is in term of this legislation, this 
legislation would not I think affect that matter one way or the 
other. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll defer to my 
colleagues, and perhaps we can discuss this particular issue in a 
different forum, perhaps in estimates. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
found it somewhat interesting listening to some of your 
comments and your of course very political speech tonight, and 
I guess somewhat consider it to be a lecture. I won’t take it that 
way because I don’t think you deserve to lecture anybody on 
health care. But I did take note that you saw this Bill to be more 
of a political statement than I guess a true need in health care. 
And that’s your right, to make this sort of a statement. 
 
But I think the point that the member from Arm River made 
was a valid one in so far as when we’re out at these health care 
rallies . . . tomorrow night there’s one in Herbert; I know right 
now that you won’t be there. You haven’t been at any of the 
others, whether it’s Central Butte or Kamsack or Swift Current. 
And so to say to the member from Arm River or myself that we 
don’t know what we’re saying when we tell you . . . we come 
back into the House, and it’s day after day after day, and who 
knows better than you, Mr. Minister, because you have been on 
your feet I think four or five times more than any other minister 
in responses in this session. So health care has been dominant 
in this session. 
 
But what we are continuously hearing is desperation on behalf 
of the people. And it’s not that they want to pay more. In fact 
you’re taking advantage of those feelings by saying, you know, 
with the view that in fact here is another tax. And it’s not 
whether there should be charges or shouldn’t be charges for 
health care services. You are actually upping the ante and 
wanting to talk higher dollars. And so I think you’re really 
playing on the feelings and desires of those people out there  
the desire to have some form of health care remain in rural 
Saskatchewan. And for that I think you’re wrong. 
 
But to say that in fact what we have here is health care in this 
province that is second to none, I disagree. I think we did have. 
But second to none today . . . Look at today’s question period, 
Mr. Minister. Now this is continual; it’s every day you’re on 
your feet on two or three or four different issues in health care. 
 
And here’s what people say. You don’t have to believe us, you 
know, if you feel that we’re not getting the message right, 
because we’re the ones out at these health care rallies and these 
town hall meetings, when in fact they’re trying to save health  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3107 

care. But what are the people saying? 
 
And right here, in Saturday’s Leader-Post, and this is the case 
that I raised with you in question period today. And you may 
find this to be distasteful after it’s been raised  I don’t know 
many times  a couple hundred times that we’ve raised 
individual cases in this session alone. And I know I did a few 
hundred in the last session and then the session before that. 
 
But that’s how people find that they’re getting health care in 
Saskatchewan these days. Listen. Here’s the comments of a 
doctor: 
 

‘Years ago, I could have admitted her . . . 
 

And he’s talking about the lady that had the cancer 
 

‘Years ago, I could have admitted her, but now she doesn’t 
fit the criteria.’ 

 
Well you know what? When we’re talking about these Bills in 
regards to your department, Mr. Minister, you being the 
Minister of Health, this is the criteria that people live under. 
You said it. You said it in regulation, mostly, by this Bill. 
 
And this is really why we can’t . . . I wouldn’t begin to support 
a Bill where in fact so much of it is laid out in regulation. 
What?  90 per cent of this Bill will actually be dealt with by 
regulation. So what is it we’re talking about here? We don’t 
know. You’re going to make those rules up later. 
 
And in fact what is in the Bill, as you’re saying, is nothing more 
than a political statement. If you want our support with the 
direction health care is or should be going in the province, then 
don’t come in here with your so-called political statements. 
What good is it? It means nothing. 
 
What means everything to us . . . and, Mr. Minister, what I 
mean by this when I . . . saying us, our caucus, who will have 
continuously brought forward these individual cases, is why it 
is that people have got to use the Leader-Post or the Legislative 
Assembly to get health care. And that falls squarely on your 
shoulders to deal with it. Not with those individual cases, but 
it’s more than evident that there’s a trend . . . (inaudible) . . . 
likes to call it a trend. 
 
(2015) 
 
I mean people are desperate. They’re coming . . . They’re using 
these avenues because that’s all that they have left. And that’s, 
at the end of the day, what you’re going to be judged for. It’s 
not going to be some Bill that’s a political statement to you or 
that you can quote from at election time, saying, well we were 
able to prevent those big bad provincial Liberals who are, as 
you’ve been saying all night, tied to Preston Manning . . . How 
you got that one, I don’t know, but I thought it was hilarious 
listening to you. 
 
They’re going to judge you on whether or not their mothers and 
fathers and grandmothers, etc., are getting health care  and 
they’re not. So you can have all your political statements in  

here that you want, but at the end of day if you’re still closing 
down hospitals, you’re closing down nursing homes . . . 
 
What do you want to govern with the legislation that you’re 
bringing forward? You, by this Bill and by the Bill that we’re 
going to be discussing tomorrow morning, have total control on 
health in the province, especially over health boards. Well of 
what? Because you’ve been busy taking away health. We don’t 
have the service. What do you want to control? You’re in 
control of nothing. You’re caving in. So . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  A little exaggeration goes a long . . . 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well no, it’s not a little exaggeration. It’s 
continual. It’s continual  it’s continual  dealing with this 
sort of stuff. You think it doesn’t take its toll on everyone, 
official opposition included . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, Mr. Chair, once again I’m calling on you, as I have time 
after time tonight, to get a little bit of control in the House. Well 
look it how loud and boisterous they are. They’re so anxious to 
make public their financial records on secret funds that they just 
can’t control themselves. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well I went and checked out yours, but 
you wouldn’t give it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh, is that right? 
 
The Chair:  Order. I would like to remind the members that 
there is a debate going on in the House and they would like to 
hear each other. Please allow the people speaking the courtesy 
of your quietness. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So in closing, Mr. Minister, we’re going to 
let you move ahead with the Bill and move on to other items 
here today, but it really is disappointing when we have to 
continuously bring health care to your attention and to the 
public’s attention, of what it’s like out there. 
 
And you know very well when the first round of cuts came 
about with the health care reform and there was some 52 
hospitals affected. Everyone in the province knew it, because 
there was court actions all over, or threats of court action. But 
now the people in Swift Current don’t know that the people in 
Kamsack are having a rally and they don’t know that the ones 
elsewhere . . . Those rallies are still happening. You and I both 
know it and these sort of cases are continuous. 
 
“Like any grieving daughter, Mary cries when she talks about 
her mother’s death.” That’s quite a way to end it, isn’t it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Chair, I want to say in answer to 
the member very briefly, if I may, the member raises the 
question of making a political statement, and I want to say to 
the member there is nothing wrong with making a political 
statement. If the statement is that we believe in a public 
medicare system, I think that’s not so bad. I think we should 
make that political statement. 
 
Opposition to that view is also a political statement, as I said 
earlier. The member says we don’t have a good health care  



3108  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

system. I say to the member, you tell me where the health care 
system is better than it is in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
be specific about where it is better, because we have a pretty 
darn good system. Not a perfect system, Mr. Speaker, but we 
have a pretty good system. 
 
And I want to say to the member that he flatters himself and the 
Liberal Party a little bit when he says that the only way you can 
get health care in Saskatchewan is through the Liberal Party, by 
complaining and then they raise it in the legislature. 
 
Because it’s true that the Liberal Party has raised a few dozen 
cases of people they think have some beef against the health 
care system in the legislative session, but I want to say to the 
member from Wood River, that every day in this province under 
the public medicare system, there are about 27 to 2900 people 
that are treated in our hospitals. There are 9,000 people that 
reside in our nursing homes, and there are 24,000 people that 
receive home care and community services. 
 
And I say to the member from Wood River, that if he’s trying to 
tell the people that the only way that those 2900 people in the 
hospital get service is because of something the Liberal Party 
does, he’s mistaken. If he’s saying that the only way that the 
9,000-some people in nursing homes get cared for, is because 
of something the Liberal Party does, he’s mistaken. If he’s 
saying that it’s because of the Liberal Party that 24,000 people 
get home care services or community services in this province, 
he’s mistaken about that too. 
 
The reason those people get services in the hundreds and 
thousands every single day is because of the dedicated women 
and men that work in the health care system. And it’s because 
people in this province had the vision to come up with a public 
medicare system over the opposition of his party. 
 
And I don’t want to debate the member about that. But I just 
say, when the member says you can only get health care in 
Saskatchewan if you complain to the Liberal Party and have 
them raise it, I think the member is exaggerating slightly, the 
role the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan plays in health care. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
just want to point out to you a few things in response to some 
of your comments. I thought I was finished but I guess I’ll say a 
few more words. 
 
In response to what you’ve talked about in terms of premiums 
that you alluded to earlier, on different issues and the cost of 
collecting those premiums, I just want the minister to know, in 
case he doesn’t . . . or in case his department hasn’t informed 
him, we have a great, huge part of this system, health system, in 
the province today that does have premiums, and I’ll just name 
you a few off, Mr. Minister. I just made a quick note or quick 
list here. I’m sure I haven’t got them all. 
 
We already have home care premiums. People pay for some of 
their home care. What does it cost to collect that, Mr. Minister? 
We have long-term care charges, Mr. Minister. That’s a major 
fee to a lot of seniors in this province. We have day care. We 
have day care premiums, Mr. Minister, for people going in for  

day care and as well as the night care programs, Mr. Minister. 
We have the respite program. It’s a wonderful program but 
people have to pay for it, Mr. Minister. We have Meals on 
Wheels; people pay for it, plus the volunteers that deliver it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, we also have ambulance fees. People talk about 
fees. We have ambulance fees. For those of us in rural 
Saskatchewan who are seeing our services being eroded and 
lost and greater distances to travel, we pay for our ambulance. 
The air ambulance for the people in the North and for extreme 
emergencies  we pay for that, Mr. Minister. It’s a premium. 
What does it cost to collect it? We have the drugs, our drug 
plan which you eliminated. A major expense to a lot of us that 
have to use that plan. Those are all premiums. What does it cost 
to collect it? 
 
I ask you again to, on behalf of your government, to be a little 
more open-minded when it comes to lives of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Health is an important issue, something we want 
to preserve. We all do. We can sit here and banter back and 
forth and you can say that we’re doing the wrong thing and 
you’re doing the wrong thing and we’ll say it. But the crux of 
the matter is, is that we want a system that we can sustain, that 
we can pay for. And the only way we can do that is if your party 
will set aside some of its political history and start facing up to 
the facts that times are changing. We have to do things 
differently and we can do them; people are ready to do them. 
 
And so I can only ask the minister that he will be open-minded, 
and I’m sure he will be. He’s one of the more open-minded 
ministers that we have on that side of the House and I look 
forward to the next three or four years and making some 
changes for the good of the people of the province. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to move 
an amendment to clause 4 of the printed Bill, which would 
indeed: 
 

Amend clause 1(c) of clause 4 of this Bill by adding the 
word “reasonably” before “considers relevant to the 
application”. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I think that that is a reasonable 
amendment to the Bill. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. As we spoke on  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3109 

this clause earlier, I guess I’ll just get right to the amendment. I 
move: 
 

That we amend clause 17 of the printed Bill by deleting 
from subsection (1) the words “on a question of law only” 
and adding immediately after the words “judge of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench” the following: 
 
“on any question of law or on the ground 
 
(a) that there has been a breach by the minister of a 
provision of the statute that is relevant to the decision 
appealed; 
 
(b) that the decision is founded on an erroneous 
apprehension of fact or that the minister has, in making the 
decision, failed to take into account all relevant facts; or 
 
(c) that the minister in making the decision has not 
afforded the person a reasonable opportunity to be heard or 
has otherwise not acted in accordance with the principles 
of fundamental fairness.” 
 

I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chair. I’d like to propose a 
subamendment. 
 
That in the amendment the second word “any” be changed to 
read “a,” so it reads, “on a question of law.” And then after the 
word “law,” a semi-colon would be inserted and then the word 
“or” would appear, and the words “on the ground” would be 
removed. So it would read, 

 
on a question of law; or 
 

. . .” And then clauses (a) and (b) would be deleted and clause 
(c) of the amendment would be included but reworded to read: 
 

(b) on the ground that the minister in making the decision 
has not afforded the person a reasonable opportunity to be 
heard or has otherwise not acted in accordance with the 
principles of fundamental justice. 

 
(2030) 
 
The Chair:  The subamendment as moved by the minister to 
amend the House amendment of 17(1) to read: 
 

Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the minister, 
pursuant to this Act may appeal the decision to a judge of 
the Court of Queen’s Bench: 
 
(a) on a question of law; or 
 
(b) on the ground that the minister in making the decision, 
has not afforded the person a reasonable opportunity to be 
heard or has otherwise not acted in accordance with the 
principles of fundamental justice. 

 
Subamendment agreed to. 

Amendment as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 30 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This amendment, 
on this particular clause, is in regards to the regulations of 
which, through the course of this session, we’ve been talking 
about. 
 
And in particular, I’ve been encouraging the government to be a 
little more open and bring forward the regulations in a timely 
fashion so that they can be reviewed and debated in this type of 
forum. 
 
Of course in the government’s open and accountable style, of 
which we don’t see much of, this didn’t go over very well. And 
so consequently, we never do see the regulations. And certainly 
you would think that, when one of the ministers is bringing 
forward a Bill, that they would certainly have done some work 
on it in preparation for the Bill. 
 
But however, we’ll be introducing an amendment here, Mr. 
Chairman, to clause 30, and it will be to: 
 

Amend clause 30 by deleting the words “on proclamation” 
and substituting the words “upon consideration and 
acceptance by the Committee of the Whole of the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of regulations 
proposed pursuant to section 29”. 
 

I so move. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:38 p.m. until 8:48 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  7 
 
Osika Aldridge McLane 
McPherson Belanger Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays  22 
 
Wiens MacKinnon Atkinson 
Johnson Upshall Kowalsky 
Crofford Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Cline 
Serby Stanger Hamilton 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Sonntag Jess Murrell 
Thomson   
 
Clause 30 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 



3110  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a 
Crown Foundation for District Health Boards 

and their Affiliates 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of 
Labour Relations between Health Sector 

Employers and Employees 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I move that the amendments be now read 
the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that the Bill be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce any 
officials that have not previously been with him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The officials have all been previously 
introduced, Mr. Chair, thank you. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. 
 
A few questions this evening, Mr. Minister. We’ll start off 
firstly with the provincial health association and its relationship 
with government. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us 

what types of grants that the provincial government provides to 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  They receive an operating grant of $1.281 
million, which is their basic funding from the province in terms 
of their operations. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. Do you provide any 
other payments to SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) for services such as the . . . for bargaining, that 
type of service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Bargaining would be included in the 
operating grant. 
 
Mr. McLane:  So the 1.281 million, Mr. Minister, would be 
the total monies granted to SAHO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you explain any other payments to 
them then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. They receive $2.25 million for district 
information systems and $98,000 for central services. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Have the . . . I assume, Mr. Minister, that 
these payments are for this year, that you’re referring to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Have those payments fluctuated over the last 
say five years to any great extent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The operating grant has gone down 
approximately 10 per cent this year. The district information 
systems funding has fluctuated quite a bit. Last year there was a 
compensation classification study which involved a million 
dollars. Some funding may be approved this year with respect 
to that matter, which is not approved yet. And central services 
grant is a new grant this year, as I read it. 
 
Mr. McLane:  What would be involved, Mr. Minister, in that 
new grant? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It has to do with the fact that 1,400 staff 
were devolved to the districts from the province and SAHO is 
receiving some money to help the districts cope with the 
transition. And SAHO itself must cope with that transition 
payroll. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. You mentioned the 10 
per cent decrease in the operating grant to them. Given the 
times, the increases in utilities and many other things, what was 
the reason for the decrease in the grant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The Department of Health, as the member 
may know, considerably downsized this year in terms of our 
administrative costs and we cut our administrative costs by 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3111 

approximately 10 per cent. And we felt that the central 
administration of SAHO should do likewise. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure that’s a 
great comparison. I believe that the department’s role has 
decreased as well. However, it would appear to me that the role 
of SAHO would have increased significantly, certainly over the 
last year, if not two or three. I’m wondering, how you could 
justify that same type of criteria for downsizing for the 
provincial health association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is our objective to put less money into 
administration, more money into front-line services. And we 
feel that that objective should apply to the Department of 
Health; to SAHO, which is the central organization to health 
districts; and to the health districts themselves. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Is there any monies that are given to the 
districts directly for membership fees for SAHO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Districts receive global funding. Out of 
their global funding they may pay membership fees to SAHO. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Just keeping with SAHO and its association 
with the government in terms of the labour negotiations and 
representing the unions, I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could 
describe in your own words the role between government and 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Government approves a bargaining 
mandate and SAHO would be responsible for everything else. 
 
Mr. McLane:  That leaves a fairly wide scope for them. Are 
there any negotiations or discussions that take place with the 
department, your wing of the Labour department, with SAHO, 
in trying to formulate what type of an agreement you might be 
wanting them to make with the health unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Not really. But in setting the mandate, 
government has to have some discussion with SAHO if not 
both parties. But other than that, the bargaining is a 
responsibility of SAHO. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Is the department looking at, Mr. Minister, at 
any other vehicle for this type of negotiation, other than what 
SAHO has been doing and the former provincial health 
association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, I think you’d have to agree that 
most likely the members of SAHO are probably telling their 
provincial association that their backs are against the wall, in 
particular in the funding formulas and the funding areas. I’m 
wondering, as is the case, there’s been some wage increases for 
some health sector unions already. Do you think that, given the 
tight fiscal crunch that the districts are in, that that’s appropriate 
for the government, through your department, to offer those 
people wage increases in whatever form, whether it’s a direct 
wage increase or a benefit package? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think the health employees should be 
treated equitably with other employees in the public sector. And 
if other employees in government and the Crowns have 
received, for example, a 1 per cent increase, I think the health 
employees who deliver very important services to the public 
also deserve that kind of increase. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Would you not then agree that it might be 
appropriate that the government would fund those wage 
increases over and above the global budget that the districts are 
receiving, given that tight fiscal plank that they are walking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And can I ask you why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The government is funding the wage 
increases through global funding. The funding is 
population-based and needs-based. The government itself is 
able to give its employees the mandated increase, while 
decreasing the level of spending on operations quite 
dramatically over the last number of years. 
 
We expect that by watching administrative costs and 
performing in an efficient manner, the health districts likewise, 
like government, like other organizations, should be able to 
pass on a modest and fair increase to employees while still 
operating within available resources. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, would you disagree that any 
benefit packages to any health sector union at this point in time 
would directly relate to bed closures and/or facility closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Not necessarily. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Minister, where would you expect 
that the districts would pick up the extra funding for, that your 
government hasn’t kept up with, in terms of these union 
negotiations, the contracts, the benefit packages, inflation costs, 
increases to utilities  where do you expect the districts to find 
those types of dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Administrative savings and rationalizations 
within facilities, to name two areas. 
 
Mr. McLane:  In terms of administration, Mr. Minister, 
could you tell us what type of downsizing we’ve seen 
throughout the districts and through administrative reductions? 
It appears to me that we continually see advertisements in the 
paper for the districts, advertising for directors of this or that 
and the other thing, so where are the savings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The administration is down about 18 per 
cent across the province in terms of the number of 
administrators before health reform and after. In Regina and 
Saskatoon the number of administrators is down about 22 per 
cent. 
 
It’s true that when people leave management there will be 
advertisements to replace them. The fact is however, contrary to 
conventional wisdom or what may be promoted by those who 



3112  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

do not believe in health reform, the amount spent on 
administration and the number of administrators is down rather 
than up. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Now when you talk about administrators, Mr. 
Minister, are you referring about administration in general or 
are you talking to what we used to know as administrators of 
health agencies and facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m sorry, you’ll have to elaborate on the 
distinction between those two areas. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Minister, I’m trying to get a fix on what 
you’re talking about when you talk about administrators. Are 
you talking about administration in general? Administrators, 
there are many administrators of different health agencies and 
facilities. Is that what you’re referring to? Are you talking to 
administration in general? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  By administration we’re referring to 
executive management, human resources, finance and 
accounting. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, do you have a flow chart for 
districts? Are they expected to follow a certain sector or group 
of administrative-type people? Would every district be 
consistent? Would they all have about, depending on the size, 
the same types of directors in different areas in health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is up to the district. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a welcome to the 
minister and his officials. I just have a few questions for you, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Basically from the perspective of northern Saskatchewan, could 
you list some of the affiliates and some of the non-affiliates that 
your department is working with in terms of allocation of 
dollars or delivery of services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, in terms of alcohol and drug services, 
there is funding that goes to Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, 
Creighton, Clearwater, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Mitho Menoo Centre, 
Pine Island, Robert Simard, Sandy Bay, Recovery Lake, and 
Pinehouse. There are home care services at Beauval, Buffalo, 
Creighton, Cumberland House, Deschambault, Green Lake, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, La Ronge, Michel, Pinehouse, Sandy 
Bay, Turnor Lake, Wasahaw, and Weyakwin. 
 
And in addition, of course, funding to the St. Elizabeth’s 
Hospital at Ile-a-la-Crosse, Uranium City hospital, St. Martin’s 
Hospital at La Loche, and the La Ronge Hospital, MACSI 
(Metis Addictions Council of Saskatchewan Inc.), and I think 
I’ve mentioned the rest. And then of course money is spent 
through the northern health services branch as well. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And as you are more than aware, 
Mr. Minister, we’ve been discussing issues of northern concern 
for many months in the House. And one of the specific points 
that was raised time and time again for northern Saskatchewan 
is we’re really playing catch-up with a lot of the rest of the  

province. 
 
And certainly it’s foreign to me to see regions discuss hospitals 
and there’s a possibility of 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 hospitals in a 
certain region, whereas in northern Saskatchewan there may be 
4 or 5 at the most for the whole, entire North. And we certainly 
recognize the differences in travel, and the geographical 
challenges of delivery of health, and also to ensure that the 
people of the North have access to health care. 
 
One of the pressing results that people wanted to see when it 
came to the health challenges in northern Saskatchewan, and 
was really a surprising matter, they didn’t only speak about the 
need for health districts and consultation with governments. 
They didn’t only speak about better facilities and a wider range 
of services. But the incredible thing they brought forward, Mr. 
Minister, was a lack of housing. 
 
(2115) 
 
They attributed pretty well most of the health challenges with 
the lack of housing. Certainly health facilities are part of the 
solution, but really the infrastructure in northern Saskatchewan 
provides a severe challenge to many, many people and 
especially the children of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I got an example here I’d like to share with you. La Loche 
is a prime example of how desperate the housing situation in 
northern Saskatchewan is. And I’ve recently spoken to a mother 
of four who is living in a substandard home because there is 
simply nowhere for her to go. Christine Janvier is being asked 
to vacate the house because there is no provisions made for her 
to live in the house and there’s certainly no provisions for her to 
live in a different house. And Ms. Janvier has been told to leave 
one house already due to sewage back-up. And this is not an 
isolated case. Ms. Janvier has four young children and local 
housing boards aren’t able to accommodate her and aren’t able 
to find her a decent place to live. 
 
And I guess what we’re trying to prove at this point, Mr. 
Minister, is certainly in northern Saskatchewan we have to look 
at an overall assessment of what the challenges for health care 
is. And housing is one of the biggest detriments right now to 
health care. 
 
And I’d like to ask your opinion on this issue. When it comes to 
the old saying, a pound of cures . . . or an ounce of prevention 
is worth a pound of cure, would you basically offer your 
opinion on the situation with housing, helping with the health 
problems in northern Saskatchewan, and how you feel we need 
to have this addressed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I’d be pleased to. I’d like to say to the 
member that I agree with the member when he talks about the 
fact that in some areas of southern Saskatchewan we’re talking 
about eight or nine hospitals in a given area, whereas the North 
is very under-resourced in terms of hospital services, if I can 
put it that way, given the geography. 
 
What I find really strange about the Liberal Party and the 
member’s participation in it, and I don’t mean to be too  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3113 

political, but one of the odd aspects of the member’s role as he 
sees it is the fact that he gets up in the House day after day to 
complain about the closure of the Plains Health Centre when 
there are actually three hospitals in the city of Regina, and there 
are going to be two locations that offer the same services. 
 
And one of the things we’re trying to do with health reform is 
exactly what the member is talking about tonight, which is to 
take some of the money that goes to institutional services and 
redirect that money from areas we really don’t need to areas 
where there is great need. 
 
One of those areas is northern Saskatchewan. And it’s 
unfortunate that one of the things the Liberal Party has done, 
like the Conservatives before them, is to ignore the plight of 
people in the North and their needs because they’re too busy 
talking about keeping things going down here that we don’t 
really need which, if I may say so, is a very selfish attitude. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Athabasca that I’m quite 
sympathetic to what he’s saying tonight, contrary to what he 
says day after day in question period, or prior to question 
period, in the House when presenting petitions, not on behalf of 
the North but on behalf of people in the South. 
 
More catch-up has occurred in the last few years in terms of 
hospital services in the North than has occurred in the last 20 
years. And I would refer to the fact that the La Ronge Health 
Centre just opened with hospital services, nursing home 
services, community services, home care, counselling, and what 
not. As the member knows, there also will be a facility in the 
Athabasca basin that will be coming about. As the member also 
knows, there’s a committee looking at what we need in terms of 
hospital services on the west side, which the member 
represents. 
 
In terms of housing, I think the member will know that this is a 
responsibility of the Department of Municipal Government. But 
having said that, let me say that I think the member raises a very 
valid point, which is we can’t discuss health without discussing 
housing. 
 
And if we would pay some attention to housing, including 
housing conditions in the North, in terms of proper insulation, 
sewage, and water, which this government has been doing more 
of than other governments  with less support I might add 
from the federal Liberals than before  and it’s my hope that 
when we set up the new district health boards in the North, that 
those boards will look at health in a coordinated, integrated 
fashion such as the member is referring to tonight, including 
looking at how they should work with Municipal Government 
in terms of housing. Because I agree with the member. It has a 
direct impact on health and the health of the people. 
 
What we cannot do, I say to the member, is do as the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party does day after day, and that is to 
say we cannot change the system. The Saskatchewan Liberal 
Party sees the health care system in these terms: simply, how 
many people can you stick in hospital beds? How many people 
can you put into nursing homes? The Saskatchewan Liberal 
Party does not look beyond the number of hospital beds and  

nursing home beds to ask the question, how do you really get at 
the issue of the health of the people? 
 
And in northern Saskatchewan, the member from Athabasca is 
saying tonight, you have to look at issues like housing, clean 
water, sewage, and I agree wholeheartedly with the member. 
And if we can get beyond the opposition of the Liberal Party to 
a meaningful look at health reform, I’m confident that we could 
work with that member to actually improve the health of people 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, on reference to the 
situation with housing, we’re glad you’re looking at the holistic 
approach to health care in northern Saskatchewan. But the 
situation in the North  La Loche is a prime example  it’s 
been what, 16, 17, 18 years that we’ve had trailers pushed 
together to form the basis of having a hospital to serve that 
community. 
 
Mr. Minister, make no mistake about it. This $114 million cut 
that every department within your government has been 
claiming is a direct result of their cut-backs because of the 
federal government has cut back this province, really the 
situation is, how many more government departments are going 
to take credit for their cuts and blame it on the feds? 
 
Now we got 19 different ministers that are claiming 114 million 
was cut out of their budget because of the federal government. 
But the fact of the matter, there was no $114 million cut 15, 14, 
13, 12, 10 years ago. This hospital, St. Martin’s Hospital, is a 
bunch of trailers put together to serve the people of La Loche, 
Garson Lake, Turnor Lake, and Descharme Lake. These are 
Saskatchewan people. And when we talk about provincial 
responsibility versus federal responsibility, the federal 
government, from what I can gather, transfers money to the 
province to deliver health services as well as social services and 
education and on and on. 
 
Now my question back to the minister is: in spite of all the 
money that over the years has been flowing to this provincial 
government from northern Saskatchewan royalties and from the 
federal government as well  I’m not defending the federal 
government in these cuts; I’m just saying that they put money 
into health care  why is it after 17 years that we’ve still got 
trailers put together for a hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’m in agreement with the member 
that there should be some improvement in the situation in La 
Loche that the member describes. We are waiting for a 
committee of people from the North who will give us some 
advice in terms of how they think the facilities on the west side 
should be done or redone and where they think the facilities 
should be  whether it’s in La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, or 
elsewhere. 
 
And I want to say to the member, without trying to be too 
political about it, I have sat here day after day, being aware 
myself of the situation with respect to La Loche, and wondering 
why it is that the member representing Athabasca gets up day 
after day and presents petitions on behalf of the people of 
Regina and the South, who have many hospitals to go to, and  



3114  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

never once has presented any petition, as far as I know, on 
behalf of the people of La Loche and the North, who actually 
need some kind of change in the health care system. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Well, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the 
minister may feel, there are petitions coming, and there will be 
more petitions coming on a wide range of issues. So let me 
assure you, Mr. Minister, that petitions in reference to health 
care in northern Saskatchewan are coming. 
 
In the first session I believe my role, certainly here as a member 
of this caucus, is to represent as best as I can all Saskatchewan 
people, with the Athabasca people as well, to make sure their 
needs are integrated with the common front that we want to do 
to protect health care. 
 
The fact of the matter, Mr. Minister, is that the situation here 
really doesn’t point me to come up and say yes, maybe I 
shouldn’t be speaking about the situation in the South. But 
really the issue here is not of me defending health care in 
southern Saskatchewan. The issue really is, what are you going 
to do about that hospital? That’s the question that remains to be 
answered here. And this is a point and a question I’ve been 
asked for the last 17 years. That’s the whole issue in reference 
to St. Martin’s Hospital. 
 
Now what we know, Mr. Minister, from various correspondents 
and complaints we’ve gotten, you know, the trailers that we 
have pushed together are certainly not a sound place to have 
patients live. There are bats in the attic. There are mouse 
droppings all over the place. And as we all know, some of the 
mice, the deer mice that are very prevalent in that area also 
carry . . . are known to carry the hantavirus, I believe it’s called. 
Now that is not a sanitary place to have people and patients 
live. 
 
And then you go on to talk about the other visitors that the 
hospital has. Now whether we sit here and argue about whether 
I speak on behalf of Regina or whether I speak on behalf of the 
North is not the issue here. The issue is, day in and day out, 
people of La Loche going to St. Martin’s Hospital in a bunch of 
trailers to receive health care. That’s the issue. 
 
So the question I have is . . . certainly not being a politician 
myself, really I am not the minister of Health. If I were the 
minister of Health, I would immediately rebuild that hospital to 
a decent level to show respect to the people of St. Martin’s 
Hospital, to show that these people are indeed part of the 
Saskatchewan community, that these people have waited long 
enough, that these people have been patient enough, and that 
these people have suffered enough through that facility that’s 
called a hospital. 
 
And that’s my whole point here. And we’re talking about a new 
mine in northern Saskatchewan. Why do we speak about a new 
mine? One mine in northern Saskatchewan is valued at $8 
billion, Mr. Minister  $8 billion. And the people that live in 
the North with the mining activity of that nature, for one mine 
alone, have to go to a hospital that have trailers put together. 
 
That is the real crux of the problem here. It’s not federal  

transfer cuts. It’s not whether the member from Athabasca gets 
up every morning and talks about the health care cuts for this 
city. The real issue is the people of the North are simply tired of 
waiting for support and are very impatient when it comes to 
health care. That’s the issue, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member can get up and say he’s 
not a politician, but the fact is that the member is a member of 
this Chamber. The member is a representative of the Liberal 
Party. The member was nominated by the Liberal Party, elected 
as a Liberal. And if I was the member, I might want to 
disassociate myself with that group of individuals over there as 
well, especially after the way the former leader of the Liberal 
Party was treated by that group behind closed doors. 
 
But that’s not the issue, Mr. Chair, and I agree with the member 
in that regard. But I say to the member, not wanting to be 
difficult or political myself, but the fact is that the member has 
stood in this House more times and talked about the conversion 
. . . or the closure of the Plains Health Centre in consolidation 
of health services in Regina than the member has talked about 
health services in the North. And I say to the member, you can’t 
have it both ways. You can’t have improvements in the North 
and preventative health, as the member talks about, without 
changes to the health care system. 
 
And if the member is trying to disassociate himself from the 
policy of the Liberal Party, I support the member in that regard. 
And I agree with him that it is not a very forward-looking 
policy. 
 
But as I’ve tried to indicate to the member, there is a committee 
looking at the west-side communities that the member 
represents and trying to examine the health facilities that are 
required up there. There’s a planning committee of seven 
representatives of west-side communities, and I think the 
member will be familiar with that. I and the department are 
waiting for a report from that committee. 
 
That report from northern people will assist us in terms of 
planning facility changes in the North. It’s my hope, as it is the 
hope of the member, that some improvement will be made with 
respect to the situation in La Loche. I’m sympathetic to the 
member’s point of view in that regard. 
 
And when this committee reports, I’ll be happy to consult with 
the member about what I think is much more important than the 
Plains hospital issue, quite frankly, and that is the issue of 
health services in the North. And I think the member is right. 
We have to get off the dime of always discussing what’s going 
on in southern Saskatchewan and sometimes take a look at the 
health services they have up in the North. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And just to continue on with the 
estimates section of this particular part of our session, I was 
going to ask, when you have northern health services branch, 
what’s their total operating cost per year? And of that cost, what 
is staff versus program cost? 
 
(2130) 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3115 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  There’s a total of $11.341 million in the 
budget for this year; of which salaries are 3.956 million; 
operating is 3.088 million. You’ll see that that only totals 7.044 
million. That leaves 4.3 million basically, and I’m advised that 
figure goes to various grants to third parties. And at the moment 
I don’t have a list of those grants, although I think we can 
probably locate one if the member will bear with us for a few 
minutes. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. While we’re getting the 
information about the grant situation, when we do make a 
choice, a decision regarding the health districts in northern 
Saskatchewan, have you got an inkling as to how many health 
districts may be formed? And if there is an idea as to how many 
districts might be formed, how will the allocation of funding 
be? Will we see an increase in this funding of 11 million in 
recognition of the tremendous challenges facing northern 
Saskatchewan when it comes to health choices? 
 
And as well, the fact that we haven’t got any health facilities 
and that there’s a number of areas where we can use 
improvements and staff as well. So the situation, the question 
clearly is, how will you be allocating the staff, and how many 
health districts do you look at in reference to the budgets and all 
that? How will we be allocating those budgets to the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I and the minister of northern 
Saskatchewan will be meeting the local people that are involved 
in planning the district formation on July 22. And after that we 
will be making a recommendation to cabinet with respect to the 
number of districts. 
 
In terms of the budget, I would expect the funding to the 
northern health services next year to be relatively stable. Our 
indication has been that we will maintain health care funding at 
the same level this year, notwithstanding federal cut-backs. 
We’re putting extra provincial money in. Next year, federal 
cut-backs will be twice as high as they are this year, basically. 
We will make up the difference for the health districts in 
northern Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan so that they 
do not lose any money as a result of the Liberal cuts. 
 
But I think the best we can do in view of what the Liberals are 
doing to health care financing is probably to maintain stable 
funding. But we’ll certainly undertake to do that, and I’m in 
agreement with the member, that we have to do our best to 
back-fill for the federal Liberals. 
 
In terms of the figures we were talking about a few minutes 
ago, the grants to third parties are 2.248 million; and on 
northern transportation, the sum of 1.049 million is spent. The 
figure I gave you before for salary and operating was 7.044 
million. If you add the grants of 2.248 million and northern 
transportation of 1.049 million, you get the total spending of 
11.341 million. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And of the . . . in reference to the 
transportation grant of 1.049 million, would you be able to give 
me a breakdown of those costs as to which people were 
transporting patients, as well as . . . 
 

Has your government ever done  or your department ever 
done  a cost/benefit analysis in terms of having services in 
northern Saskatchewan as opposed to transport them out of 
northern Saskatchewan to southern locations? Because 
obviously funding for health care centres and health districts 
boards will most certainly mean needs assessment. And I’m just 
wondering if you had any work done in that effort to try and 
utilize the northern facilities that we are hoping to have built 
within the next several years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t have any breakdown of the northern 
transportation payments. These aren’t grants but payments to 
people who need to be transported out. 
 
And in answer to the question, is an assessment done with 
respect to the cost-effectiveness of this  yes, that is done on 
an ongoing basis. That is, the decision is asked . . . or the 
question is asked, whether it makes more sense to try to treat 
the person in the North or whether you truly have to take them 
out. And a decision is made in these cases — the $1.049 million 
that they have to be taken out for the treatment they require. 
 
But what we would like to do, to the extent we can, is reverse 
that, so that if there are services that can be provided at the 
hospitals in the North, including the La Ronge Health Centre, 
and perhaps the new centre designed for the Athabasca basin, 
and on the west side once we get the report of the community 
people up there and plan accordingly, it would be our desire 
certainly to provide whatever services could feasibly be 
provided in the North. 
 
I think the member will know that there are many, many 
services that cannot feasibly be provided in the North just 
because of the sparsity of the population, in the same way that 
they couldn’t be provided in many parts of the South. There are 
lots of services that are just provided in Saskatoon and Regina, 
and sometimes Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, North 
Battleford, Yorkton, Swift Current, and so on — Moose Jaw — 
that aren’t provided in the smaller centres. 
 
But to the extent we can, I agree with the member that we 
should certainly be examining that on an ongoing basis and 
providing every service we can in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In reference to the 
3 million you indicated for staff, as well as the 3 million you 
mentioned in reference to operating, that totals close to $7 
million. How much of the $7 million is actually spent right in 
the town of Lac La Ronge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is difficult to answer that question 
because many of the people are based in La Ronge but provide 
services throughout the North. They will travel around 
providing nursing services or counselling services and so on. 
 
So we don’t have a breakdown in terms of what services are 
provided in La Ronge versus the rest of the North. And that 
would be quite difficult to come up with in the sense that 
northern health services is headquartered in La Ronge but 
provides services throughout the North, sometimes on a 
travelling basis. 



3116  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

I think though that once we set up districts, assuming that there 
is more than one district in the North, then . . . I know what the 
member is getting at, which is, are we spending a 
disproportionate amount on the east side, La Ronge, as opposed 
to the west side? But the problem  if there is a problem  
will work itself out in the sense that if you have more than one 
district, let’s assume, and you have one on the east side and the 
west side, those districts will have to be funded presumably on 
a population basis. 
 
So at that point the funding to the districts will become 
probably much more transparent than it is now, and it will be 
quite clear to the member eventually that the funding is done on 
an equitable basis, or if there’s some problem with it, what 
adjustment needs to be made. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  At this point in time, when you speak about 
the situation of having equitable funding for different districts 
of northern Saskatchewan, I think we can certainly support, you 
know, that effort. 
 
What’s been happening is, what we’ve seen is, the west side 
certainly have had their share of problems over the years. And 
it’s always an ongoing battle as to what’s the best way that we 
can improve health care. And obviously, Mr. Minister  and 
I’ve heard you say it on a number of occasions  is to 
empower people to make decisions over budgets and services 
out of the health district. 
 
So in reference to that situation, are you saying to me this 
evening that, as Minister of Health, that you would ensure  
based on the information that if there was indeed three health 
districts for northern Saskatchewan, excluding the far 
Athabasca communities; there’d be an east side, there’d be a 
central, and there’d be a west side health district — that you 
would fund them according to their population, thereby turning 
over all control, and hiring decisions, and policy choices to 
these local health boards. 
 
Is that what I’m hearing you say this evening? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. The districts in the North, like the 
districts in the South, would be funded on the basis of 
population. Then there would be a needs-based adjustment. For 
example, if the population of one district was such that they had 
more very young children or elderly people, then they would get 
more, the same way as in the South. You make adjustments 
based upon the demographics. 
 
And there would be needs-based adjustments as there are in the 
South, so that if people from one district go to another, some of 
the funding follows the people and so on. But generally 
speaking, the system would be the same in the North as it is in 
the South. 
 
So I think the system would be an equitable system. You can 
get into a debate, that we often have in this legislature, that 
everybody would like more money. And I understand that. So 
all the districts would like more money, but generally speaking  

the funding of the districts in the North would have to be 
justifiable on a certain rational basis, i.e., you know, there are 
so many people in each area and you start from that premiss and 
work from there. 
 
But it would not be a system designed specifically for the 
North. It would be basically the same sort of formula that we 
have in the South. But we think that that is a more fair and 
equitable way to allocate health care funding than has been 
done in the past. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason why 
I’m asking that question, Mr. Minister, is simply for the fact 
that I think it’s very important that we look at the point of fair 
service and access to service. I think that’s the whole issue 
we’re talking about when we talk about health care in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I don’t want to see . . . and I think a lot people are 
really watching the particular problem. And if it certainly 
happens . . . because what we don’t want to see is we don’t 
want see the west side completely forgotten. We don’t want to 
see the east side communities completely forgotten. We don’t 
want to see the far northern communities completely forgotten, 
with La Ronge being the central headquarters and having the 
whole North as one district. 
 
I think you’re hearing that message loud and clear, that the 
people of northern Saskatchewan feel  because of their 
particular problems, the lack of infrastructure we’ve spoken 
about for many years, and the fact that they’re basically not in 
charge of many of the health care dollars that are coming in 
northern Saskatchewan  that there is no choice but for the 
government to recognize these particular regions. 
 
Now if we do go to four health districts, what I don’t want to 
see happen, Mr. Minister, is to have these health districts tied 
into the La Ronge facility, thereby again creating the same thing 
but under a different set-up. 
 
And clearly what’s got to happen is the health districts, if there 
are four of them, they got to have control of their dollars. 
They’ve got to have control of their decision making, and they 
certainly got to have some extra dollars to deal with the 
problems that they’ve had for many years. 
 
And we’ve seen Lac La Ronge get a new facility. I realize that 
there was some federal dollars and perhaps in the Athabasca 
basin there may be some more federal dollars for the health care 
facility up there. But my point clearly is that if we’re going to 
have health districts in northern Saskatchewan and if there is 
four or five health districts, that these health districts certainly 
have control of their allocation of dollars and certainly have 
access to decent facilities. 
 
Now again, the point that we raise is, time after time after time, 
La Loche has been calling for a new hospital, a new health 
service centre. And then certainly on the other hand, we see that 
Lac La Ronge has got a brand-new facility. So the point we 
want to raise and I certainly want to make on their behalf, is 
that what is good for La Ronge should be good for the west side  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3117 

as well. 
 
So my point is, can you ensure me today that if there is indeed 
four or five districts set up, that they would have allocation of 
funding based on their population and that they would have 
control of that funding and that they would not be tied into any 
particular, centralized service plan that you might have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well they certainly won’t be tied into any 
centralized service plan. They will receive population-based 
funding. I should say to the member, as I think the member will 
already know, that the per capita funding that will be paid for 
health services in the North is now and will continue to be 
higher than the per capita funding than in the South, simply 
because of the distances and the difficulties that there are in the 
North. So that’s a natural thing. 
 
But the population-based funding will apply in the North the 
same way as it applies in the South. The districts will certainly 
not be obligated to use a central health facility as the member is 
referring to. They will, as the southern districts are, receive 
certain pools of money, and so they will have a certain amount 
of money for acute care services or hospital services, nursing 
home services, community-based and home care services and so 
on, as they do in the South, but there will not be any special, 
added-on obligations to the health districts up there that do not 
apply down here. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a couple of 
more questions from my point and I’ll turn it over to my 
colleague. 
 
I guess one of the points I wish to make in terms of health care 
in northern Saskatchewan, especially the west side, health care 
dollars for the North, it’s very low. And we certainly see that. 
But the low level of funding is also complicated, Mr. Minister, 
by the fact that many of these northern Saskatchewan 
communities don’t have much say when it comes to the 
decisions made for northern Saskatchewan health care. 
 
And certainly northern Saskatchewan appreciates the continued 
commitment to health care. There’s no question about that. But 
there are still many deficiencies in the health services, and right 
now as we speak there are no mental health workers for the 
entire west side. 
 
So my point is that we have to look at how people are placed, 
how people are hired, and whether the system that we have now 
spends a tremendous amount of money on either taking care of 
people that may have been fired or taking care of people that 
may have been wrongly dismissed, or maybe perhaps people . . . 
trying to attract people to the North. All these issues really add 
to a major problem and a major cost. 
 
So the situation is, several people have come to me expressing 
concerns about how workers are hired; where these workers are 
placed; the lack of probationary assessment; and certainly 
whether these people are qualified. And, Mr. Minister, I 
wouldn’t mind hearing from you if you know of anybody that is 
in northern health services branch that isn’t qualified to hold a 
certain position. And if you are, would you be able to provide  

me with that information? 
 
At this point in time, we’re seeing that there’s very little control 
over who gets hired and where they’re placed by the people of 
the North. And who decides what area gets funding? Is it 
officials from your department or is it officials from the 
northern health services branch? What role is . . . or who fills 
this role when it comes to deciding who is hired and who is 
qualified and so on and so forth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I appreciate what the member is 
saying. I think when the health districts are created, there will 
be an opportunity for much greater community control because 
the community will be selecting the boards that will be running 
the districts. 
 
I think that there are people working on the west side in the area 
of mental health at the moment, contrary to the situation several 
months ago. I think there has been some improvement in that 
regard, but in any event this will become a matter under local 
control when the districts are set up. 
 
I’m not aware of any problems with respect to the qualifications 
of people working in the northern health services branch. If the 
member has some particular concerns and would like to send 
me details concerning any individuals, I’d be happy to look into 
them. I can’t say that I’m aware of any problems of that nature 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again, just in 
closing, I want to thank you and your officials for taking the 
time to answer some of these questions and also to point out 
that northern Saskatchewan does have a tremendous amount of 
problems. And for many years, a lot of communities have been 
fighting and vying for this brand-new hospital concept we’re 
talking about. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have approximately 15,000 people sharing one 
facility on the west side, so there may be room for two facilities 
at the very least. And there may be room for other ways and 
means in which we can improve health care. 
 
So the situation is clear, Mr. Minister, that northern 
Saskatchewan people really deserve the respect that they should 
have gotten many, many years ago by giving them adequate and 
decent and suitable facilities. 
 
And what we have to do as government is work hand in hand 
with the people that are affected right at the community level 
when it comes to the allocation and the decision making of 
health care dollars. And I cannot stress to you the degree of 
importance that the people of the North have placed on one fact 
 that they don’t want one health district for the entire North. 
They do not want that. 
 
Because what that’s going to end up doing, it is going to end up 
centralizing all the services in one location and thereby 
disempowering people from the process of making decisions 
affecting their health care and certainly their services that they 
need. 
 



3118  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

And I go to the earlier point  all the tremendous social and 
economic problems we’re having in northern Saskatchewan. 
And yet there is no real clear plan to talk about the mental 
health workers in northern Saskatchewan to help with some of 
the problems of living in these northern communities. 
 
And we can go through all the stats, stat by stat by stat. We can 
talk about the problems with alcohol and drug abuse, the 
problems with housing, and also the problems with suicide. 
You know, it’s a very, very tough situation when we see young 
people taking their lives out of frustration and out of a lack of 
support. 
 
So really the essence here, standing up today and politicking 
back and forth, is not going to solve that problem. Real, true 
commitment to northern Saskatchewan is going to solve that 
problem. And that’s where we talk about compassion and this is 
where we talk about empowering people to make these choices. 
 
So I urge you, with all speed, to try and come up with a 
successful resolution to this issue, work with the northern 
people, respect their wishes, and watch very, very carefully that 
the intent of what you’re trying to do when it comes to health 
care is to empower these regions, empower these communities, 
to finally have a say in health care and get their . . . finally get 
their decent share of health services and health support from 
this government. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you. I just want to say, Mr. Chair, 
that I appreciate the advice of the member in terms of the 
formation of the health districts. 
 
And I’ll certainly keep his comments in mind as we make a 
decision, myself and the Minister of Northern Affairs, in terms 
of that issue. 
 
And I also want to say to the member that in terms of the 
broader health issues like housing and the problem of suicide in 
the North, I agree with him wholeheartedly that as a society, not 
just the Department of Health, but Municipal Government and 
housing and across the piece, we have to try to integrate and 
coordinate our efforts in a much better way to try to solve some 
of the really horrendous problems that there are certainly 
throughout the province but also . . . and the country, but also in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m very sympathetic to what the member is talking about. 
And I hope that some of our resources are in fact directed and 
channelled to what the member is talking about  more 
counselling — and try to look at the whole issue of wellness 
including mental health, and why people commit suicide, and 
those issues. Those are very important issues. 
 
And I take what the member says to heart and I certainly hope 
that we make some progress in that regard, in what’s a very 
serious issue, over the next months and years. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome, 
Mr. Minister, and your officials. 
 
I have one question only and it basically deals with oxygen  

supplies, and I’m referring to some of the tragic situations that 
happen in Saskatchewan through sports accidents. And the 
situation I’m referring to specifically is a hockey accident where 
a young man was fairly seriously hurt and has become in need 
of oxygen. 
 
If he is in the hospital, then SAIL covers the cost of equipment. 
If he’s at home, the equipment is also . . . the cost of the 
equipment is also covered. However, at present he’s at the 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre and here he must buy his own 
equipment. 
 
And I guess I have two questions: why that discrepancy, that 
while he’s at Wascana he has to take care of his own cost of 
that equipment; and what would happen to him if he didn’t 
have a trust fund that was set up for him to cover those costs? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Neither I nor any of the officials present 
understand why the young man’s oxygen wouldn’t be paid for 
at the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre. We can’t think of any 
reason why his oxygen should be paid for in the hospital and at 
home, as I understand it, but not at Wascana. 
 
So the only answer we have is, if you would send over  not 
this minute  but the name of the individual, then we would 
conduct an investigation and see why it is that the oxygen isn’t 
being paid for, because that does not seem to be the 
understanding over here, that it shouldn’t be paid for. 
 
So we certainly would be happy to look into it, and of course to 
provide you with an explanation as to what has happened. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Health 
Vote 32 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Just before they leave, I’d like to thank the 
officials from the Department of Health for their assistance 
tonight, and also the excellent, hard work they do throughout 
the year on behalf of the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too, on behalf of 
the official opposition, would like to extend our appreciation to 
the officials from the Department of Health, and to you, Mr. 
Minister, for assisting in the process this evening. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3119 

Motions for Supply 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I resolve: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1996, the sum 
of $118,757,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1997, the sum 
of $3,044,553,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 

Motion agreed to on division. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave 
of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 123, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years ending respectively on March 31, 1996 and on 
March 31, 1997, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By leave of the Assembly and under 
rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:13 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

EVENING SITTING 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................3097 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................3105 
 COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................3097, 3099, 3102, 3108 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3097 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................3098, 3100, 3106, 3108 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3101 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................3106 
 Recorded division (amendment) ................................................................................................................................................3109 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their 

Affiliates 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
 Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of Labour Relations between Health Sector Employers and 

Employees 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
 Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health Vote 32 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3110 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................3112 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................3118 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Health  Vote 32 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3118 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................3118 
 Motions for Supply 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................3119 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................3119 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................3119 
 
 


