













































May 9, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1479 

 May 9, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, we rise again today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

primarily from the city of Regina, and I’d like to submit these 

five or six pages. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition are from places like 

Regina, Shaunavon, Moose Jaw, Esterhazy, Sintaluta, Sturgis, 

Coronach, Lemberg, Spy Hill, Assiniboia, Bulyea, Kamsack, 

Lemberg, Langbank, Rouleau. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of concerned citizens from throughout the 

province regarding the impending closure of the Plains Health 

Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 

Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from the city of Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names of people from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Alida, a lot 

from Regina, and some from Carievale. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition from concerned citizens throughout southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

Regina . . . I guess they’re all from Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today 

presenting petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Fillmore, Creelman, Stoughton, and the vast majority of them 

though  and many pages of them, I might add  are from 

Weyburn. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with 

my colleagues and people all throughout Saskatchewan in 

trying to save the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears that all of the people that have signed 

this petition are from Regina. I so present. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

presenting a petition today on behalf of people who are 

concerned about accessibility for quality and affordable 

accommodation in Saskatchewan. And I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore our petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 

rental properties to the equivalent of one month’s rent; and 

that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies available to 

landlords who are not given sufficient notice by social 

assistance tenants who vacate properties and whose rent in 

their new accommodations is paid by social assistance 

without regard for outstanding obligations in previous 

rentals agreements. 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

urge the Department of Social Services to reconsider the 

decision to reduce the parent education and support 

programs; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Northern Affairs with 

regards to natural gas exploration in the North: (1) have 

any permits been allowed for the exploration of natural gas 

in the northern administration district; (2) if there have, 

what areas are being explored and by which companies or 

corporations; (3) are there any corporations in northern 

Saskatchewan that receive a subsidy, grant, or forgivable 

loan for operations in the North; and finally, (4) in the 

event of future exploration of any resource in the northern 

administration district, will the minister advise this House 

and northern residents in advance of the proposed 

exploration? 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Executive Council: (1) how 

many government-funded tenders were awarded to 

union-only firms in the fiscal year ‘95-96; (2) what was the 

total dollar value of these tenders; (3) how many 

government-funded tenders were awarded to non-union 

firms in the fiscal year ‘95-96; and (4) what was the total 

dollar value of those tenders? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you today and, through you, to the rest of this House a group 

of students and staff that I’m very excited to introduce today. 

They come from Hague, Saskatchewan from Hague High 

School. They are seated in the east gallery and behind the bar 

over here. 

 

The staff is Margi Corbett, Scott Richardson, and chaperon 

Kathy Dueck. The reason I’m excited about introducing this 

group of youngsters  students in senior high; sorry, we’ll get 

it right  is that that happens to be the school that I taught my 

first year in, decades ago. And approximately 3 years ago, I was 

asked to come back for a short term again, and so I know these 

students and their parents very well. Give them a good welcome  

to Regina, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 

Assembly here today, a group of 39 grade 8 students from 

Gravelbourg School accompanied by their teachers, Doug Bell 

and Ron Loiselle, and teacher aides Terri Alix and Sheryl 

Cooper, and also a number of drivers here today who made it 

possible for the students to attend. 

 

And I’m looking forward to talking with them later on this 

afternoon. But if you would just all help me in welcoming them 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today on behalf of 

my colleague, the member from Prince Albert Northcote, it’s 

my pleasure to introduce 25 grade 9 students who are seated in 

the west gallery. These students are from the Queen Mary 

Community School, and I must say, it is a very good school at 

that. It’s the school where there’s a great deal of parental and 

community involvement, and visitors are always welcome. 

 

And with them today are their teachers: Marg Mayotte, Mark 

Hastings, and Clint St. Denis. And I look forward to visiting 

with them later and having drinks, courtesy of the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatoon Economic Development Authority 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the United 

Nations says that Canada is the best place in the world to live 

and the Conference Board of Canada follows that up by saying 

Saskatchewan is the best place in the world to live, we 

shouldn’t be surprised that the world is beating its doorstep to 

Saskatchewan and that the headlines . . . that the Saskatoon 

Economic Development Authority is a big hit on the Internet. 

 

Thanks to enterprising citizens and first-class educational 

institutions, the numbers of hits or visits to the Saskatoon 

Economic Development Authority is growing by almost a 

thousand visits a month. 

 

And the word about good things happening in Saskatchewan 

isn’t just relegated to the Internet. Thanks to Canada Post, 

Saskatchewan’s achievements and genetically altered canola are 

featured recently on a set of four stamps that have been issued 

by Canada Post. And this set of stamps celebrates Canada’s 

biotechnology and high technology achievements. 

 

Companies with the right blend of talent and experience and 

savvy know that they can lessen the risk and increase the 

rewards of working on the leading edge of technology by 

coming to Saskatchewan, and Saskatoon in specific. As we face  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

the challenges of the 21st century, the world knows that 

Saskatchewan is the place to be. And the address on the Internet 

is www.lights.com/sreda. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Member Marks 25 Years of Public Service 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-five years 

have come and gone, but even after all that time we still see the 

member from Regina Dewdney sitting in this House. Long ago 

his wife and children donated him to the Saskatchewan public 

service where he’s held a wide range of portfolios. 

 

Sincerely on behalf of my colleagues, we would like to extend 

our congratulations on his 25 years, on the anniversary of his 25 

years in public service. My colleagues and I are hoping we’ll be 

invited to attend your next party, and hopefully it’ll be a 

retirement party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tourism Promotion 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tourism 

Saskatchewan is quick out of the starting gate. Earlier this 

week, three tourism organizations combined efforts to form 

Tourism Saskatchewan. Earlier this week, we had an 

opportunity to also tour that facility. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed impressive. 

 

Well today Tourism Saskatchewan has announced a promotion 

geared to boosting in-province travel. The promotion is called 

“Seymour Seitz and The Great Saskatchewan Gold Rush.” It 

offers $15,000 worth of gold and other prizes to Saskatchewan 

vacationers who visit at least 3 of the province’s 11 tourism 

regions and can name the location of the gold buried at a 

well-known Saskatchewan tourism destination. 

 

This promotion will create awareness of the hundreds of 

tourism destinations Saskatchewan has to offer and will help 

keep our vacation dollars in the province as a means for 

creating even more jobs and supporting our small businesses. 

 

Many sectors of the economy are linking with tourism industry 

because its growth potential is extremely high. Tourism 

currently injects $1 billion into our provincial economy every 

year and employs 1 in every 11 Saskatchewan workers. With 

initiatives such as the one being launched today, these figures 

have nowhere to go but up. 

 

Congratulations to Tourism Saskatchewan for promoting our 

great province and creating awareness of this great industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Senator Hastings 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 

pass along condolences to the family and friends of the late 

Senator Earl Adam Hastings. Senator Hastings passed away on  

Sunday at the age of 72. 

 

He was born and educated in the city here, and he went on to 

serve on the Royal Canadian Air Force in the 1940s. Later on 

he managed to combine his interest in politics and social 

reform. He was appointed to the Senate by then prime minister 

Lester B. Pearson in 1966. He had a long, illustrious career as a 

Liberal senator for over 30 years. 

 

On behalf of my colleagues, I’d like to extend my condolences 

to Senator Hastings’s families and friends. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Day 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, today is Multiple Sclerosis 

Awareness Day. Multiple Sclerosis is the most common disease 

of the central nervous system affecting young adults. The 

statistics concerning multiple sclerosis, known as MS, are 

staggering. An estimated 50,000 Canadians have MS. 

 

Can you imagine having to go through life having vision 

problems, numbness, loss of balance, and even paralysis? Those 

are just a few of the problems people with MS have to face on a 

daily basis. 

 

Earlier this week, I was pleased to participate in flag raising 

ceremonies in the Battlefords to raise awareness of this disease. 

I would like to congratulate all of the Saskatchewan chapters of 

the MS Society for their hard work. The Battleford chapter will 

be holding a walkathon this weekend to raise funds for this 

worthwhile cause, and I’m pleased to participate in this event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to recognize the efforts of these 

people, many of them volunteers, some of whom we have seen 

handing out carnations outside the Assembly today, who are 

raising awareness about MS. As yet, the cause and cure for this 

disease are unknown. The official opening of the Cameco MS 

Neuroscience Research Centre in Saskatoon this year is an 

important step in the search for answers about multiple 

sclerosis. 

 

Let us hope that soon we’ll be on the brink of a brighter day 

when this disease can finally be declared a thing of the past. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Bruno SADD Chapter 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize the Bruno chapter of SADD (Students Against 

Drinking and Driving). They recently took part in the victory 

tour of the Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse Medallion of 

Distinction. This is a national award to recognize substance 

abuse problems in Canada. 

 

Bruno, one of the first SADD chapters formed, has been very 

active over the years. I had the opportunity to attend the school 

assembly at Bruno and speak in support of SADD at both the  



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

local and provincial levels. 

 

The Bruno chapter is an enthusiastic group and actively 

participated in Impaired Driving Awareness Week. They were 

involved in “Sound-Off-Send-Off”, presentations to elementary 

students, and had many in-school displays. Seven delegates 

attended the national conference in Saskatoon. They wound up 

the week hosting a chemical-free banquet and dance with 160 

people in attendance. 

 

Congratulations to the president, Aimée Basset; vice-president, 

Tasha Dagenais; secretary, Brandy Buckle; and the treasurer, 

Laura Huber; and to the Bruno chapter of SADD. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ogema Hosts Dance Competition 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

your indulgence as I’m feeling quite light of foot today. Ogema, 

one of my communities, has just added considerable bounce to 

the steps of people all across my constituency. I am referring to 

the Ogema Dance Club which hosted a regional dance 

competition on April 27. Dance clubs from Weyburn, 

Bengough, Francis, Radville, and Pangman, as well as Ogema, 

took part in this wonderful community event. 

 

The dancers ranged in age from 5 years and under to 18 years 

old, competing in the areas of ballet, highland, tap, and jazz 

dancing. I am pleased to report that my constituents are all a 

very nimble and artistic bunch. All of the towns that 

participated in the Ogema competition had winning performers. 

 

A highlight of the competition was the Ogema Dance Club’s 

production number called “No Limits”. This ambitious 

production included 23 dancers from Ogema who range in age 

from 6 to 18 years old. A spectacular achievement of staging, 

coordination, and art. 

 

Dance clubs and hosting competitions take incredible 

community involvement and commitment. I ask that this House 

join me in congratulating the Ogema Dance Club for hosting 

this event as well as the dance clubs from the other participating 

towns. I appreciate your part in bringing dance opportunities to 

the children of our communities, and music to all of our hearts. 

 

Again, a hearty congratulations to all of the dancers, parents, 

and teachers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

75th Anniversary of the Yorkton Rotary Club 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 

me to share with you and members of the House a very special 

event that took place in my constituency this past week. 

 

On Monday I had the privilege of joining the members of the 

Rotary Club in Yorkton in celebrating their 75th anniversary. 

Seventy-five years demonstrates the club’s dedication to the 

ideals of service, of helping our youth, the community, seniors,  

and projects all around the world. 

 

One example of the club’s memorable service is that they were 

the catalyst to start the seniors transportation program, the first 

of its kind in Saskatchewan, which to date has benefited 

hundreds of seniors across our communities in Saskatchewan 

and have been replicated in many other communities. 

 

Their motto of “Service Above Self” helps build on positive 

initiatives to further our friendship and to focus attention on 

helping those who are less fortunate than we are throughout the 

world. 

 

I would like to ask members of the Assembly to join with me 

today in congratulating the members of the Yorkton Rotary 

Club on their 75th anniversary as well as to commend them for 

all of the hard work and tremendous contributions that they 

have made to the city of Yorkton and to our great province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mental Health Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as you know, this is Mental Health Week in 

Saskatchewan. Several members of the Assembly joined 400 

others in Regina at the mayor’s luncheon a few minutes ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, stress and mental illness in all its forms affects 

more citizens than all other health problems combined. Yet 

many of us know very little about mental illness. The important 

activities of this week, like the mayor’s luncheon, will go a long 

way to enhance public awareness and education and to remind 

us that those experiencing mental illness face important 

challenges every day. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Home Care Workers’ Collective Bargaining 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when this government came to power it promised proper care 

for our sick and elderly  a promise they have failed to live up 

to. 

 

As 1,500 home care workers prepare for possible strike action, 

the nurses’ union is also preparing to head to the bargaining 

table. Will the Minister of Health explain where any wage 

increase arising from negotiations involving home care workers 

will come from? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the parties to this collective 

bargaining  that is the union representing the home care  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

workers, and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations) which represents the hospitals  are engaged in 

a process of collective bargaining, as is the union of nurses and 

SAHO. 

 

And it’s best not to politicize these issues; it is best to let the 

parties work the matters out between them. And I have every 

confidence, Mr. Speaker, that if the parties are left to bargain in 

good faith, as I’m sure both sides are going to do, that there will 

be a successful resolution of their bargaining. Their bargaining 

is continuing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe in the collective bargaining process and I have every 

confidence that the parties will resolve their differences. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not the bargaining 

process that’s the problem; it’s your funding, and lack of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has already reduced funding to 

many health districts this year; cuts that have resulted in the 

closure of facilities, further reductions in services, and more 

lay-offs to front-line health care workers. 

 

If this government forces health districts to come up with funds 

to accommodate wage increases for home care workers there 

will be even further lay-offs and more facilities closing. The 

hands of district boards are tied, Mr. Speaker. They simply have 

no room to make further cuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government brought about health care 

reform it was based on the promise of proper home-based 

services. Will the minister explain why such a promise was 

made if in fact his government now refuses to properly fund 

them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member well 

knows, the budget for home-based services has increased quite 

dramatically each and every year since this government came to 

office. 

 

And I want to say to the member, as the member also well 

knows, that this government has not cut spending to health care. 

Mr. Speaker, the only cut we’ve had to health care spending in 

Saskatchewan is a $50 million cut from the Liberals. For every 

dollar the Liberals took out of health care, this government, the 

New Democrats, put a dollar back in. 

 

We all know that it is difficult to live within a budget, but that 

is what we must do, Mr. Speaker. The budget for health care 

this year is the same as last year; we have not cut health care 

spending. We have increased spending for home-based 

services. The member knows that. The member is simply trying 

to play politics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, obviously it’s not a case of  

politics. They have relied on home-based services. You’ve 

closed hospitals. You’ve kicked people out of nursing homes. 

And now you’re not properly funding the other system that you 

promised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, time after time we have demonstrated the 

ever-widening cracks in Saskatchewan’s health care system. 

And it is because of this government’s actions that our sick and 

elderly are terrified of your health care system. Yet this 

government will force further reductions if health districts have 

to use home care funding for further wage increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government promised — they promised — a 

safe, reliable health care system. This government made a 

commitment to properly fund that home-based system. If this 

government is truly committed to upholding these promises, 

will the minister stand in this House today and state that health 

districts will not be forced to absorb a negotiated wage increase 

for home care workers? And will this government stand up 

today and say that they will fund it properly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in the House 

before, we have said to the districts that they will not be forced 

to absorb the $50 million cut to health care spending imposed 

by the Liberals. We did not pass that cut on to the districts, 

which would’ve resulted in a 3.8 per cent cut to the districts, 

Mr. Speaker. We back-filled for the Liberals when they 

abandoned their commitment to medicare. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s very unfortunate that 

we continue to see the Liberals engage in fearmongering. 

They’re prepared to get up in this House day after day and make 

statements like, people are being thrown onto the street; the sick 

and the elderly should be terrified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a compassionate province. The 

workers of Saskatchewan are compassionate, and the 

Government of Saskatchewan is compassionate, Mr. Speaker. 

And we are going to continue what we have done for the last 30 

years, and that is to fund the publicly funded medicare system 

which that party is opposed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too am 

getting calls from seniors and their families who are frantic 

about the impact this possible home care strike will have on 

them. They desperately need to know what will become of them 

if home care workers do walk off the job. For many, home care 

is their last resort. They want to know what back-up plan is in 

place. They are asking me, will they be placed in hospitals? 

Who will look after their safety? 

 

Can the Minister of Health tell us how he will uphold his 

promise to ensure that Saskatchewan seniors will still get the 

crucial care they require if home care workers walk off the job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence that 

the parties, bargaining together, will resolve any differences 

they might have. And I would remind the member that the 

parties are still in bargaining. 

 

But I would also say to the member that this province has a 

history of caring for people, Mr. Speaker, and the safety and 

security of each and every resident of Saskatchewan is going to 

be taken care of, Mr. Speaker, in a reasonable fashion. And I 

don’t believe that despite what the Liberals may say that there 

are people in this province that work in the home care sector 

that are going to put anyone’s lives at risk, Mr. Speaker. This is 

unfortunate fearmongering and I think politicization of a 

process that ought not to be played out in a partisan way, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, many other calls I am receiving are 

from seniors and concerned families from Cudworth and 

Wakaw. Like other health districts across Saskatchewan, they 

are now facing massive funding cuts. And it could mean the 

closure of the Cudworth hospital this year, and more than likely 

cuts to nursing home beds next year. 

 

One of the patients in the Cudworth Nursing Home is a frail 

100-year-old woman who had her leg amputated last year. She 

has just been accepted into a nursing home after waiting 14 

months on a waiting-list. Now she and her family are wrought 

with worry about what will happen to her if nursing home beds 

are cut. 

 

Seniors should be able to spend their last years with some sense 

of security and dignity, but that is not the cold reality for many 

of Saskatchewan’s elderly because of promise after promise 

that is being broken by this government. How can the Minister 

of Health honestly say, as he has many times in this House, that 

there is no crisis in Saskatchewan health care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, it saddens me that members 

of the legislature would get up and suggest that elderly people 

in nursing homes would be taken out of their homes and would 

have no place to go, and that that has happened or that it would 

happen because, Mr. Speaker, it has not happened, even though 

those members continue to say that it has happened. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it will not happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is simply alarmist fearmongering from the 

Liberals. They have been at it for a long time. Fearmongering is 

the last refuge of the Liberal Party when you’ve got the Liberal 

Party on the run — as they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Park Fees 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister for the Environment. Mr. Minister, your 

government has found yet another way to siphon money out of  

the pockets of Saskatchewan people. You plan to grab another 

$600,000 from campers and visitors by jacking up provincial 

park fees by an average of 10 per cent. And the government 

spokesman says you’re not ruling out further increases in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is this latest revenue grab necessary? Isn’t it 

going to hurt the tourism industry in this province, an industry 

your government is supposed to be helping? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have a 

very short memory about the management of finances. The fact 

is that the Saskatchewan park system is one of the best-run park 

systems in Canada. It’s one of the most valued and well-used 

park systems in Canada. I’d have the members know, if they 

care to take a tour through the park system in summertime 

sometime, they might notice there’s more Albertans in the 

Saskatchewan park system than there are Albertans in the 

Alberta park system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  And they would know it because the 

quality of the camping system in Saskatchewan is of a very high 

quality, and we’re going to keep it there. And the fact that we 

can’t subsidize any more than we have in the past is entirely 

attributable to the mismanagement of the member who asked 

the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Addiction 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for gambling. Madam 

Minister, you have said that your gambling expansion program 

would not lead to an increase in gambling addiction; however, 

calls to your gambling help line have almost doubled since the 

Regina casino opened in January. The number of calls has gone 

from 136 in December to 234 in March. 

 

Madam Minister, will you admit something that is obvious to 

every citizen in Saskatchewan, that your casino expansion 

program is clearly leading to greater gambling addiction 

problems? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to respond to the member’s question in a couple of ways. First 

of all, in the province of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, we 

have some of the best health care services and counselling 

services anywhere in Canada. Mr. Speaker, what we have . . . 

and those programs were established, Mr. Speaker, in advance 

of the expansion of gambling in this province. 

 

Currently in Saskatchewan we have, Mr. Speaker, in all of the 

health districts across the province, people who have been 

trained in the gambling field, in the gambling addictions field; 

and certainly what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, in this province 

is we’re seeing that all of our gaming activities in Saskatchewan 

are conducted in a very strict and regulatory fashion. 

 



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

The benefits of all of the revenues that we receive through the 

gaming industry, Mr. Speaker, are equitably distributed across 

the province. And we have some of the finest policies in the 

country, Mr. Speaker, and as I speak, I’ve had the opportunity 

of meeting with at least three representatives from outside of 

Saskatchewan looking at our gaming policy in Saskatchewan 

. . .  

 

The Speaker:  Next question, next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 

can talk all you want about the people you have in place. The 

question is not who’s in place, the question is how many people 

are having gambling addictions? And those numbers are going 

up and you know it. There are more casinos scheduled to be 

opened before the end of the year. That will mean more 

addiction problems. It’ll mean a greater demand on the facilities 

that you’re bragging about. 

 

Mr. Minister, virtually every gambling addiction expert says 

that VLTs (video lottery terminal) are the most addictive form 

of gambling, and your casino expansion is looking at an extra 

1,000. Gambling is expanding; gambling addiction is 

expanding, and so is expanding the hurt to families and children 

because of it. But your gambling addiction programs are not 

keeping up. 

 

Mr. Minister, what further measures are you taking to deal with 

the serious problem your government has created? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

remind the member opposite that what we have done as we 

establish gambling in this province is established a very solid 

policy and distinctive policy in terms of gambling development 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, 3,600 VLTs in this province, which 

were reduced from 4,000 two years ago. We have 1,000 slot 

machines in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have 43 bingo 

halls, and we have through our gambling industry, Mr. Speaker 

. . . supporting the hotel industry somewhere to the tune of $24 

million a year. We have provided jobs to aboriginal people 

across the province  nearly a thousand aboriginal jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, that will be in place after the opening of the casinos. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, also over 1,200 charities that are 

supported in this province through the recreational sports and 

culture 6/49. And if the member opposite cares to look at the 

information out of Ontario yesterday, I note that the Harris 

government will be introducing in his province for this budget 

somewhere in the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Christian Counselling Services 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my  

question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, I have 

received a number of calls and letters regarding your 

government ceasing to fund the Christian Counselling Services 

organization in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government has money to build casinos, and 

you know these destroy families. You have money for a 1-800 

line to give teenagers abortion information, but no money for an 

organization that counsels pregnant women through their 

pregnancies to help find suitable parents for children. 

 

I’d say, Mr. Minister, that your priorities are in the wrong place. 

Why are you ceasing to fund Christian Counselling Services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’ll take notice of this question. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, as I indicated earlier, this 

question . . . And I think the Minister of Health could certainly 

answer this question. I believe the minister has the ability and 

the responsibility. 

 

But in regards to that, Mr. Minister, while you’re looking at it 

and while you’re . . . you take notice on why you’re going to 

contact . . . if it’s the Minister of Social Services, as you’re 

telling me, if you would just ask the minister and ask maybe the 

Premier why you continue to fund programs and facilities that 

hurt Saskatchewan families while you cease funding 

organizations that help Saskatchewan families. 

 

Many people have utilized this service. This service has 

provided a sound basis for adoptions in this province. And, Mr. 

Minister, will you ask that question of the minister as well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll give a 

very brief answer in general terms on behalf of the government, 

mainly in response to the minister’s . . . the member’s comment 

about, or the implied comment about, the lack of commitment 

of this government to families and for those people who are at 

the bottom end of the ladder. 

 

And I repeat, Mr. Speaker, to you and all members of the 

House, that over the four and a half, five years that we’ve been 

in government  notwithstanding some very severe, difficult 

financial circumstances, the result of which I may remind the 

member once more is the result of the Conservative government 

 I’m proud to say that our programs with respect to social 

services have not been reduced. In fact they’ve been enhanced 

and they’ve been reorganized to be more efficient in order to 

help individual families and people. 

 

The specific question that the member asks about, the House 

Leader has taken notice, and we’ll provide the specific answer 

when the minister returns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I want to remind the Premier that you  



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

cannot answer a question and then take notice. The notice was 

taken for the first question. 

 

Funding for Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not only the members of our caucus who are standing up to 

fight for health care. Last night in Fort Qu’Appelle, hundreds of 

people packed a room to protest the government’s 22 per cent 

cut to the Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital. These people are 

putting the blame exactly where it belongs  with the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Official Opposition, the member 

from Melville, was there, but he was the only MLA (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) who attended this very, very 

important meeting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to know why the minister did not 

bother to attend this meeting, and if this is the level of 

commitment that this government has towards health care in our 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that there will 

continue to be a hospital in Fort Qu’Appelle. But there is a 

dispute going on in Fort Qu’Appelle, and the dispute, Mr. 

Speaker, is between the hospital, which would like more money 

from the district health board, and the district health board. 

 

I want to say to the member that the district health board 

concerned, namely the Touchwood Qu’Appelle District Health 

Board, received an increase in funding this year, Mr. Speaker, 

not a decrease. But the district health board has the obligation 

of determining how it should allocate its resources and spend its 

money. That’s what it’s doing. 

 

It is in the process of planning acute care services in the district. 

That’s the job of the district health board. It is not the job of the 

member or myself to interfere in that process or to try to 

politicize that process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 

has played dirty pool and continues to deflect the blame every 

time they’ve had bad news for Saskatchewan people. They 

blame the federal government. And their latest tactic seems to 

be pitting one community against another. 

 

It is the NDP government that has severely slashed health care 

funding. But instead of taking responsibility for the cuts, they 

are letting health districts fight their battles for them. Already 

some people from Balcarres and Lestock are upset with Fort 

Qu’Appelle for wanting a larger portion of their funding. And 

this is a scenario that’s playing over and over again throughout 

the province  not us, not us. But this blame is misplaced. It is 

time for the government to shoulder the burden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the Minister of Health pit these  

communities against one another and cowardly stand aback 

while these boards fight for badly needed funding. Where is his 

conscience? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I would remind the member, Mr. Speaker, 

when the member gets up and talks about cut-backs, and the 

member says, don’t blame somebody else, I say this to the 

member I’m not going to apologize for stating the fact that the 

Liberals have cut the health care budget in Saskatchewan by 

$50 million. Not the New Democrats, Mr. Speaker  the 

Liberals. And for every dollar that the Liberals have taken out 

of health care, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats have put a 

dollar back in. And so I say to the member, why do we blame 

the Liberals for cut-backs to health care? Because the Liberals 

have cut back. We have not cut back, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what indicates how false the member’s question is, the 

basis of the question, Mr. Speaker, is that the health board 

concerned did not get any cut-back from the province. We 

didn’t cut back. We didn’t pass on the federal cut-back. The 

health board actually got an increase, Mr. Speaker. So I say to 

the member, get real, Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Enough is enough. 

Health care cannot continue to take these fatal blows. And 

people will not continue to watch this government break 

promise after promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government had made a commitment to 

provide $2.4 million to this Indian hospital. They made a 

commitment  and in writing, no less. Still the government 

thought nothing of cutting funding to district boards, and now 

they’re using districts to buffer criticism of their poorly planned 

and executed policy choices. 

 

Will the minister tell the residents of the Touchwood 

Qu’Appelle Health District  and for that matter, residents 

throughout Saskatchewan  that they will start to take 

responsibility for their actions and that they will follow through 

on their promised funding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I realize, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member has to get through his list of questions, regardless of 

what the answers may be. 

 

But I want to say to the member that if he and his colleagues 

take the position, in a dispute between an institution and the 

health district, that one community should get more money, it 

also means that the other communities in the health district 

therefore get less money. And if the members opposite think 

that that’s the position they should take within the boundaries 

of a health district, they can take that position  they can 

favour one community over another. 

 

What we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is leave it to the district  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

health board, to the people in the community, to allocate 

funding. That is their job, Mr. Speaker. And the funding has 

been provided, and that member knows it. 

 

Oil Company Boycott 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week we 

saw two NDP back-benchers break ranks over the government’s 

pension responsibilities. Yesterday the government member 

from Regina Coronation Park broke rank by supporting a 

federal NDP-led boycott of Esso stations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal New Democrats are attempting to 

score cheap political points at the expense of small-business 

retailers. Myron Knafelc, an Esso retailer in my constituency, 

said, and I quote: 

 

People could boycott every Saskatchewan Esso service 

station and the company would not feel the pinch at all, but 

every local retailer in the province could go out of 

business. 

 

Mr. Premier, this is your chance to show that you truly care 

about Saskatchewan business, and are willing to forgo politics 

for a change. Will the Premier stand in this House today and 

condemn this ill-conceived boycott that will hurt our business, 

and that his federal counterparts are proposing and a member of 

his government is supporting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I must smile a little bit 

at the question for the inconsistency that it reveals of the 

fundamental position of the Liberal Party. This member today 

gets up and asks us to condemn the boycott, and by inference 

therefore, to support the high prices that the oil companies are 

levying on the motorists and the ordinary citizens of this 

province’s country, while just the other day the member from 

the Touchwood . . . the member from Moose Jaw . . . Which 

riding? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The member from Thunder Creek is 

condemning us for not having taken part in the boycott. Again 

this is an example of fundamental contradiction by the Liberal 

Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the position of the government is clear. It is the 

responsibility of Ottawa to come to grips about this issue, about 

whether or not the oil companies are gouging the motorists and 

the ordinary taxpayers and people of this country and this 

province. The combines commission must be dealing with this. 

 

We say that Mr. Solomon and the federal MPs (Member of 

Parliament), by raising this issue, are doing the public a service. 

And the Liberals should be joining us and other MLAs who 

show that concern too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Queen’s Bench Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Dependants’ Relief Act be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No 90  An Act to amend 

The Provincial Mediation Board Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Provincial Mediation Board Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am sure that I 

speak on behalf of all my colleagues when I say that it is a great 

pleasure to introduce to the Assembly our former Health 

minister, Louise Simard, who is sitting in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and her mother Antoinette, who is also seated in your 

gallery. 

 

In 1991 this province began reforms to our health system in 

order to strengthen universal medicare for our generation and 

for generations to come. As a result of Louise’s courage, vision, 

wisdom, and strength, we now have a health system in 

Saskatchewan that the rest of the world is looking to for 

guidance  for guidance on how best to provide health 

services across Canada and around the world on the basis of 

need, not ability to pay. 

 

I was very pleased to learn today, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association have recognized 

this contribution by making Louise an honorary SRNA 

(Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) life member. I 

would ask . . . 

 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  And so I was going to ask all members of 

the Assembly to join with me in welcoming and congratulating 

Louise, and also welcoming her mother Antoinette here today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  With leave, for the introduction of guests as well. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too in the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) caucus would like to welcome the 

former member, Ms. Simard, and her mother to the Chamber 

here this afternoon. 

 

As I think back fondly on the many debates that as Health critic 

I had with the minister at the time, and the winning debates that 

I was involved in, it is with great pleasure that we see you back 

in the House. And we want to congratulate you on being 

nominated by the SRNA, is it?  yes  today. It is very nice to 

see you again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Introduction of guests also, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the government and the third party in welcoming back 

to the legislature Ms. Lingenfelter  Simard-Lingenfelter. And 

congratulations on the appointment by SRNA. 

 

And of course I’ve had many bouts with Louise over the health 

care issues, which I’m happy to say we’ve passed on to the 

current Minister of Health. But we do appreciate you having 

taken time to come back to the legislature. And it’s great to see 

you in the galleries and not on the floor. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

those prior as well who introduced. But, Louise, you will 

excuse me if my focus is not on you and not on an honorary 

constituent but on a permanent constituent, Louise’s mother 

Antoinette, who lives in Meadow Lake, is a constituent of mine 

and a neighbour and good friend. And, Antoinette, it is very 

nice to see you down here today, so welcome. And join with me  

in welcoming her here today, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In keeping with our practice of being 

open and accessible, I’m pleased to table a response to question 

no. 89. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question no. 89 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again in keeping with our growing 

reputation of being open and accessible, I’m pleased to table the 

answer to question no. 90. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 90 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once more, I’m pleased to table a 

response to this question as well. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 91 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  As soon as they’re asked, they’re 

tabled. I table the answer to this as well. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 92 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table this one as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 93 is tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 70 An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

immediate left is John Edwards, the director of municipal 

policy and legislative services. On my far left is Gordon 

Hubbard, senior municipal advisory . . . in the senior municipal 

advisory role. Behind me is Perry Erhardt, legislation officer. 

And on Perry’s left is Sharon Markesteyn, senior policy analyst. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Madam 

Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here today. Mr. 

Chairman, due to that this is a very complex Bill and SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) is very . . . 

there’s a lot of stuff in the SAMA Bill, we may at times be 

taking our time. So, Madam Minister, if you would be patient 

with us at times. 

 



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

I’d like to start with clause 3, Madam Minister, and the 

definition of pipeline is changed so that the flowlines are no 

longer included. What was the purpose of this, Madam 

Minister? 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, following extensive 

consultation which included consultations with the industry, 

some of the provisions in the tax policy regime that currently 

relates to the oil and gas industry have been amended, and that 

is the reason for that change. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. The 

definition of pipeline is also changed so that valves, scrapers 

traps, fastenings and appurtenances to the line of pipe are no 

longer included in the definition. Did the pipeline industry want 

this change, or what was the purpose of that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is simply a 

clarification for assessment purposes, and they are not assessed 

now and there’s no change. But it’s simply a clarification. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell 

me then, then how will the revenue effects . . . the rise from the 

changes that we have just gone through here and some of the 

other, previous ones in clause 3? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are no revenue 

effects from these particular amendments because it’s simply a 

clarification of definitions, but the status of how these things 

that are being defined here are treated for assessment purposes 

does not change. It’s simply a clarification of definitions. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Minister, what you’re saying is this will not 

affect the assessment at all then, change the assessment of the 

value? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, although I referred to 

some changes that will occur, none of it is occasioned by the 

changes in these definitions. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Clause 5, Madam Minister, and we’re 

talking about letters and petitions here and the changes that are 

being made here. Is there not another way to deal with letters 

than what is being dealt with in this Act? Was there no other 

way that we could have done this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this amendment is 

simply a clarification and doesn’t change the status of a letter to 

a council. A letter to a council never was . . . always had a 

different status than a petition to a council. And this ensures 

that the flow of communications with council is not impeded by 

requirements to verify the signatures on routine requests from 

citizens to council. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. If I 

understand right, the problem here was that councils were 

treating letters and everything else as such as petitions. Could 

the government or could you not have give a definition of a 

letter which would make it clear that it is something different  

than a petition? Would that not have been another way to go? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we are accomplishing 

what the member suggested in a slightly different way. Instead 

of defining letter, we are further . . . in some sections we will 

come to further, we are clarifying and better defining and 

changing some of the rules surrounding petitions. And then 

anything other than a petition would be deemed to be a letter or 

a routine communication. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m 

wondering if it’s a good idea to do away though with the tried 

and true rules for petitions when it would be maybe better to 

restrict the number of situations when those rules would be 

followed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well I think, Mr. Chairman, I think 

not. What we are doing in the provisions that respect petitions 

is trying to make sure that the petitions are more timely and 

relevant, and clarifying the rules surrounding petitions. But I 

don’t think we would want to complicate the procedure that 

happens when ratepayers and citizens are communicating 

routinely with their council in writing. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, the new miscellaneous rules in clause 21 regarding 

assessment concern me because of their detrimental effect on 

municipal tax revenue. The new rules say that both machinery 

and equipment associated with pipeline will not be included in 

the assessment of land or improvements. 

 

Madam Minister, this should or will reduce the local 

government’s tax revenue from the oil and gas pipeline 

industry. Has this been discussed with the urban municipalities 

that will be affected by the changes? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the rules are not 

changing, or the regime is not changing for mines and pipelines. 

The changes come in the oil and gas industry in some different 

regime for taxing equipment. 

 

And so I think that it will become clear as we go through it that 

there aren’t necessarily, in this particular section, any 

implications for revenue because what we have yet to do is to 

define the classes. And then of course there will be various mill 

rate factors that will be able to apply to the classes. 

 

So it’s not possible at this moment, based on the information 

that any municipality or we would have, to quantify changes in 

the taxation. I mean there’s . . . we can quantify the changes in 

the assessment but not in the tax policy as it may later be 

applied by the relevant local government. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. I 

understand that with a variable mill rate they will have the 

flexibility to adjust accordingly. 

 

But some of the concerns have been brought to us and I wonder 

if you have not had the same concerns brought to you, Madam 

Minister, from mines and the oil and gas industry, of concerns 

in the case where possibly a council may be slanted to one way  



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

and want to pick up a lot of new revenue. And with the flexible 

mill rate, would this not be possible if you had a very biased 

council? You know, is that a concern that you have, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, of course that is a 

concern. And that’s why I guess it’s well understood, in the 

consultations that we’ve had, that when the province through 

regulations sets the property classes and the . . . addresses the 

question of the variable mill rates, there will obviously have to 

be caps on the amount of shift that can occur for the very reason 

that you describe. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Koenker:  With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have in 

our gallery the . . . your Speaker’s gallery this afternoon, a 

group of 39 young people from Father Robinson School in 

Saskatoon. With them are teachers Gary Olver, Jeanie Lysitza, 

and Blake Schneider. And I’d like all members to welcome 

them here to our House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to join with 

the member from Saskatoon in welcoming the kids here today. 

But I also see a special friend of mine. It looks like Jennifer 

Koskie up in that second row and I want to welcome Jennifer 

here today and ask all members to welcome her here. Hope you 

have a great time. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 70 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just on that 

same issue we were talking about, Madam Minister, and it 

possibly should be brought up when the next Bill’s up, but I 

think it may affect this one a little bit. 

 

But mines, and I’ve got some of the concern from especially the 

bigger mines. I think they do most of their dealing with you as 

government rather than with the local municipalities. And I 

think some of their concerns might be here that the new rules in 

these Bills, and possibly some in each, that they may have to do  

a lot more dealing now with the local governments out there. 

And I think this is a concern to them because I think they feel 

they’re going to have kind of split between. 

 

Is that the intent of this Bill? Or are they getting a misreading 

out of this, that that won’t change at all? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there isn’t anything in 

this Bill that would change, or intend to change, the relationship 

of those industries with local governments. They do have . . . 

you referred specifically to potash, I believe. As you know, 

there is the potash sharing arrangement where the size of the 

pool that’s available for distribution by the formula is obviously 

affected by the mill rates of various municipalities. So there is. 

 

And having been the reeve of one of the municipalities that’s in 

that situation, I know there to be a good relationship with the 

industry, and good lines of communication. So I think it’s 

positive now and I see nothing in this legislation that would 

change that relationship, or certainly wouldn’t intend to either, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 23, 

Madam Minister, the clause shifts the responsibility for 

designation of property classes and percentages from SAMA to 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Why does the government 

want the power to designate different classes of improvements 

and the percentage of assessed value and shift it away from 

SAMA? What was the purpose for that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, if the member 

will reflect back on the tradition and history of this matter in the 

province, he will know that historically this has always been a 

provincial responsibility. And I can’t speak for what happened 

within the previous administration, when the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency was established with the 

intention of transferring the whole responsibility for assessment 

procedure to that agency, but it seems as though the intent was 

to transfer all responsibility. 

 

Then I think in practice, as the Assessment Management 

Agency looked at its work and tried to develop within the 

mandate that was given to it, they felt uncomfortable, feeling 

that assessment should be their responsibility but the tax policy 

should still be done by government because, as you know, 

assessment and taxes are two different things. Assessment 

provides the base, but the tax policy is really politically 

sensitive at the local level and at the provincial government 

level as to how that is used — how the assessment information 

is used and how the tax policy is developed. 

 

So it’s proposed that in this legislation that the government will 

take back that historic role that they’ve had from SAMA, 

because probably it wasn’t appropriate to try to transfer it there 

in the first place. So this really doesn’t change anything; it 

simply re-establishes the role that the province has always 

played, except for this brief interval between the establishment 

of SAMA and the full transfer of responsibilities, or sharing of 

responsibilities, between the government and that agency. 

 



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, but would 

you agree that SAMA has the expertise or the ability to do this? 

Would they not have also that ability? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I certainly think that 

. . . my assessment would be, for whatever that’s worth, that 

they certainly have the ability. 

 

But they are technicians. I mean these are the people that 

measure the property, that value the property. They’re setting up 

the base upon which people at various political levels will use 

to raise revenue, whether it’s the education system, the local 

government system. And they communicated, and I think 

rightfully so, that the tax policy that uses the assessment base is 

rightly political and not technical. And obviously we agree with 

them or we wouldn’t be making these amendments to the 

legislation now. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. I think 

where my concern comes in here — and it might be your 

government. It might be the next government or go on, on the 

next one after that — but is there not a real danger that 

transferring this job from SAMA back to the executive arm of 

government, to the Premier’s office or the minister’s office, will 

result in political concerns becoming paramount down the 

road? I mean, could this not happen? I’m not saying it will 

happen with your government or the next one, but it seems to 

me that, by not letting SAMA do it as an independent body, that 

this could become a political tool. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s 

appropriate that it is political, and I’d just like to clarify that the 

responsibility is being transferred not to the executive arm of 

government but to the legislative arm of government which, in 

this House as demonstrated here today, is a transparent process. 

 

And at the end of the day, having had the debate in public in 

this Chamber and having the press to have access to the 

arguments, then the resulting legislation is then used by local 

governments, again, and educational institutions, again by 

publicly elected democratic bodies in a transparent procedure. 

So I think that it is highly appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that this 

should be the procedure. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to go 

on to clause 24 now, Madam Minister. And the clause says that 

for the time being only the cost approach and the sales 

comparison approach, sometimes called market-value approach, 

will be used. But the presence of the new section 239.01 leads 

me to believe that you intend to rule out income- or 

benefit-based assessment. This approach is sometimes called 

benefit approach. 

 

When income-based or benefits-based assessment was 

introduced in other provinces, the results was a massive 

increase in the number of appeals and the complexity of the 

appeals. I understand that in Alberta the number of appeals rose 

to somewhere between 8 and 10 per cent of the number of 

assessable properties. 

In Saskatchewan, if income- or benefits-based assessment were 

brought in, it is quite possible that several thousand appeals 

would be brought in, in each major city, Madam Minister. For 

example in Regina, there are approximately 60,000 assessable 

properties. If 8 to 10 per cent of them became the subject of 

appeals based on income- or benefit-based assessment, we 

could see 5 to 6,000 appeals in the one city alone. Can you 

comment on that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m happy to have the 

opportunity to comment on this issue. There are three pillars 

basically to the assessment system, the values that are used. One 

is the market value. One is the actual or depreciated value. The 

other one is the income approach for a commercial property or 

rental property. 

 

This has never been used in Saskatchewan. As you mention, 

there is some experience in other jurisdictions with mixed 

results. This is why this legislation bars the use of the income 

approach for three years. We feel it’s premature to try to jump 

into that, based upon reservations that we and other people that 

we’ve consulted with have. 

 

But unless we start to collect some information to make some 

assessments on how to use, or by assessment I . . . some 

analysis on how this could be used in a proper way without the 

results that you describe, we would never get to that stage of 

doing the analysis unless we had the ability or SAMA had the 

ability to collect some information. 

 

So what is seen to be happening in the future is that some 

information will start to be collected. Some analysis will be 

done. And at some future time, in full consultation with those 

who would be affected by this, a decision will be made whether 

and when to start actually applying the income approach to . . . 

basis for assessment. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Now I’d like 

to move on to clause 27, Madam Minister. It says that an urban 

council may pass a by-law providing that businesses are not to 

be assessed. What studies, if anything, has the department done 

to determine whether this would result in a bidding war 

between neighbouring urban municipalities to attract 

businessmen to their community? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I guess these changes 

are occasioned by the reality that there is a very un-level 

playing-field out there right now in this area. So what this 

legislation does is repeals the section in the current regime 

which gives municipalities the option to use two different 

methods of calculating business assessment and prescribe only 

one way, being a percentage of the value, but then makes it 

optional as to whether a municipality applies that assessment or 

not. And we recognize that this may cause shifts between the 

sectors depending on what decision the municipalities take. 

 

But as I said before, they are locally, democratically elected. 

They are charged with making those choices. And whether they 

make the right or wrong ones, they’ll be accountable at the 

polls. 

 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. So I presume 

what you’re saying is you believe that there’s enough flexibility 

in the variable mill rates to let the urban municipalities adjust 

their taxes accordingly? Is that what you’re saying? Like that is 

the feeling I’m gathering from this, that you feel there’s enough 

flexibility there for them to make the adjustments that they have 

asked for. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, yes, that’s true. And 

when the member referred before to competition or bidding 

wars for instance between municipalities, if one municipality 

opts to have the tax and the neighbour opts not to and it makes 

a difference in the business tax regime, then they can use the 

variable mill rates and the phasing and  in the case of larger 

urban centres  subclasses of property in order to overcome 

that and to adjust for it. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. When you . . . 

in discussions with urban municipalities, have you got a feeling 

from them how many of them may drop the business tax and 

how many of them will hold on to it? Is there a feeling out there 

right now what the trend will be? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think it’s still 

premature at this time. I think individual councils of 

municipalities are still studying the data that’s coming in, and to 

my knowledge very, very few . . . I’m only aware of one that 

has so far made a decision that’s been expressed in a resolution. 

There may be more, but for the most part I think they’re still 

studying the matter. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you think 

though . . . Before I leave this issue, I think a lot of the concerns 

that have been brought to us, and I’m sure you’ve heard the 

same, that the bidding war that we’re talking about out there 

between cities and even towns within . . . say within our 

constituencies even. I can see in my constituency I have about 

three towns of comparable size out there. 

 

Do you not think there may be a problem with, down the road 

here, between the communities themselves by one having it and 

one not having it? Do you not think this is going to create a bit 

of a problem out there by no consistency? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess this is 

always a perennial potential for competition and the kind of 

thing that the member refers to. Because I’m aware also of 

areas where there are several good-sized communities close 

together, all with good road access, all wishing to have some 

increase in their commercial activity or perhaps some light 

industrial development. 

 

And they do now, even outside of the property tax regime, they 

do all kinds of things  like give land away, give tax holidays, 

enter into servicing agreements that are preferential — in order 

to attract industry. And I think that the development of the 

REDAs (regional economic development authority), in other 

words a regional approach to trying to develop industry and 

commerce rather than each municipality vying for, you know, a 

certain kind of development, is healthier. 

 

But I can’t conceive of any regime in the competitive arena 

when municipalities are all trying to grow and trying to have 

development, that there will ever be a level playing-field. And 

even if you could create some dream world where the property 

tax regime would be absolutely a level playing-field, then as I 

mentioned, no doubt people would be creative enough to find 

other ways to tip the balance in their favour. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Just one more question for a minute, 

Madam Minister, and I thank you for that answer from before. 

 

Did you give consideration to making it one way or the other 

completely? Like I realize the way it was before there was 

communities that on their own dropped the business tax in half 

or whatever. Had you given consideration to make it one way or 

the other  they all had no business tax or they all had it 

compulsory possibly? 

 

Well I guess what I’m asking is, they all didn’t have it. It’s 

probably the way they would have gone. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is $55 million 

provincially raised through this tax. And there would be that 

magnitude of a shift if it was made mandatory. It also has, as 

you know, implications for the education portion of business 

tax. So we felt it was . . . the analysis clearly showed actually 

that it was much preferable to provide the flexibility of the 

option. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to 

your officials, Madam Minister. I have some questions on the 

business tax and I’m wondering  it talks about the business 

tax being optional  and I’m wondering if this option has 

brought a lot of difference of opinion to your office and what 

type of discussions have been carried on with various towns 

and organizations over this option. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, some very extensive 

consultations were carried out, not only with municipalities but 

with business organizations. And there is of course, as in 

anything, some divergence of opinion. But the majority view 

would have been in support of the route that is being taken via 

this legislation. 

 

Ms. Draude:  In my talks with some of the various towns, 

they are concerned that having options of having various rates 

for business tax will end up making one town compete against 

another town for business. Can you give me your thoughts and 

comments on that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think basically 

it’s phrased a little bit different way, but it’s almost the same 

question that was posed by your colleague a few minutes ago in 

terms of the level playing-field between municipalities and 

trying to attract or retain business activity and commercial 

activity and jobs and so on in their town. 

 

The business tax is a very small factor. As you know, there are 

cases now where municipalities will abate certain business 

taxes or give certain advantages. So this is not a perfect world, 

but we and the community that this tax will serve and be used  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

by have a general consensus that this is the right way to go. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, can you explain why there 

really hasn’t been any reassessment update done for so many 

years? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there hasn’t been 

an overhaul of the assessment system since 1965. And so when 

you’re looking at values and all the different things that have 

happened in the economy, the relationship of values, it’s really 

imperative that the system be brought up to date. 

 

And I think that, when the goal of moving towards market value 

is achieved, that people will understand their assessment notices 

so much more readily because, as you know, when you get your 

property assessment notice now, the number that represents the 

base for your property tax to be applied to, people look at it and 

they can’t relate it to the market value. They don’t understand 

the derivation of the numbers. And we think, and SAMA 

obviously believes, that moving to market value will make the 

system much better understood. And the legislation provides 

that there will be a reassessment every three years from now on, 

so we should never be in this situation again. 

 

And the legislation also provides for the establishment of a base 

year. So when the reassessment is carried out in 1997, it will be 

using 1994 as the base year. I mean obviously, if you’re trying 

to do it and establish it in the year that you’re in, you’re not 

picking up the current improvements, and you’re kind of doing 

it, you know, by the seat of your pants. So if you use a 

three-year lag, that gives you time to have all the proper 

information in place. 

 

So then in the year 2000, there’ll be a reassessment done with 

1997 as the base, so we’ll always have a rolling value, and 

moving it ahead. And it wouldn’t be as dramatic as this one 

because here we’re playing 30 years, more than 30 years, 

catch-up. It would more or less approximate, I would think, the 

three-year reassessments, the way that pick-ups are done now 

on an annual basis. It would be just adjustments. But there 

would be a review of the whole system every three years from 

now on. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. The reason that the 

reassessment is done this year, I guess, starting in 1997, must be 

part of the government’s overall vision for something. Is there 

some reason you’ve decided this is the year? After 30 years, 

we’re going to start changing it, and I’m just wondering how 

this works into the government’s plan for the future. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, SAMA has been 

struggling with this for some time, and as the member may 

know, there were some changes made in the way SAMA is 

governed. There were legislative amendments brought in to 

provide for representation from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities), from the municipal sector. 

 

And there were also a number of fairly high profile lawsuits 

challenging some major, major assessments. And those were 

put on hold with the promise, I guess, by SAMA that a 

reassessment would occur. And so the newly formed board of 

SAMA, with all this information in hand, decided that 1997 

was the year that they wanted to go ahead. So it’s not the 

government’s decision. It was the decision of the people who 

own the new assessment system, the members of SAMA, who 

made that determination that 1997 was the year they wanted the 

new system to take effect. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. The government’s main 

focus, I believe, up to the year 2000 is going to be to get 

Saskatchewan ready to go into the year 2000. And we’re going 

to, through the Partnership for Growth, work towards creation 

of jobs. I’m having a little bit of difficulty seeing how this part 

of the government’s focus is blended with the overall plan of 

job creation when it seems to be causing a little bit of 

controversy. Could you explain to me how this fits into the 

overall plan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think 

modernizing the reassessment system fits into the overall plan 

to take a stronger and more modern Saskatchewan into the 21st 

century. It fits very well. And there are benefits for the business 

sector. And doing the assessment in 1997, allowing for the 

phasing-in of changes, will bring . . . there’s a three-year 

timetable for the phasing-in, to adapt to the system. And that 

will bring us squarely up to the new millennium with a fully 

modern taxation and assessment system that everyone is 

comfortable with and that has benefits for everyone and is seen 

to be more fair. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell 

me what the make-up of the SAMA board is  who is actually 

sitting on it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there will be an 

opportunity to scrutinize the estimates for SAMA as an agency 

itself. But there are three provincial . . . there’s a total of eight 

. . . nine, that didn’t add up . . . we’re missing one. There’s 

three provincial; two urban; two rural; one from education, 

from the trustees; and one representative of the assessors . . . the 

appraisers, people who actually . . . the professional 

organization that actually does the work. That adds up to nine. 

 

Ms. Draude: When we talked about the assessment appeals 

amendments, I was wondering about the local board of revision. 

Who decides who’s going to be sitting on that local board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the members of the 

local board of revision are chosen by the councils. And in rural 

municipalities certainly, in most cases the boards of revision are 

constituted by members of council. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Still a little 

more with clause 28, Madam Minister. As I understand the 

present rules, a business is classified according to which class 

of business is being carried on, and then the appropriate rate is 

multiplied by the number of square feet used by the business, 

and that’s how business is assessed and ultimately taxed. 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

From my reading of your Bill, Madam Minister, all that will 

change and the urban municipalities will decide to keep their 

business . . . which decide to keep their business taxes will have 

to assess the business using a property tax assessment 

procedure. 

 

Madam Minister, as you know, a great many businesses operate 

out of leased premises where many businesses rent or lease 

space in a single building from the same landlord. How will 

individual businesses be assessed in these circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the business tax in 

those cases will be a percentage of the property value, and the 

business assessment will be a percentage of the property value. 

And there’ll be a . . . you’re speaking of a situation where there 

is, say a strip mall where there’s multiple tenants. Yes. So that 

would apply to each section of the . . . however the division is 

made when there are multiple tenants. They’d assume their pro 

rata share of the percentage of the business assessment, 

property assessment. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I realize 

these are very complex issues and I sympathize with you on 

them. But in this case, I still . . . I just can’t quite follow what 

we’re saying here. Are we going by . . . in this situation of a 

strip mall or even a larger mall for that matter where there are a 

number of businesses, big, little, and whatever, how do they 

come up with what each person is paying then? By footage? Or, 

you know, are we getting into . . . three years down the road 

will we get into the income part of it then? Or how are we going 

to work this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would refer the 

member to section 242(5) of the legislation, and it describes 

how the agency  being SAMA  would determine that 

allocation. Mr. Chairman, I could read section (5) for the 

benefit of the member. It says: 

 

Subject to subsection (7), (which refers to land and 

improvements for business purposes) where more than one 

business is located within the same land and 

improvements, the proportion of the business assessment 

set pursuant to subsection (2) to be allocated to each of the 

businesses is to be determined according to a method set 

by the agency. 

 

So SAMA has not yet come up with the formula as to how that 

sharing will be done when there are multiple tenants. But 

they’re doing work on that. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Will this be 

one of the things that will come out in the regulations of the 

Bill then? Is this where we will get an understanding of that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no, that won’t be part 

of the regulations. That will be set, determined, by a SAMA 

board order. I realize it is very complex and the division of 

responsibilities between the enabling framework that the 

government is trying to establish here, and then the 

responsibilities of SAMA is distinct from that. Of course there 

is a relationship, but it does make it difficult. But I’m told that  

the SAMA’s board orders are gazetted, and that’s how they 

become known. And pursuant to the conversations and 

proposed amendments we had yesterday, you would understand 

the implications of that. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, we talked a few minutes ago about the income-based 

assessment. Will this maybe be an easier way down the road for 

such things as these strip malls? Would this be an easier way of 

defining the assessment when they’re looking at income as the 

criteria? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, SAMA has not as yet 

made that determination as to . . . it’s really the only options 

they would have . . . would be to use a percentage of rental 

value or square footage, the two methods, the alternatives that 

are in the existing legislation. And they haven’t as yet 

determined that, but work is going on, on a formula that will be 

fair. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

could you tell me how you expect or can see that home-based 

businesses will be assessed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is a very good 

question that the member opposite raises, and it’s really a tough 

one. There was some discussion about that issue at the last . . . 

well the extension of the SAMA meeting that occurred last 

September, the end of September. And it is very difficult. 

 

And they’re looking at it now. They’re consulting and trying to 

determine whether perhaps some sort of a licensing regime 

might be more fair, more enforceable, than a business tax, 

because as you know, there is such a huge variety of 

home-based businesses because Saskatchewan people are so 

ingenious that it is very difficult to address this issue. 

 

But again it certainly needs to be dealt with because it needs to 

be a level playing-field for those people as well as, we 

discussed earlier, between other communities and other 

businesses. Practitioners that are working out of their home, 

doing whatever the activity is, should also be able to count on 

having a level playing-field so that they can work the same kind 

of costs into their products or services. So that would be the 

goal. 

 

(1515) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Minister, have you consulted with the 

home-based business association group to have their input? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there were 

amendments made last year that permits licensing instead of 

assessment for home-based businesses. And there were 

extensive consultations with the . . . I just forget the exact name, 

but the provincial association that represents home-based 

businesses. And the amendments were approved, or they were 

very acceptable to that group. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Then just to clarify this for me, you are 

looking at the option of licensing home-based businesses  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

instead of assessing them on their property? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the licensing regime 

wouldn’t come in as part of the assessment system. That would 

be a municipal responsibility, as it is now. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So then right now for home-based businesses, 

it’s going to be decided later and left into the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, well actually, you 

know, the choice has already been made because . . . in the 

amendments that permitted licensing. And so there already is 

the ability there of municipalities to have a licensing regime for 

home-based businesses. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Will they also be assessed then, a possibility 

they’d be assessed a business tax on top of this licence then? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is no. There wouldn’t be an assessment as well. There 

would be a licence rather than assessment. 

 

But as you know, it is very complex. I mean, if you had an 

extension to your house or if you were using your garage or 

some other building on your property, farm, or acreage for some 

commercial purpose, then of course, I mean, that building is 

then assessed because it’s not an accessory to a farm use or that 

sort of thing. But it’s assessed on its own merit. And the licence 

is something different. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, we’d like to just touch on something kind of off the 

side of this, and I think the member from Kelvington had 

touched on a bit, was to do with regulations. What sort of things 

will be brought into this with the regulations at the time 

regulations are brought in? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are a number of 

important factors that are yet to be determined with consultation 

by those affected and interested. The most important ones being 

 that will be a subject of regulations  the most important 

ones being the property classes and the percentages of value 

which will be applied to those. 

 

There needs to be established in regulation the formula for how 

the equivalent education tax revenue will be raised where 

business assessment is not used, and . . . oh yes, the percentage 

of property value that will apply on the business side. That 

percentage, if a municipality opts to have a business 

assessment, the percentage will be set in regulations. So there 

are a number of very critical issues still outstanding that need to 

be dealt with in regulations. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think you’ve 

hit the nail right on the head and I think this is why we have 

concerns. And regulations scare us no matter or not just this 

Bill, every Bill that we’ve come across. And would it not be 

wiser to wait and bring the Bill in with the regulations so that 

we could look at, you know, the public, urban, rural, everybody 

could look at the Bill with the regulations in. Would that not be 

a fairer way of doing things? 

It just seems to me that when we bring these Bills in, actually in 

some cases . . . and this Bill is fairly complex without the 

regulations. But in a lot of cases the Bill itself, there’s nothing 

to it without the regulations. We’re debating the Bill and we 

actually don’t know what we’re talking about until the 

regulations come in. So would that not be a fairer way of doing 

it, is waiting to that point when the regulations were all in place 

and then bring it in as one? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there are several 

answers to that . . . parts of the answer to that question. One is 

that it couldn’t be done because all the data wasn’t available. In 

fact all the data is not yet available. SAMA is still working on 

this . So physically it wouldn’t have been possible because we 

just didn’t have . . . the information was not at hand. 

 

Secondly, it’s never . . . it’s just not possible with the system 

that we use, to develop the regulations in conjunction with the 

Bill because the regulations are pursuant to the legislation. So 

the legislation has to be in place first, and we never know that 

until the day we stand up and say, I move this Bill without 

amendment. 

 

And then the regulations, I mean work can be being done on 

them, but they simply can’t be put into place until the Bill has 

been passed, assented to, proclaimed. And then the regulations 

are developed and they are gazetted. And they will be 

developed, the regulations will certainly be developed, in 

consultation with those who are affected and those who will use 

the system. 

 

But I guess, like, in addition to that, this is the reason why when 

you talk of fairness it is so critical that the property tax 

assessment and tax system be made . . . brought into the 21st 

century and modernized. Because it is, as we all know, the least 

progressive tax there is. 

 

I mean, it doesn’t go away. Say your residential tax, it’s an ad 

valorem tax. It’s presumably based upon the value of what is 

there, and it doesn’t go away if you get old or you get sick or 

you get unemployed or, in the commercial sense, if your 

business isn’t doing well or being profitable, doesn’t affect the 

property tax and is not a basis for appeal. 

 

So that’s why I say that, because it is not a progressive tax, it is 

so critical that it be as fair as possible. That’s why it’s urgent 

that we need to make these changes to help the Assessment 

Management Agency and the local governments bring their 

systems up to date. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. But I think 

our concerns still are there that, unless you can point me in a 

different direction, when regulations are brought into this Bill 

 and I agree with you that the parties involved will be 

consulted in that  but as far as the legislature itself here, the 

whole intent of a Bill could really be changed by the 

regulations. You know, the base could be there. 

 

Am I missing something here? Do we have any input into when 

the regulations come in, how we could at least have a chance to 

discuss them at that point? 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it just isn’t 

possible to do it that way because the . . . just the same as in the 

normal rules of order, an amendment cannot change . . . an 

amendment is out of order if it changes the intent of the original 

motion. And the relationship between the legislation and the 

regulations is exactly the same. The regulations have to be 

designed to be pursuant to the intent spelled out in the 

legislation. And the regulations can in no way be contrary or 

change the intent of what is contained in the Bill. They must be 

pursuant to. 

 

So I guess that’s the only insurance I can give, is that that’s the 

way it has to work, that nothing, no regulation can change the 

intent so that you’re not getting a pig in a poke. When this is 

passed, this is what you get. And the regulations have to be 

pursuant to that. And they will be done in consultation. They 

will be gazetted. 

 

And it’s very normal to leave things like percentages of value, 

issues where there might need to be some changes in practice, 

in the regulations rather than the legislation. Because if we need 

to make a change  say if municipalities came forward and 

said, oh, we think you got this wrong; it’s having this 

unintended effect  we would have to, if it was in legislation, 

we’d have to say, well you’ll have to wait until the next 

legislative session for us to make those changes. Regulations 

are more flexible, and that is the reason why, in almost every 

piece of legislation, those features where there needs to be 

flexibility are placed in the regulations rather than in the 

legislation. And there’s nothing sinister about that. It’s meant to 

be practical. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. You may 

have answered this already, and I maybe just missed it. But 

when you said the regulations themselves cannot change the 

intent of the Bill, who decides that? And you maybe told me, 

and I just didn’t get that but . . . I’m sorry. Maybe I didn’t 

explain, but who, you know, when a new regulation is brought 

in by your staff or whoever, who is the overseer that says the 

intent of the Bill was changed; this isn’t allowed? That’s where 

I’m coming from. That’s where I feel we should come in as 

opposition and critics of the government. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well it’s just, Mr. Chairman, it’s a 

matter of law. And if . . . the very same as . . . I guess the 

analogy I use, because it’s one that you would be familiar with, 

is that an amendment is out of order if it changes, if it has the 

effect of changing, the intent of the original motion. And the 

relationship between regulations and the legislation is the same. 

And so if, by accident or design, someone were to approve a 

regulation that is not in keeping with the intent of the Bill, a 

legal challenge to that would most certainly be successful. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  So really what you’re saying, it would have 

to go to the courts, would be the only way it would really be 

brought to . . . If some municipality out there said, this has 

changed the whole intent of this, the only alternative they would 

have is go through the court system, I presume. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well if there were something that 

glaring, Mr. Chairman . . . Well any individual municipality  

wouldn’t be at risk. If there truly was an issue, then the 

municipal organizations would no doubt take up the cause. 

 

But that’s why we have the procedure where the department . . . 

Well first of all, the need for an amendment is recognized by 

someone. Perhaps a municipality will come to the government 

and say, you’ve got this wrong and we need to have this fixed. 

We have the wrong percentage or whatever the part of the 

regulation is. Then the procedure is that the situation is 

analysed. And if the petitioner, if you like, or the person or 

body who has brought it to our attention is correct, then drafting 

instructions are issued. 

 

The Department of Justice does the drafting. The draft 

regulations come to the Regulations Review Committee, which 

is a committee of cabinet. The recommendation is then made to 

cabinet. If it’s approved, then it’s gazetted for all the world to 

know. So there’s quite an extensive process in changing a 

regulation. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to 

explain to you that we’re not specifically picking on the SAMA 

Bills with regulations because, as an official opposition, we 

have a problem with every Bill that’s coming up with 

regulations. 

 

I realize you’re saying that it cannot change the intent of the 

Bill, but I’m sure you must realize, Madam Minister, that these 

regulations have a big input into what the make-up of the Bill 

is. So it’s strictly not just the SAMA Bills; it’s every Bill that 

comes up here. Some of them are very minor, so the regulations 

don’t affect it. But in this case, the regulations really do, and I 

believe the health Bills and education and a number of other 

ones, regulations can really come into effect. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to 

comment on the . . . I think we’ve had this debate before about 

legislation and regulations. But it’s the very same as . . . I would 

describe it this way: that the Act, the Bill, is the policy and the 

regulations are the administration. This is the intent, and the 

regulations are how the intent is carried out, which is the reason 

why the regulations and the legislation absolutely cannot be at 

odds with each other. The world just wouldn’t work that way. 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam 

Minister, thank you. You identified six or seven major areas 

where regulations would be an integral part of this Bill. I’m 

wondering if you can tell me who is going to have input into the 

regulations for each one of these different major areas. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if I have 

a list at hand of who all has been consulted so far, but roughly, 

for starters . . . oh, it’s quite an extensive list. Yes, I won’t read 

it all. 

 

But it’s the urban municipalities association, SUMA; and 

SARM, the rural association; the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association), the SAMA agency of course, and the  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

chambers of commerce, the CFIB (Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business), the chambers of commerce from all the 

cities in Saskatchewan or all the communities who have a 

chamber, the urban municipal administrators’ association, the 

Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials, the 

home builders’ association, the real estate association, the 

architectural heritage society, the Regina Home Builders’ 

Association. Some of the business associations, like the 

Partnership, and on, and on it goes for several pages. 

 

So there have been really extensive consultations. And then of 

course we receive letters and requests from individuals as well. 

But I would say that we have really consulted widely and will 

continue to do so on the development of these very important 

regulations. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Because I think 

that the regulations that you’ve identified, the five or six 

different, very important category, probably affects a number of 

different groups differently. I’m wondering, you had indicated 

that there was . . . the regulations haven’t been all finalized, so I 

take that to mean that you’re still meeting with these different 

groups. I’m wondering if there is different groups that are sort 

of assigned to or taking responsibility for various sets of 

regulations. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, yes, the answer 

is, these consultations are still ongoing, and there have been a 

number of larger meetings, sort of seminars called 

consensus-building sessions where really all of these parties 

would come together. 

 

Then on specific issues of course, there are specific 

organizations that take more of an interest in that issue; then 

there would be smaller meetings and potential drafts and intents 

would be known and it’s a two-way communication. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Could you give me an idea of when the 

standing Committee on Regulations that’s actually formed here 

in the House, deals with the regulations? Is it after all of your 

groups have met and compiled regulations, then they come to 

the Regulations Committee in this House? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the Regulations 

Committee is not part of the House and that’s what provides the 

flexibility actually. What happened  and it’s been brought to 

my attention; I knew this too  that there were meetings with 

the SARM board this week on May 6 and meetings with SUMA 

board on May 7 and there are other meetings planned with other 

major stakeholders for the balance of this month. 

 

What the procedure is, that when a decision has been made 

based upon the advice of all the members of these various 

groups  and of course sometimes you know you have to 

exercise some discretion when everybody doesn’t agree; but 

you listen to all the positions — then a recommendation is 

made for the drafting of the intent . . . is formed. And then that 

would be done by people in this case in the Department of 

Municipal Government who would then relay this intent of 

what it was they wished to accomplish in the regulation to the 

Department of Justice who would draft the regulation. 

Then it would come to the Regulations Review Committee, 

which is a committee of cabinet with a secretariat that includes 

people from the Department of Justice, and in this case, there 

would be people there from the Department of Municipal 

Government to make sure that everybody . . . all the members of 

the Regulations Review Committee understood the intent and 

had the legalities explained to them by the Justice officials and 

so forth. When that’s all done, if the Regulations Committee 

agrees, then it goes to cabinet for approval, upon which it is 

gazetted and the time of coming into force is set. 

 

In summary, to say is, that all takes place outside of the 

legislative session and they’re not . . . the regulations are not 

brought back to the House. But that’s what provides the 

flexibility, in that if you need to change something in between 

sessions, you can use that process, where otherwise there could 

be a year’s delay. Like if there’s something we find out that we 

want to change in July, say if the session’s over by July . . . at 

this rate, it may never happen. But just say that we notice in 

July that somehow we’ve slipped up on something, we have no 

opportunity to fix it for a whole year, and the regulations 

procedure provides that flexibility. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for your 

explanation to us novices here. I appreciate it. 

 

I have one specific question. I have a concern and a deep 

interest in heritage properties and buildings. I’m just wondering 

if they had special input and if there was some . . . if you’re 

looking at their needs in a different way than some of the other 

buildings and property in the province. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think that the 

architectural heritage society is one of the organizations that I 

did read out when I was reading off that list, and they were 

involved in the consensus-building sessions. And of course 

people with an interest in heritage are very concerned about 

provisions in the property assessment and tax regime that would 

encourage, for example, demolition of buildings. And that 

would run contrary to the intent of those who are interested in 

heritage, to preserve valued sites. And I certainly agree with you 

on that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess I’m rather unclear on what you would 

mean by some of the input they might have had, I guess. Can I 

be specific and ask you what they’re actually saying about it? 

Are they going to be assessed on market value or some 

replacement value, or has there been a decision made on that 

type of thing? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is a summary that 

I am quoting from, of local government tax policy review, 

consensus-building sessions that were held in August in 

Regina, August of 1995. And it’s very brief so I’ll just read for 

you, because I don’t have copies of it, the comments that the 

architectural heritage society had to make on these issues. They 

said . . . these are the concerns they have: 

 

Reassessment will lighten the tax burden on older 

properties and will contribute to the retention and 

renovation of older properties, particularly in the  



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

downtown core. 

 

Obviously that wouldn’t be a concern; that would be something 

that they would welcome. 

 

However, the change to market value may also penalize 

under-utilized buildings and lead to their demolition. 

 

And then on the business tax, they’re concerned that: 

 

Elimination of business tax will shift the burden to older 

heritage structures. 

 

And they’re also concerned that there’s a delay in establishing 

an income approach until the year 2000. 

 

So I think those are the concerns that were raised by the society 

as advocates for the retention of heritage property. They’re 

valid concerns and I hope that they will be able to be addressed 

in such a way that we don’t lose any valuable sites. 

 

There is a feature here that should be helpful in the vacancy 

adjustment for the business tax. So if there is a building that’s 

not being used, or at least not being used for business even 

though it’s in a business district, which might apply to the 

urban sort of near-downtown in urban centres, that there would 

be relief for that property — tax relief — in that feature. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I don’t want to 

put you on the spot, because I know what I’m trying to do, but 

I’m very concerned that there actually would result in a 

demolition of heritage buildings, sites, or . . . It would be 

difficult to actually demolish a site, but the buildings that would 

have possible impact for keeping heritage in our province and 

encouraging tourism, I think is something that we’re sort of 

overlooking here. 

 

Could you give me any specific details on how you’re dealing 

with perhaps the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation and some 

of the buildings and sites that they’re looking at right now that 

they don’t have monies to actually restore or use as tourism 

sites? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is probably a 

question that is more appropriately put in the context of 

estimates for the heritage, culture and recreation branch of the 

Department of Municipal Government. And members will have 

the opportunity at that time. 

 

So for our purposes here, let me just say, if it’s any comfort to 

you, I’m also the minister responsible for heritage. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I may get the 

same answer here, Madam Minister, but it just came to mind 

when the member from Kelvington-Wadena was asking the last 

question. 

 

What buildings are actually . . . or organization-owned 

buildings and land are exempt from taxes in urban centres? I am 

familiar with rural, but in the city, like say Regina, can you tell 

me what all buildings would be exempt? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are two types of 

exemption, if you like. First of all there are the statutory 

exemptions that are contained in legislation, in the Act 

respecting urban municipalities in this case. And the 

exemptions are many, many, but we start with the ones that you 

would be familiar with  the Crown land, any land and 

improvements held by the Crown or by any person in trust for 

the Crown. And then land and improvements especially 

exempted by law. And then it goes on to talk about places of 

public worship and schools and educational institutions and on 

and on and on. 

 

So there is a very extensive list of statutory exemptions. Then 

urban municipalities  that was your question  can prescribe 

exemptions that they wish to add to that list. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Then what 

you’re saying  and I think this is right  that none of the 

government buildings in the city of Regina, taxes are paid on. 

They’re all exempted? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I guess based on the 

principle that one level of government doesn’t tax another, that 

the member would be familiar with, owned Crown land and 

buildings are exempt. But leased space occupied by a Crown is 

taxed, or assessed and taxed. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, I’d like to get back now to the clauses again. We kind 

of got sidetracked there for a few minutes, but I’d like to go to 

clause 36. 

 

And in this Bill you have set out complicated new rules for the 

conduct of assessment appeals. There are new rules for filing a 

written material, examination of discovery, or disclosure of 

information. The explanatory notes which have been distributed 

by your department make a point of saying that these 

procedures will probably be used only for large commercial 

appeals. But there is nothing in the legislation to prevent the 

municipality from insisting on the use of these procedures 

simply in order to delay the progress of appeals, or worse still, 

in order to make it economically unfeasible for the other party 

to proceed. 

 

Madam Minister, does the department realize that making 

home-owners and small-business owners use the examination 

of discovery process and the other accompanying measures that 

I have talked about, will make it next to impossible, from a cost 

perspective, for such people to bring perfectly reasonable 

appeals before the board of revision of a great many urban 

municipalities? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in general the changes 

are meant to streamline the assessment process. And they allow 

more time, for instance, for an appellant. Specifically on the 

examination for discovery, that is at the option of the appellant. 

So there wouldn’t be any undue costs imposed on an appellant. 

Because if he doesn’t want . . . this is at his option, or his or her 

option. So it would likely be used more by large  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

commercial-type appeals. And that’s one of the reasons why 

more time is allowed. 

 

But in summary, I think the intent is to streamline the process, 

along with some provisions in the municipal Act, the SMB, the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board Act, which will be, you know, 

complementary to these. 

 

But the essence of it is to try and put the onus on the board of 

revision at the local level. Because you would be very familiar 

. . . the member from Saltcoats would know, that in the event of 

a major appeal or a precedent-setting appeal, sometimes the 

appellant wants to short-circuit the process at the local level and 

get straight to his stated case or straight to the municipal board. 

And that’s really not the proper way. 

 

So this legislation provides that the board of revision process at 

the local level will be thorough and have integrity. And that if 

there’s going to be an appeal . . . and the decisions of the board 

of revision will be in writing. And so that if the appeal process 

is to proceed then to a higher level, that the stage has been set. 

And similar to . . . not to make it difficult. Maybe I shouldn’t 

draw this parallel because we’re trying to make it easier not 

tougher. But the same principles would apply then that apply in 

the legal system where you can’t introduce evidence in the trial 

that hasn’t been brought up at the preliminary hearing for 

example, if that information was known at the time. 

 

And the same principle will apply here, that the base will be 

established for any further possible appeal by having a process 

at the local level that has full disclosure and full integrity. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Still with 

clause 36 and still on assessment appeals. In many tax appeal 

procedures, there is a fast-track procedure available which 

applies to appeals where the amount in dispute is below some 

fixed level. The fast-track procedure could also be available for 

those appeals where the issue is quite simple. 

 

Since many property tax assessment appeals are brought by 

ordinary home-owners, I think there should be a fast-track 

procedure available for them. That could be accomplished in 

several ways, and one way would be to limit the right to use 

examination of discovery process, the mechanical recording 

process, and the extensive filing of written material in the 

complicated, regimented disclosure process to appeals where 

the monetary amount in dispute is over some predetermined 

amount. 

 

Madam Minister, is there no way that a fast-track procedure 

could be set up for home-owners with much simpler cases? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure what the 

member is reading from, but some of the things that he has just 

read, from whatever document he’s using, are not accurate. And 

I think we’re making it . . . I wouldn’t use the word fast track, 

but we’re trying to make the system as accessible as possible by 

. . . for example, there’s provisions that allow boards of revision 

to have fewer people. And for boards of revision to sit 

concurrently, like a . . . probably wouldn’t be the case in a rural 

municipality where there aren’t that many appeals, but in a city,  

for example, where there may be a large number of appeals and 

maybe some are complex appeals, the board of revisions could 

be made up of fewer people and could sit concurrently, so it 

wouldn’t be one board that would have to sit for weeks and 

weeks and weeks. 

 

And I don’t really see anything here that makes it more difficult 

for the kind of appellant that you speak of. I mean really there is 

a fast track. We’re lengthening the time a little bit. We used to 

have . . . I think we’re going from 20 days to 30, to appeal the 

assessment when your assessment roll is opened. You used to 

have 20 days; you will now have 30, so you’ll have a little bit 

more time to prepare. It does provide that the grounds for the 

appeal should be stated in writing, but then the appellant goes 

. . . is heard by the board of revision. 

 

As I say, the time for that hearing might even be shortened now 

if there’s more access to the boards of revision and a decision 

could be made that very day, rendered in writing. And that’s the 

way the practice has been with simple appeals in rural 

municipalities. The appellant pretty well knows when he walks 

out what the answer is. So that doesn’t make . . . nothing in this 

makes it more difficult. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, my question 

is regarding the fees for appeal. I’m wondering what the current 

fee schedule is for appeals; is there a fee? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, at the local level, 

access to the local board of revision, there is at this time no fee. 

And I’m told that if the case is appealed to . . . if the decision of 

the local board is appealed to the municipal board at the 

provincial level that there is a fee of $50. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, some of the information we 

received said the new fees may be introduced for appeals at the 

local level. Are you allowing different localities or 

municipalities to decide if they want to set up a fee? Will it be 

an option? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, again we come to the 

provisions that will be in the regulations. And the legislation 

allows for a fee to be set, but the amount of fee or the capping 

of the fee will be in as part of the regulations. 

 

And I think that for anyone who has had experience in this area, 

personally I think it’s fair. Certainly I’m not sure about the 

member for Kelvington, but the member for Saltcoats will 

certainly know that boards of revision often sit and as a 

courtesy, I guess, hear appeals that are truly frivolous. 

 

For instance, I mean there is an onus on ratepayers to be aware 

and to educate themselves on what the grounds for appeal are. 

And I mean I know I have sat as a member of a board of 

revision where somebody comes in, will not tell the 

administrator as the secretariat to the board of revision ahead of 

time what the grounds for appeal are, and hasn’t had to pay a 

fee, comes in and spends an hour maybe complaining about 

how the snowplough only went past his house once in the last 

six years, and he really doesn’t think he should have to pay any 

taxes. I mean let’s face it, this is not a ground for appeal. 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

And it’s very expensive for the ratepayers because they’re 

having maybe six or eight councillors or members of the board 

of revision sitting there, being paid a per diem. You have staff 

time; the secretariat to the board of revision is sitting there. And 

I think a small fee, a modest fee, would be a deterrent to 

frivolous appeals and shouldn’t really be a burden on an 

appellant who has a valid case even though the adjustment that 

he or she may be asking for may be rather small. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I just have one last question, Madam Minister. 

Could you tell me if the regulations are going to at least spell 

out a maximum? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in the absence of 

having copies, I’ll just read this relevant section of the 

municipal Act. It is section 251(1), (7) and (8): 

 

(7) A council may, by bylaw, establish fees for the 

purposes of subsection (6) (which is the appeals) that do 

not exceed any prescribed maximum fee or the appropriate 

amount set out in a prescribed schedule of maximum fees. 

 

(8) Where an appellant is successful in whole or in part on 

an assessment or classification appeal at either the board of 

revision or the appeal board, the council shall refund any 

fee that was submitted by the appellant to the urban 

municipality. 

 

And so there you can see that if the appeal is not frivolous and 

if the appellant is successful, that the fee will be refunded. So 

that seems to be fair. 

 

I’d like to correct something, Mr. Chairman, that I said earlier 

where the question was asked about the amount of the fee to the 

Municipal Board  access to the Municipal Board. And there 

is a table actually that says . . . it sets out different ways of 

prescribing the fee, but then says the minimum fee payable is 

$50 and the maximum fee is 600  like notwithstanding this 

other schedule. So some very complex appeals might get into 

the higher limits, but that’s the range. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much for that special 

recognition. I move that we report progress. 

 

Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Municipal Board Act 

 

The Chair:  This is the same minister and the same officials. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I’d like to start with clause 3, the changes to the 

definition section of the Act. 

 

What sort of equipment would be included in your definition of 

resource production equipment. Could you give us some 

examples? 

 

(1600) 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is on section 3 (f) 

where it refers to machinery . . . this could be, when it’s 

resource production equipment, it could be pumps, jacks, flow 

lines, anything to do with the production of the resource  that 

would be in the definition of machinery. Then there’s other, you 

know, there’s batteries, tanks, everything, you know, that’s not 

machinery. But the machinery could be jacks, compressors, you 

know, the like. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, what was the reason for the changes with this part of 

the Bill? Like, why were these changes made? It seems to me to 

be more than housekeeping, so what was the purpose of this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question, for mines and pipelines these definitions or these 

provisions are simply there as clarification. For oil and gas well 

machinery and equipment, there are changes, so the definitions 

need to be clarified, so that it will be clear what will be taxed 

and what will not. So oil and gas well machinery and equipment 

at the well sites will continue to be assessed and taxed. 

 

But machinery and equipment at oil, battery, and gas handling 

sites, to separate, treat, process, dehydrate, store, or transport oil 

and gas, and to dispose of waste products is no longer to be 

assessed and taxed. Those will be off. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to go 

to clause 5, and this is actually not a great, important one, but I 

was just wondering — we’re changing the rules here and 

getting the administrator to make sure that a member of council 

signs the minutes — was there a problem that came out of this? 

This is why this was changed like this? Like, I was trying to 

understand why this was being done. What prompted this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, essentially there’s not 

really a change. It’s simply intended to be clearer what the role 

and duty of the administrator is with respect to attending at and 

maintaining records of council meetings. I’m told it’s simply to 

clarify the wording and to parallel the wording in the urban Act 

to bring the two closer together. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I believe we 

always have had to  have we not?  sign the minutes as a 

member of council. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s true, and 

this change does not affect that requirement. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  All right, thank you, Madam Minister. 

Clause 6, I believe we’re changing the powers to have re-counts 

for rural elections. Why would we not allow for a re-count even 

where there’s a difference between the winner and the second 

place finisher . . . is greater than the number of ballots where 

there was an objection plus the number of spoiled ballots? Can 

you give me an explanation of why this one is being done? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No. Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 

additional subsection would limit re-counts to only those 

situations where the re-count could change the outcome of the  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

election. And this wording is taken, with appropriate 

adjustments, from a section of The Local Government Election 

Act. Just an attempt to clarify and to bring the wordings of the 

parallel Acts or the different Acts which had provisions bearing 

on the same situation more consistent with each other. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 7 

where were talking about by-laws, what sort of by-laws do you 

have in mind when you talk about by-laws for health, safety, 

morality, and welfare of the inhabitants of the municipality? 

Could you elaborate a bit on that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that wording is 

consistent with the general responsibilities of a local 

government, sort of, for the good and welfare of the citizens 

they’re elected to serve. And the change in wording is simply 

again to be more consistent with the wording in section 83 of 

The Urban Municipality Act. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 9, if I 

understand this right, we’re reducing the duties and the powers 

of rural municipalities within regional parks. What kind of 

agreement does the minister have in mind when you say that 

RMs (rural municipality) no longer have any jurisdiction in the 

regional parks unless they have entered into an agreement with 

the park authority? Could you elaborate on that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that’s not . . . That 

interpretation is not quite accurate. 

 

What this does . . . This is an equity issue relating to buildings 

located on regional park property, where we now have a certain 

regime for rural residences, resort villages, fully taxed, fully 

assessed, fully taxed. Provincial parks and regional had their 

fees raised. They’re not taxed but they had their fees raised a 

couple of years ago. So there’s a little anomaly now in that 

regional parks dwellings, some of them permanent residences in 

regional parks, are not assessed and taxed. 

 

So this is an equity issue. This legislation is intended to make 

them subject to the rural municipality for purposes of taxation. 

It’s not changing the boundaries but it’s for purposes of 

taxation. The rural municipality that the regional park is located 

in would have jurisdiction for the . . . for tax purposes. This 

would be municipal tax, education tax. 

 

The park authority would actually set the mill rate and the park 

authority, I’m given to understand, would keep 80 per cent of 

the municipal levy raised for purposes within the park, and the 

other 20 per cent would go to the municipality. But it certainly 

isn’t designed . . . it’s not designed to weaken the relationship. 

In fact it’s designed to strengthen it, and it’s an equity issue. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Is this 

something new? I know in our area, we’re not familiar with this 

because we’ve never had any regional parks where there’s been 

people living in them. Is this a new part or has this always been 

there, just . . . or this amendment is just changing it a bit? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, this is new. It was 

considered about two years ago when some extensive  

consultations were undertaken, and at that time there was an 

effort to sort of create a level playing-field with all . . . for all 

resort residences. 

 

And it is a difficult issue because there are so many different 

ways they’re organized. There are resort villages, as I’ve said. 

There’s provincial parks, the regional parks, national parks, and 

they’re all treated somewhat differently. 

 

So the association representing these regional park property 

owners is  I will concede  not thrilled about this. But on 

the other hand, the municipalities  SUMA, SARM, and 

SSTA, the local government federation, as you know  is 

certainly united in wanting this change because the other resort 

areas or park areas that are organized in different ways are 

certainly paying their freight in one way or another. And the 

owners of property in regional parks are an exception to that. So 

as I say, they’re not thrilled, but it’s an equity situation. 

 

And a lot of them are . . . these are not, in general, very 

elaborate residences. A great many of them are seasonal. So 

how . . . if they become part of the municipality for assessment 

purposes and the park authority sets the mill rate, it’s hard to 

determine right now whether there’ll be really a dramatic 

financial effect or not. But those organizations see that at least 

there will be some contribution, and that’s seen by them to be 

fair. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Does this 

affect all parks then? We’re talking provincial, regional, 

everything, or just strictly regional parks? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is just regional 

parks, because in resort villages which are not in parks, they are 

now fully assessed and taxed as if they were rural residents. 

And in provincial parks, two years ago they had their lease fees 

raised to approximate a level of tax contribution. And at that 

time, the dwellings in regional parks weren’t given the same 

treatment, and now they’re being brought in. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 

appreciate what you’re saying when you said that the regional 

parks weren’t thrilled about it because we’ve had a number of 

calls from people in regional parks and on the boards who are 

quite upset about it. 

 

I’m wondering if you could tell me if they were involved in the 

consultation process when it was determined that they should 

be assessed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the provincial 

organization which represents these owners of property in 

regional parks was consulted when a full review of the situation 

was carried out about two years ago. And they of course did not 

want to be included in the legislation. And at that time, they 

weren’t. 

 

But since that time there’s been, I guess, constant requests from 

local governments and school trustees to include regional parks 

in the property tax regime, or their residences. And we have 

responded to that. And knowing that, the owners of those  



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

residences will not be happy, but they are on a level 

playing-field. Right now, they have a huge advantage over 

cottage owners in resort villages or provincial parks. And while 

it’s a nice advantage for them to have, there isn’t anyone else in 

the world that sees that to be fair. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think that there 

is deep concern with them and the reason I asked you the 

question is that, with the calls that I’d received after the Bill 

was presented, from regional park boards, I had the idea that 

they were rather flabbergasted that they were included. So were 

they actually given information lately, before the Bill was 

introduced, that they were going to be assessed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I have met with 

representatives of the group, but it was, I believe, after the 

legislation was tabled. And I knew that there was a consultation 

process at one time, and so I think they wouldn’t be surprised 

so much, as they didn’t like the idea two years ago when they 

were involved in the consultations, and they don’t like it any 

better now. And I have met with them, or representatives of 

their group, and we’ve spoken about the equity issue. And 

they’ve asked me some questions about how it will evolve. And 

I guess one comfort is that the regional . . . the park board will 

set the mill rate for the park. 

 

(1615) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I hope I 

understood you correctly when you said that the regional park 

board would be able to keep up to 80 per cent of the funding 

that they collected. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, yes the regional park 

would - or the authority, the board, would retain 80 per cent of 

the municipal levy that’s raised. They wouldn’t keep the school 

levy but the municipal levy. Because obviously, if they’re 

responsible for providing - or if they had an agreement with the 

rural municipality, for instance, obviously somebody has to 

provide some services to those residents that are in the park, 

you know, whether it’s waste management, or whatever, and 

they provide access to a beach which maybe they clean and so 

on, so they could retain that 80 per cent. 

 

And then either the authority would use that money to provide 

those services, or they might want to enter into an agreement 

with the municipality, with the rural municipality that they’re 

in, to provide those services on their behalf and maybe pay 

them a fee. 

 

So there’s quite a bit of flexibility in how this could be handled. 

And it would be - usually the relationships between the regional 

park authority and the municipality are good and positive, 

because obviously it’s members of the municipalities that 

formed the regional park board. So I think they’ll be able to 

work it through in a positive way. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The figure of 80 

per cent, was that something that was agreed to with the 

regional park? Was it a number that was decided upon with the 

board? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would refer the hon. 

member to section 339.1, if she has a copy of the Bill. It sets 

out in six different sections exactly how the tax issue will be 

handled and how the percentages will be allocated. 

 

And I guess some research determined that only 20 per cent of 

the money collected would be required for the overhead, if you 

like, of the participating municipality, and so the rest of it 

should obviously go to the park authority. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report progress and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 70 and Bill No. 

71. 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair:  I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials 

first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairperson, to my left is Terry Scott, assistant deputy minister; 

to his left is Doug Matthies, general manager of Crop 

Insurance; to my right, Dale Sigurdson, assistant deputy 

minister of Agriculture and Food; behind me, Jack Zepp, 

director of administration services; and Ross Johnson, to my 

rear right, budget officer, administration services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would 

welcome the minister’s officials here this afternoon. My first 

questions surround the minister’s trip recently to the Far East 

and initiatives undertaken there, we are told, to establish new 

markets for Saskatchewan grown and Saskatchewan processed 

goods. If the minister would just provide us this afternoon with 

an overview with respect to the trip. Perhaps you could include 

in there when this trip that has just recently been undertaken, 

when was it initially planned? 

 

And then if you could go on from there as to what were the 

specific objectives of the trip. And then how many of these 

objectives do you feel were achieved? And also could you 

provide to us how many officials from your department may 

have accompanied you on the trip, and also as far as what 

specific destinations you went to and what were the purposes, 

as I say, in these destinations, of promoting trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, well I’ll give you an overview of 

the trip to start with. 

 

We spent five days, approximately five days in Tokyo, meeting 

with different agricultural groups, discussing trade in many 

areas. 

 

One of the highlights - I’ll give you some of the highlights. 

Meeting with a company called Zen-Noh. Zen-Noh is the  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

largest agricultural cooperative in Asia. They’re a similar set-up 

to Federated Co-op as we know it over here. They have 2,300 

member co-ops. 

 

One of the important reasons of meeting with Zen-Noh is that 

they trade $100 billion Canadian a year, which is fairly 

significant in terms of trade around the world. And so when we 

met with them, they were interested in a number of things 

including canola. 

 

One of the things about a company like Zen-Noh is that they’re 

interested in almost anything that you can supply them. They’re 

a trading company, and things like feed grains, pork, beef - you 

know, there’s a variety of things. 

 

One of the other things that we did that was quite important  

and I mentioned it the other day  in Japan was that we met 

with the Department of Agriculture, the Minister of Agriculture 

and talked about transgenic canola. We have three licensed 

varieties of transgenic canola in Saskatchewan right now. Of 

those three varieties, the problem is that Japan does not accept 

transgenic products yet. 

 

Now for the farmers here, it means getting the fields inspected, 

registering them. It means when they harvest them, they have to 

confetti the grain to make sure it doesn’t get mixed in because 

any transgenic varieties that are mixed in with regular varieties 

found in Japan, of course that would cut off our current trade. 

 

What the Japanese government told us  the officials and the 

minister told us  not directly, but they insinuated that by the 

fall of this year they’d hoped to have legislation passed to allow 

transgenic canola in Japan. 

 

We were very tactful in our approach because you can’t push 

these people, push the consumer very hard, the trader or the 

government very hard. But we made it very, very plain to them 

the advantages it would give them if they allowed transgenic. 

 

First of all, it would allow the advantage of the producer over 

here to work on a - the product to be less dollars when they 

came to buy it. Simply because with transgenic canola, for 

example, you can use one herbicide, one trip over. You can use 

Roundup, for example. Roundup-tolerant canola is 

transgenically produced, instead of spraying two or maybe three 

times for different kinds of weeds in your fields. 

 

So the cost of production is reduced. When the cost of 

production is reduced, of course, then if the price stays fairly 

constant, then you can get a better margin. And what we 

basically said is that, don’t be too concerned about the price; be 

more concerned about the supply. Because we have a great 

demand for canola from around the world, and growing 

demand. 

 

(1630) 

 

When I get to Taiwan - I’ll explain to you that in Taiwan there 

is a company that’s selling canola right now who are interested 

in possibly processing canola, but every ounce of canola they 

sell right now, they’re losing money on. Last year they sold 500  

tonnes. This year they hope to sell 3,000 tonnes. And when they 

get up to 10,000 tonnes of oil for a market, then they will 

probably start producing themselves and consuming our raw 

product. 

 

So Japan knows very well that there is great demand for canola, 

and we explained that to them. And I think that helped to push 

them into deciding that they should allow transgenics because 

first of all, the safety product is there and the fact that the 

consumption is going up and they’re going to be competing 

with other people in the world with a product that is very 

limited. 

 

We explained to them that the acreage is going to be reduced 

slightly this year. Not to be concerned about that because if we 

get a decent crop, the production could be up and we could 

have more product than last year. But we were saying that 

unless we get a product that is more heat tolerant and can move 

further south in the province to be produced, there is a limited 

area in Canada  not just in Saskatchewan, but in Canada  

for canola production. 

 

Anyway, that’s a long story to tell you that we felt that we really 

accomplished something there. And they  without saying yes, 

absolutely  indicated that possibly by this fall they hope that 

they have legislation in place to accept transgenics. 

 

I don’t know how long you want me to go on. I’ll abbreviate 

this, so you can ask another question. But then we went to 

Korea. Korea we talked about feed peas and pork. 

 

An Hon. Member:  But did you have a good time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We worked so hard we didn’t even get 

any sleep. Field peas and pork. In Hong Kong we talked about 

canola. We talked about a CIDA (Canadian International 

Development Agency) project in mainland China that needs 

funding to ensure our potash production over here. I can get 

into that later if you like. 

 

Went to Taiwan, spent nine days in Taiwan talking to the 

ministers  not the minister in Taiwan; Korea, talked to the 

minister  to officials from the government. We talked to a 

mustard processor in southern Taiwan. We talked to people 

who are buying organic seed, sprouting seeds, from Mumm’s 

up at Shellbrook. And they plan to be buying more product 

from them. We talked to people who were interested - sorry, in 

Korea. We missed antler velvet in Korea - anything from ostrich 

to ginseng to horseradish. I mean when you talk to these people, 

they’re interested in almost anything we can grow over here. 

 

So from that aspect, I think it was very successful. I can 

elaborate much longer on this trip because it’s quite exciting to 

know the potential over there, but I’ll allow you to ask another 

question. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure it was just 

an oversight, but I did ask at the outset, when was your trip 

originally planned. We want to have some sort of an idea in  



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

terms of your department and when it contemplates taking 

initiatives such as you’ve undertaken, how far in advance are 

you planning for these types of initiatives? And then also I did 

ask how many of your officials from your department had 

accompanied you in the trip. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, sorry. From the department, I had 

one official with me, from the Department of Agriculture and 

Food. But I also had with me my chief of staff from my office, 

which was just for logistical purposes, organizing. 

 

But the trip was initially planned, if you recall, by Mr. Goodale 

and the federal government. This was the Team Canada. Let me 

explain that. The first half of this trip was the Team Canada 

mission organized by Mr. Goodale. That was originally set for 

February and then it was postponed. If you recall the whole 

federal cabinet shuffle, it was postponed because of that, I 

believe, and then it was rescheduled for March. And again it 

was some time in late February that Mr. Goodale’s office 

contacted us and asked us if we wanted to go on the trip. 

 

We talked it over with the department officials and myself, and 

we thought it would be a good trip to go on. It’s especially 

important, we felt. And we were really pleased that Mr. 

Goodale initiated this, because I didn’t realize how important it 

was until I got there. 

 

But to have a Canada front, common front in Asia, is very 

important. Because they don’t see us as Saskatchewan or 

Alberta or B.C. (British Columbia)  they see us as Canada. 

And it was an opportunity for us for Mr. Goodale to help open 

doors for us as a province, and then for us to open doors for our 

people who were on our mission with us. So that was the 

process of the trip, and I think that’s answered all your 

questions. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. 

Minister. With respect to the trip, I was very pleased to see you 

acknowledging the national front in terms of a Team Canada 

approach. And we do feel that this is probably the most 

efficient and certainly most economical approach, and the most 

visible approach, I might add. I would corroborate what you’ve 

said, where when you travel around the world, we’re recognized 

as Canadians versus any provincial differentiation, to a large 

degree. 

 

But if I could go back to - you mentioned when you made your 

trip to Tokyo, a rather large cooperative that is doing something 

in excess of $1 billion per year in trade. A company of this size 

or cooperative of this size, and if they are undertaking a good 

degree of activity related to just trading  pure trading if you’d 

have it  would they not have had any presence here in 

Canada? Would there not have perhaps been an office for a 

company such as that in say, the province of British Columbia, 

in Vancouver, where perhaps some economies could have been 

realized more so by just stopping in on a local office of such a 

corporation? 

 

And also if you would, just along in line with this questioning, 

could you provide us the total cost with respect to the 

department, your department, and the trip  what this may  

have cost the taxpayers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  With regards to the total cost, as I 

indicated to the press and to the opposition earlier, as soon as 

we get it all compiled we’ll get it to you. And that should be 

almost ready but it’s not quite ready yet. But we certainly will 

do that. It will certainly be done, well shortly. 

 

I would undertake to get it to you before these estimates are 

over so you can ask more questions on it if - not today but 

before the Agriculture estimates - before you’re done with 

estimates in Agriculture. 

 

I don’t know if . . . you’ll have to appreciate . . . What I’ll 

undertake to do is get a list of . . . some companies have offices 

in Canada. Very few, but some do. Zen-Noh, I do not believe 

have an office in Canada. I’d have to double check, but I’m 

pretty sure they don’t. But that’s not . . . And you could; if they 

had an office, yes, you could go see them. 

 

But the important thing is to go to the consumer, to the buyer, 

where they live. And it’s easy for me to say this. But if you 

want someone, if you want to double check this, I just ask you 

to pick up the phone and phone Thomson Meats or Humboldt 

Flour Mills or SPI (Saskatchewan Pork International Marketing 

Group) or canola council or CBEF, Canada Beef Export 

Federation or the Canadian Wheat Board, even though they’ve 

got a great reputation over there. The importance of having 

government people over in the country that’s consuming . . . 

like I say, it’s very important to be there, but don’t take my 

word for it. I encourage you to phone these people and ask them 

if they think it’s important for government to be there. 

 

And it is important for the team Canada approach, especially on 

the first trip. Part of the key . . . the key, rather, to dealing with 

Asian countries and to some degree other countries, but 

especially Asian countries, is you don’t deal with them until 

they know you basically. The first trip with Mr. Goodale 

opening doors for us and we opening doors for our producers is 

the first step. Then it’s to get to know them to continue to build 

the confidence to do business. 

 

And again, you don’t have to take my word. You can ask . . . in 

fact in the next estimates I’ll bring an article I neglected to bring 

today on Asia from  I think it was  Newsweek. But they 

were interviewing in Manitoba, a Manitoba person who was 

doing business in Asia, and they were saying exactly the same 

thing. So like I say, you don’t have to take my word for it. But 

from fresh off being there, this is really important, the contacts. 

 

And one of the things that’s most important is the follow-up. 

And this is why I’m beginning to talk with my department now 

as to what presence do we need as a follow-up. We’re doing 

follow-up as far as contacts that we’ve made now and 

opportunities that have been opened, whether it be in capital 

investment in Canada. And some of these things, most of these 

things I can’t tell you publicly. In private, I can talk to you 

about them because there are certain sensitivities about people 

doing business who don’t want it public. But I’d certainly be 

willing to mention some of the potentials that we have to you  



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

privately at any point in time as you wish. But it’s important to 

follow up. 

 

And what I’m trying to establish now is how often is it 

necessary for a government official to be in Asian countries. 

And it looks . . . I guess if I were guessing, I would say 

probably three times in two years or eight to nine months apart. 

And that is contacting the people who are over there. 

 

And the cynics and critics will of course say, well yes, you’re 

planning your next holiday. Well I accept that criticism even 

though it might be wrong. But I can’t emphasize enough the 

value of the presence of the producers . . . the partnership 

between the producer of the product from Saskatchewan, the 

government, and our trade people abroad meeting with the 

consumer or trading house. They call them trading houses, 

basically, over in Asia. So that partnership is being moulded. 

I’m not the first guy that was there. I mean this has been going 

on for a number of years. 

 

The difference now is that because of GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) changes, because of rural 

trade organization rules changing and the tariffs being reduced 

in those countries, there is much more potential for two areas: 

(1) shipping a processed or value added product to the 

customer; and (2) having investors from Asia invest capital in 

Saskatchewan to help us value add to our primary products. So 

that area is opening up greatly right now because of changing 

trade rules. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mentioned 

with respect to follow-up that you’re contemplating perhaps 

three times within the next two years. Could you just perhaps 

elaborate a little bit more on that? I would take that to mean that 

yourself or officials of your department might be undertaking 

another trip to the very same sector perhaps within this fiscal 

year. And would you perhaps just elaborate upon that, or are 

you undertaking initiatives to other parts of the world? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well as far as Agriculture is concerned, 

what we’re doing now is trying to decide what the necessary 

follow-up is. When I said eight times or eight times . . . every 

eight months or three times in two years, I’m just giving you my 

perception of what I think might be a ballpark time frame. 

 

Because . . . what we’re talking about and what I’m trying to 

put forward is how to establish a constant presence, whether it 

be Economic Development, Agriculture, Premier-Prime 

Minister trade mission, whether it be producers from 

Saskatchewan going over there to trade shows. Whatever it is, I 

think that one of the advantages that we can give to ourselves is 

if we try to establish a constant presence in the region. 

 

And . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from 

Shaunavon . . . no, what’s the name of it now? Wherever he’s 

from, down in the corner. He says, I’m not just trying to get a 

few more trips for myself. Well I’ll tell you, no that’s not the 

reason. But you won’t believe me. But I’ll tell you, if you were 

ever to be able to form government, which is just almost totally 

unlikely that you would know the importance of going over 

there. 

(1645) 

 

In fact . . . so anyway the trade missions . . . we have people 

from the Government of Saskatchewan, not just Agriculture, 

but who are over in Africa, Ukraine, South America, Asia, as 

part of their job, for trade. They’re our trade people, and every 

government has them. Manitoba has them. Alberta has them. 

And these people visit those regions on a regular basis doing 

the follow-up, the contact with the region. 

 

So anything that’s . . . as far as agriculture is concerned, we’re 

not planning anything specifically right now for agriculture. 

What we’ve done . . . we just had a meeting last week, what we 

called a debriefing meeting where we asked all the people that 

were on Mr. Goodale’s trade mission . . . in fact, Mr. Goodale 

sent a representative himself to do a little debriefing session to 

talk about where we go from here. 

 

So we’re just in the process of figuring out what the next step is 

in this continual . . . I mean you and I’ll be here and gone and 

this whole trade thing will continue to go. The important thing 

is that we tap the opportunity that’s over there right now. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly would 

acknowledge that trade is what the whole world revolves 

around. But my comments, my next comments  and then I 

would put a question to you or at least a question, perhaps two 

 are that . . . and you did acknowledge the presence of other 

governmental ministers from both provinces, federally. Do you 

not feel that there is some unnecessary overlap in this regard? 

And the trip that you’ve described, having just been 

contemplated in February of this year, would seem to me to be 

somewhat of an ad hoc planning process. 

 

So within the estimates provided for this fiscal year, could we 

not then assume that perhaps there might be some more ad hoc 

trips planned on the part of your department? If you might just 

want to make some comment in this regard because I think what 

is important here is that we get private businessmen anywhere 

in this world certainly promoting the export of products from 

this country. Nobody on this side of the House would have any 

disagreement with that whatsoever. 

 

However when we have some duplication and overlap, and 

some would say and we would maintain, the costs associated 

with that with respect to governmental officials, that is where 

we have to draw a line and say, well perhaps the monies could 

be better used at home. So if you might just make some 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well certainly I would like to make 

some comments on that. I don’t know, maybe you don’t 

understand. The mission that we went on, which I was happy to 

go on, and I’m pleased Mr. Goodale . . . and I’m sure he’ll be 

having other ones. Not maybe to the same people or the same 

area. It might be the same area but not the same companies, 

because you can only meet so many. But you always touch base 

with government and then you touch base with those people 

who you think are the most valued customers. And it’s a 

rotating thing because you generally try to expand your base of 

trade. 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

But I don’t know, I don’t quite understand, what you mean by 

duplication. I think I understand what you mean by duplication 

because . . . But, for example, in Taiwan. We were in Taiwan, 

or in any country, but let’s say Taiwan. We were in Taiwan. 

Manitoba have representatives in Taiwan, and the Premier from 

. . . or the Minister of Agriculture from Manitoba was over in 

Taiwan the same time I was. And from a Canadian perspective, 

that might be duplication. 

 

But I don’t think that the minister from Manitoba, bless his 

heart, is going to try to stimulate the hog industry in 

Saskatchewan. So while you might think it’s duplication 

because different provinces have people over there at the same 

time, we each have different customers. 

 

We have customers that are lined up with value added 

producers here who . . . And I’ll give you an example. And the 

reason I give you this example is because Lorne Thomson from 

Thomson Meats made this public just the other day. He said the 

advantage of having the Government of Saskatchewan over 

there in the capacity as minister not only helped raise the profile 

for him to support his business, to give them confidence that his 

business was legitimate and they could do business with him, 

but the person that he did business with, Nichimen Corporation, 

was a mid-level bureaucrat in the corporation. 

 

That bureaucrat was really happy because he got to sit down 

and visit . . . or not visit . . . sit around the same table and do 

business as a senior vice-president. And he said to Lorne 

Thomson, that never would have happened had the minister not 

been there. 

 

So those are the examples. I mean sometimes I describe myself 

over there as a cheerleader. I’m there . . . I mean the people here 

do the business. The business people do the business. But 

everybody’s got a role to play. 

 

And I’m sure when we came back here that we wouldn’t have 

had . . . I think we had every person on the trip that participated 

in the first 10 days, come to Regina here . . . no, I shouldn’t say 

that. CBEF couldn’t make it but I think they were about the 

only one. But the canola council came from Winnipeg; Wheat 

Board came from Winnipeg; Thomson Meats, Humboldt; SPI 

(Saskatchewan Pork International Marketing Group) . . . I just 

forget. But when we invited them they all came because they 

know the importance. 

 

And like I say, don’t take my word for it. If you think this is a 

waste of time, phone some of these folks and ask them. I mean I 

haven’t paid them to say, yes, it was a good thing. You can talk 

about Saskatchewan government; you can talk to the Wheat 

Board about the Alberta or Manitoba government, because they 

do business with those governments as well; you can talk to the 

Canola Council of Canada about any province that produces 

canola. I mean don’t believe me, just go ask them. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you be able 

to provide us with a little information concerning Canadian 

embassies? Some of these locations that you did travel to 

certainly must have had Canadian embassies, commercial 

consulate offices, commercial officers anyway, on-site who  

certainly can promote the importation of our products from 

wherever in Canada, but also including a number in 

Saskatchewan which are very important. Could they not have 

made the same contacts through these offices? 

 

And would you also maybe perhaps comment where you’re 

suggesting that your status as the Minister of Agriculture of a 

province had more weight than a Canadian embassy official or 

the federal Minister of Agriculture? If you might want to just 

elaborate a little further on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, you weren’t listening very well. 

What I said was the federal minister opened the doors for the 

provincial ministers to some degree. Okay? So they took the 

lead. I mean if you’re criticizing my involvement, you’re 

criticizing Mr. Goodale’s involvement. I mean if you want to do 

that, that’s fine. 

 

But you obviously don’t understand the trading. And this is not 

a criticism of you. Trust me, I didn’t understand it  I didn’t 

understand it till I went there. It was my first trip to Asia. And 

that’s what I said to everybody when I came back — I didn’t 

understand the importance of government. It’s a different 

society. People in Asia actually respect their government 

officials. 

 

And when we go over there, they treat you with great respect. 

You open the doors, and you make the contacts. And the first 

contact is basically just, how do you do; get to know you. Then 

the second contact is when you start to do business. They get 

the feeling that they can trust and they know you. Getting to 

know people is 99 per cent of the trade game over there. Like I 

say, I didn’t realize that. 

 

And with the consulates and the ambassador and the  what’s 

the word I’m looking for, where the ambassador lives?  the 

embassy, the embassy in Tokyo, and you can ask Mr. Goodale 

and his people, Bill Ross, or any of those guys, they did an 

excellent job of lining up the people that we were meeting with. 

Bob Mason down in Nagoya who is the trade officer; Jim 

Hannah over in Korea that set up lots of meetings for us  

these people do tremendous work, not just for Saskatchewan. 

They’re doing this constantly for 10 provinces and the two 

territories I mean, and they’ve got eight hours a day to work. 

 

So again if you don’t believe me, ask them how important it is. 

Write Don Campbell, the ambassador for Tokyo, a fellow, a 

person who I just met over on the trip. A very personable man 

who knows the trade business  write him a letter and ask him 

if it’s important that provincial ministers or governments be 

represented while trading over in Asia. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, with 

respect to your response just now, I would undertake that it was 

important that the federal Minister of Agriculture be present in 

such a mission. 

 

But my next question would be, were you involved directly in 

negotiation of any particular contracts while you were on your 

trip in the Far East? And if you could, if you might just outline 

some of those for the House this afternoon. 



May 9, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The answer is, yes and no. You’ll love 

that, I know. We were directly involved in sitting down with 

producers, value added producers from Saskatchewan, and the 

people they’re doing business with. And the meeting would 

consist of opening remarks from myself, or if Mr. Goodale was 

there, of course he would be first. When we were with Mr. 

Goodale’s mission, it was more of a general nature, not that 

specific. When we were on our own, then we were working 

with our value added producers here and their buyers. We 

would sit down in our meeting room with the three parties  

the Government of Saskatchewan, the consumer — the trading 

house — and the value added producer. 

 

And all of what we would do is talk about product safety. For 

example, if we were talking about meat, I would talk about the 

federal and provincial regulations that we have in place to 

ensure product safety and how we understand that provides 

quality, and how we understand that quality, in turn, provides 

product safety. And we know they’re involved heavily in 

product safety because their consumers demand. 

 

And we know that simply because  I may have said this 

earlier  in Japan, when the British beef scare started a few 

months ago, their beef consumption went down 30 per cent  

30 per cent. I mean that affects not only us, but the world, as far 

as the potential drop in consumption of beef. So what we did 

when we sat down with Mr. Thomson and his people he does 

business with was reassure them that we provide the quality 

control regulations that Lorne wants and needs and follows in 

order to provide the product safely. We sat down with 

processors; we sat down with a company who, as I said, who 

were importing raw canola now, and they talked to us about the 

potential about setting up a processing plant and how we might 

work together on that. 

 

So yes directly to some degree, but to another degree indirectly 

because we didn’t actually . . . we don’t sign the lines or sign 

the deals. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 

Minister, before we wrap up here in a few minutes there’ll be a 

few things that I would ask you to bring the next time you come 

before estimates. 

 

That’ll be a complete, detailed list on ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) loans  where they’re at. And 

in fact of a breakdown of the loans from last year to this year. 

The number of participants in dollars. If we could have also a 

complete list of your crop insurance contracts per region. 

 

If we could get . . . just ensure that you have those breakdowns 

when you come. And also, Mr. Minister, if you have yet to table 

the answers to the global package . . . do you have that global 

package with you today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, we will provide as much 

information as possible. And with the global package, we’ll get 

that  that is being worked on  we’ll get that to you as soon 

as possible. Okay. 

 

Mr. Chairperson, I would now ask that we rise and report  

progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member from Wood River on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to say thank 

you to the minister’s officials and look forward to several 

returns on this issue. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1996 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 1452 of Hansard No. 47A Wednesday, May 8, 1996, 

1:30 p.m., under NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND 

QUESTIONS paragraph 2, line 2 “four-” should read 

“fourth-”. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1479 

  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................1479 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1480 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1480 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1480 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1480 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1480 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1480 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1487 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1488 

  McPherson .....................................................................................................................................................................1488, 1490 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1488 

  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1490 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon Economic Development Authority 

  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1480 

 Member Marks 25 Years of Public Service 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1481 

 Tourism Promotion 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1481 

 Passing of Senator Hastings 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1481 

 Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Day 

  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1481 

 Bruno SADD Chapter 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1481 

 Ogema Hosting Dance Competition 

  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1482 

 75th Anniversary of the Yorkton Rotary Club 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1482 

 Mental Health Week in Saskatchewan 

  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................1482 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Home Care Workers’ Collective Bargaining 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1482 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1482 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1483 

 Provincial Park Fees 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1484 

  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1484 

 Gaming Addiction 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1484 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1484 

 Funding for Christian Counselling Services 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1485 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1485 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1485 

 Funding for Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1486 



 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1486 

 Oil Company Boycott 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1487 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1487 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1487 

 Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1487 

 Bill No 90  An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1487 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1488 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 70 An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1488 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................1488, 1493, 1495, 1498 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................1492, 1494, 1496, 1499 

 Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1500 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1500 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1501 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1502 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1502 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1507 

CORRIGENDUM ..........................................................................................................................................................................1508 

 


