
























































June 21, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2997 
 June 21, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the signatures are from Melville, Estevan, and other small 
communities around Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise to present petitions 
of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding closure of 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petitioners are mostly from the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
petitions of names from Saskatchewan residents regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Mankota, Fir Mountain, and here in the city 
of Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by many concerned 
citizens from the communities of Regina Beach and Buena 
Vista beach and actually the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Parkbeg, Mortlach, Avonlea, Cardross, 
Coderre, as well as the city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues here today and the people of Saskatchewan in their 
efforts at saving the Plains Health Centre here in Regina. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And, Mr. Minister, the people that have signed these petitions 
are all from your home community of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. They are petitions for the double-laning of Highway 
No. 1, the closure of the Plains Health Centre, and parent 
educational support programs. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
make this introduction on behalf of my friend and colleague, 
the member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, there are 21 grade 4 
students from Dr. George Ferguson School. I understand today 
they are having a kids convention, so this is part of the activities 
that they are going to do. 
 
They are attended by their teacher, Gail Digby, and their 
chaperon, Arlene Burwash. 
 
I hope that they enjoy their stay in the Chamber and I 
understand when they have visited here for awhile they’re going 
to have a tour, and I will look forward to visiting with them 
later on. 
 
So would you please join me in extending to them a very warm 
welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as the session winds, we 
believe, to a close, I’d like to pay tribute to all of the families 
and spouses of the members in the legislature who keep the 
home fires burning while we’re here. 
 
And in particular I want to welcome and introduce to the 
Legislative Assembly through you, Mr. Speaker, my life partner 
for the last 40 years, my husband Dan, who’s here to lend some 
support to me and perhaps drop in at the Farm Progress Show. 



2998 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

So I’d ask members to help me welcoming him to Regina and 
to the legislature this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Aboriginal Day 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize today’s designation as National Aboriginal Day. The 
theme of National Aboriginal Day invites everyone to share in 
celebration. It is important that we highlight Canada and 
Saskatchewan’s vast range of aboriginal culture. 
 
I know the Minister of Indian and Metis Affairs has graciously 
provided all of us with lists of the various powwows and 
celebrations taking place this summer across this great province 
of ours. I would encourage anyone who has not witnessed one 
of these spectacular celebrations to attend one. 
 
The vibrant aboriginal traditions, customs, languages, and 
celebrations are part of what makes our nation so unique and so 
special. I hope everyone in Saskatchewan takes some time today 
to reflect on the roles aboriginal cultures have in our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, Unooch Kisteneetagun Ka 
geesigak. Today is a day of respect and recognition. It is the 
National Aboriginal Day. 
 
It is set aside so that we can recognize and reflect on the 
challenges, the successes, and contributions made by Indian, 
Metis, and Inuit peoples. While strong challenges remain all 
across Canada, let’s take the time to reflect on the positive 
achievements and the shared partnerships between the Metis 
and Indian people and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s pay due respect and commitment to the only 
Metis-controlled educational institutions in Canada  
SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teacher education 
program), Dumont Technical Institute, and Gabriel Dumont 
Institute. In addition, this is the 20th anniversary of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College and NORTEP, the 
northern teacher education program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 30 years ago there was less than five people in the 
post-secondary programs from northern Saskatchewan. Now 
there is about 2,000. 
 
On the issue of land in Saskatchewan, we have the largest land 
settlement since the signing of the treaties with the present 
implementation of the Treaty Land Entitlement. We also have 
shared partnerships in forestry, mining, gaming, health, social 
services, education, and other areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while much remains to be done, let’s continue to 
build on our shared partnerships and joint successes. When 
opportunities are open, aboriginal people stand with other  

Canadians in making important contributions to themselves, 
their communities, their province, and their country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Election Anniversary 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the 
attention of the House an important anniversary today that not 
only impacted my constituency but the entire province. 
 
It was one year ago today that the Saskatchewan New 
Democratic Party swept back into power with the biggest 
second-term majority of any government in decades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  The headline in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix read: “NDP Landslide.” And in the Leader-Post: 
“NDP Triumphs.” 
 
The popular vote of the NDP (New Democratic Party) was 47 
per cent, quite an accomplishment for any government going 
into its second term. Although today, Mr. Speaker, day 78 of 
the current session, accomplishment is not the first thought that 
comes to mind. 
 
The Liberals were optimistic heading into the election. Days 
before the ballots were cast their party president was predicting 
they would win 20 to 25 seats. They won 11 seats. Since then 
they have decided that was one too many and reduced their 
caucus by one. 
 
As for the Tories, the Leader of the Third Party was quoted as 
saying the new PCs (Progressive Conservative) are alive and 
well. Alive yes, but I guess that’s about the only positive thing 
you can say about being in third place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no matter how we place, no matter what the 
interpretations are, it is important to emphasize that we do live 
in the greatest democracy in the world. We did have an election, 
we are able to govern, we are able to oppose, and we are able to 
do it peacefully. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thunder Creek Constituency 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains and her colleagues want 
to hear positive things about Thunder Creek. Well with the 
exception of the treatment it receives from this government, 
most things in Thunder Creek are positive. 
 
Among the great positive features of Thunder Creek is the 
impeccable judgement of its residents. In the 20 or so years 
since this seat has been in existence, its voters have always 
shown the good judgement to never elect a New Democrat. The 
Thunder Creek residents know the value of good representation 
and the vote one year ago today only confirms this. 
 



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2999 

Mr. Speaker, the fine judgement of people now in the Thunder 
Creek area brought people such as Ross Thatcher, Rick 
Swenson, Lionel Coderre, and Alex Mitchell to serve in this 
House over the years. 
 
In their good judgement, my constituents however, will soon 
wonder why the member from Regina Wascana Plains is more 
concerned about the good news in Thunder Creek than health 
cuts in her own community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Victims’ Services Program in Meadow Lake Opens 
 

Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure to take part 
in an important announcement in Meadow Lake yesterday along 
with the Hon. Minister of Justice. I am talking about the official 
opening of the north-west regional victims’ services program. 
What this program will do is offer much needed services to 
victims of crime. 
 
As a result of the hard work of the people of Meadow Lake, 
Green Lake, Loon Lake, Pierceland, and St. Walburg, the 
north-west regional victims’ services program already began 
phasing in operations on June 3 of this year. 
 
This program is the 12th program of its kind to be launched 
under the provincial victim services program. The victims’ 
services program was established in 1992 by Saskatchewan 
Justice. It’s purpose is to provide victims of crime with 
information and support while the criminal justice process deals 
with the crime. By implementing the programs such as this one, 
the province is looking beyond seeing victims solely in terms of 
their role as witnesses and into the reality of what crime does to 
its victims and what services they need. 
 
Under the north-west program, 25 volunteer support workers 
were chosen and trained to work under the direction of the 
program coordinator, Brian Stephenson. They also work closely 
with the local RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
detachment. 
 
I would like to congratulate all the volunteers, the people 
involved in the program, the communities, and the RCMP. The 
program is an important step forward in helping victims of 
crime. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

50th Anniversary of St. Peter’s Catholic Women’s League 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to share with 
you and all other members of this legislature a very special 
anniversary celebration which I had the honour of attending 
Wednesday, June 19. The St. Peter’s Catholic Women’s League 
of Unity celebrated 50 years of service to their church, 
community, and Canada. To honour the occasion they held a 
very gala anniversary banquet in the town of Unity. I was 
privileged to be one of several people who were invited to bring 
greetings to this event. 
 

The St. Peter’s Catholic Women’s League was formed on 
December 3, 1946 under the capable leadership of Mrs. Rose 
Miller as the first president. And Doreen Sopyc, the now 
president, and all others who have served in this capacity are 
truly community leaders. 
 
The women in this organization are no strangers to hosting 
major events such as the one I attended. Yesterday’s 
anniversary banquet was the fourth time this organization has 
held a major anniversary function. They held celebration events 
at the time of their 25th, 30th, and 40th anniversaries as well. 
 
The first convention was held in 1957. This one was such a 
success that many more people attended than was expected and 
the attendance at these events has increased steadily, 
recognizing this group’s great organization skills. The 
recipients of 50-year pins and service pins are certainly 
deserving of such an award. Obviously this is one dedicated and 
hard-working group of women. Fifty years of serving others is 
an important contribution to our community and our province. 
 
Please join me in offering a hearty congratulations to the St. 
Peter’s Catholic Women’s League on the occasion of their 50th 
anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Red Cross Marks 100 Years of Service 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just want 
to take a moment this morning to recognize the work of a 
valuable organization in our community, certainly in our 
province. This year, 1996, the Canadian Red Cross marks 100 
years of humanitarian service to the people of this country and 
this province. 
 
The slogan of the Red Cross is Friends for Life and it reflects 
their commitment to helping people in need throughout Canada 
and abroad. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us at 
some time or other have been touched by the Red Cross, 
whether it’s through the donation of blood or whether it’s 
receiving blood; or even the fact that over the years the Red 
Cross has offered swimming lessons that many of our children 
have been involved in or even many of the members have taken 
Red Cross swimming lessons at some time or other in their 
lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Red Cross has certainly proven that it is a very 
humanitarian service. It provides humanitarian service to people 
not only in this nation but around the world  whenever 
disaster strikes, it’s there. 
 
I think it’s certainly fitting, Mr. Speaker, that this Legislative 
Assembly recognize what the Red Cross has done through 100 
years of service, and congratulations, Red Cross, as you 
celebrate your 100 years of service, humanitarian service, to the 
people of this world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



3000 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

Regina Folk Festival 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. The 1996 Regina Folk 
Festival begins today in Victoria Park and it will run for three 
days, promising a weekend of fun and lively entertainment for 
people of all ages. The festival offers a huge line-up of musical 
performers and entertainers from across Canada and it features 
local talent as well as Saskatchewan artists. 
 
Some of the performers include Regina’s own Helberg-Warner 
Band; The Cleavers  Saskatchewan fiddling at its finest 
presented by fiddle champions, Rodney Krip and Tyler 
Kushneryk; Jack Semple, who is considered Regina’s premiere 
guitar wizard of rhythm and blues, and rock and soul. I’m sure 
everyone will remember Valdy, who has made his mark on the 
Canadian music scene over the last three decades. 
 
The folk festival also includes a kids’ stage providing 
entertainment for children. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
congratulate festival general manager, Greg Bodnarchuk, and 
the hundreds of volunteers who are helping to organize the 
festival, and I invite everyone to visit the 1996 Regina Folk 
Festival because it offers a weekend full of entertainment and 
fun. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Providence Place 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Minister of Health 
is aware his government is facing another legal battle on the 
health front. Officials representing the geriatric unit at 
Providence Place have announced they are suing this NDP 
government because it has failed to honour a promise to fund 
the facility. Will the Minister of Health explain why he will not 
uphold this promise, and why court action appears to be the 
only way for Saskatchewan residents to hold his government to 
a commitment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, we’ve 
had commentary and lectures from the member from Thunder 
Creek before about court cases and lawsuits and I’m sorry to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that it isn’t always all that productive or a 
happy experience to listen to the commentary of the member 
from Thunder Creek because he rarely says anything positive or 
proactive in an effort to solve problems. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Thunder Creek, who 
undoubtedly is unaware of this, that my experience with 
hundreds of lawsuits is that most lawsuits are in fact settled out 
of court. The fact that there’s a lawsuit doesn’t mean that 
parties don’t keep talking to each other and trying to resolve 
their differences. And what I would say to the member, Mr. 
Speaker, is that what is needed here is not a good judgement, 
because sometimes a bad settlement is even better than a good 
judgement. 
 

And I would say to the member that if we’re going to long-term 
sustainability at Providence Place, there has to be a settlement 
of this matter rather than a court case. And I would ask the 
member to encourage the parties, as I do, to continue to discuss 
this matter and come to an agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard time and time 
again that the government can’t afford to keep this promise. It 
should be pointed out that the NDP government has collected 
$260 million in VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues in the 
past three years  more than the uranium, potash, and natural 
gas royalties combined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cost of running a geriatric assessment unit at 
Providence Place is only about $1 million annually. Will the 
minister explain how he can stand in this House with a straight 
face and tell the people of Saskatchewan that his government 
cannot afford to honour this promise regarding Providence 
Place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  As the member knows, Mr. Speaker . . . 
first of all, the member’s facts in terms of VLT revenues are not 
correct. But as the member knows, what has happened this year 
in terms of health care funding is that his party, the Liberal 
Party, has cut health care spending in Saskatchewan by $47 
million. 
 
And the member asks what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. What 
we’re doing is to fund the health care system by putting 47 
million extra provincial dollars from the people of the province 
into health care, contrary to what that member is doing, because 
that member refused to join with us in expressing concern over 
the fact that the Liberals are so drastically cutting health care 
spending in our country. 
 
And so I say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that if he would join 
with us in talking to his Liberal cousins in Ottawa about the 
need to properly fund health care, things would be a lot better, 
not just in Saskatchewan, but I think across the country as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the minister is 
saying here, what we are really talking about is about making 
choices. This government has the opportunity and the resources 
to make the right choices. 
 
They have the resources to provide the people of Saskatchewan 
with proper health care services that they need and they deserve. 
Instead they choose to shower their political friends like Don 
Ching with highly paid political appointments. They choose to 
proceed with policies such as the CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement) which discriminates against non-union 
labour. And they choose to close down hospitals and long-term 
care facilities. 
 
How can the minister possibly justify these choices? 



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3001 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of what this 
government has done in health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We are funding the health care system, Mr. 
Speaker, without cutting one dime out of the system this year, 
notwithstanding Liberal cuts to the tune of $47 million. The 
federal Liberal government has imposed the biggest unilateral 
cut to health care in the history of our country. 
 
So when the member from Thunder Creek gets up and asks 
about the priorities of this government, I say to the member 
from Thunder Creek that the biggest expenditure of this 
government this year will be health care expenditure, $1.56 
billion, $200 per capita higher than the province of Alberta. 
 
We are not like the Liberals in Ottawa, who are cutting funding 
to health care. We’re not like the Conservatives in Alberta and 
Manitoba and elsewhere that are cutting funding to health care. 
For every dime the Liberals take out of health care, we’re 
putting a dime back in and that member should support what 
we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Bus Communication Devices 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister in charge of SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation). 
 
Mr. Speaker, a 13-year-old student from Clavet travelled to the 
legislature this week to meet with the ministers of Highways 
and SPMC. Roxanne Foster presented a 2,000-name petition 
composed by many rural students and parents who want the 
government to ensure that communication devices are installed 
on school buses. 
 
This is simply a request to ensure students who are forced to 
ride the bus to school can contact help if their bus encounters 
trouble in severe weather. Mr. Speaker, thousands of 
Saskatchewan students are put at risk every winter when 
travelling the bus in the bitter cold or stormy conditions. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SPMC commit to working 
towards school buses to be equipped with some type of 
communication equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I want to thank the member from Saltcoats for the question. 
I want to first indicate to the member that we had a, in our 
opinion, a very successful meeting with the young person, and 
were very pleased with the opportunity to share with her some 
of the work that we’re doing across government in terms of 
providing safety and protection for people who use our 
roadways. 

I want to say to the member from Saltcoats that we have in 
Saskatchewan currently . . . and appreciate the concern that he 
raises about how difficult some of our Saskatchewan winters 
could be. And I want to say to the member from Saltcoats that 
there are a number of school divisions across the province 
already today that have in place communication devices, 
methods to ensure that there is good safety for the students that 
are involved in using the roadways and the school bussing 
systems. 
 
The commitment that both the Minister of Highways and I 
made to the individual is that we would be talking with school 
boards across the province, we would be examining our 
procedures in Saskatchewan Government Insurance, to see if 
we can be of some benefit to putting this in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my next question is for the 
minister in charge of SaskTel. 
 
Saskatchewan school divisions are already financially strapped. 
While some school divisions I spoke to say they could possible 
raise the funds to buy the equipment, they could not afford the 
operating costs. 
 
SaskTel is a Crown corporation which is meant to serve 
Saskatchewan people. It would not be difficult for SaskTel to 
provide free cellular phone service for school buses in exchange 
for the good corporate image it would receive for a minimal 
investment; keeping in mind, Madam Minister, that the phone 
usage would only be for emergency situations. SaskTel already 
spends thousands of dollars on advertising, but this could be an 
excellent way to advertise its services and at the same ensure 
the safety of Saskatchewan children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible for SaskTel consider 
such an option? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 
opportunity to answer that question because SaskTel Mobility 
has had in place since March of 1994 a special program for 
school bus safety involving SaskTel Mobility. And it was a 
program that was designed in conjunction with the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). It is being taken 
advantage of by many school divisions. 
 
And I want to accent this, Mr. Speaker: that we will have . . . 
the problem is that in some of the school divisions cellular 
service has not yet been extended to them, so it’s not available 
at any price. But as of this month, cellular service will be 
available in nine more communities, Mr. Speaker, in this 
province as the network expands to cover the whole province. 
And we will be continuing to work with school divisions and 
other emergency service providers on similar programs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



3002 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Economic Development. 
 
Mr. Minister, another day has passed and still no clear direction 
from you as to what your plan is to resolve the serious problems 
with your union-preference tendering policy. 
 
Yesterday you sent the Labour minister  soon to be former 
Labour minister  and the Highways minister to talk to the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association. Mr. Minister, are we 
any closer to a solution to this problem? 
 
Why don’t you simply do what the construction association is 
asking you  set aside the CCTA so that all parties can come 
back to the bargaining table on an even footing. Will you do 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to answer 
the question from the member opposite because this issue that 
he continues to raise . . . And he’s right, another day and 
another $35,000 for the taxpayers of the province on an issue 
that he is doing nothing to help solve, in fact doing everything 
in his power to continue on; one would ask why he’s doing 
that? 
 
But it becomes pretty obvious that it’s trying to elevate himself 
politically, not trying to help the men and women who work in 
this province or the contractors. 
 
But what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, again is the combination 
between the Liberal and Conservative caucuses to attack 
working men and women in the province of Saskatchewan. Not 
to try to solve the issue, not to try to solve the issue, but trying 
two things: one, to attack working men and women in this 
province and to try to extend the session and get some more 
political headlines for his own caucus. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that that is not what the 
people of the province want. What the people of the province 
want is a working relationship between men and women in the 
province  discussion; coming to compromise; and consensus. 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Member, that that is exactly what we’re 
doing today, is working towards an arrangement . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, yesterday you admitted 
to reporters, it would take legislation to scrap the CCTA. That’s 
likely what would be required. In fact, Mr. Minister, we have a 
private member’s Bill before the House that would do just that. 
So I’d ask you to consider passing it. 
 
But if you’re not willing to take that step, why don’t you simply 
suspend all Crown tendering until a new agreement is reached? 
If there is no Crown tendering, no Crown construction work  

being tendered at all, both sides would have a great deal of 
incentive to get back to the bargaining table and reach an 
agreement as quickly as possible. 
 
Will you do that at least, Mr. Minister? Will you put a 
moratorium on Crown construction tendering until a new 
Crown tendering policy is in place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well that doesn’t seem to make a 
lot of sense to me although the member opposite suggests that 
we shut down all Crown tendering for the foreseeable future in 
terms of creating jobs in the province. I don’t know quite how 
that fits into his job creation strategy. Because it’s about $90 
million that was tendered last year as the member knows, under 
these contracts, and literally hundreds of jobs that were created. 
 
The unfairness of the agreement . . . let me just explain to the 
member what he’s saying because I don’t think he quite 
understands. He says this is hugely unfair to the un-unionized 
contractors who received 75 per cent of all the tendered 
contracts last year  75 per cent; 25 per cent of the tendered 
contracts went to unionized contractors. 
 
I say to the member opposite, I would hate to see what his 
formula would be for working men and women and the fairness 
that he would apply if he were premier of the province. But I 
say that kind of fairness is the very reason that they will never 
have the opportunity to make the decisions as it would relate to 
working men and women in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nuclear Industry in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find the 
Minister of Economic Development’s comments interesting, 
that all of a sudden the number under the CCTA jumped from 
30 million to 90 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to that Minister of Economic 
Development. Next week is AECL’s (Atomic Energy of Canada 
Ltd.) deadline on the future of the Saskatoon office and our 
sources tell us that unless something changes dramatically the 
Saskatoon office will almost certainly close. This is largely due 
to the fact that your NDP government has always been an 
unwilling partner in the nuclear industry. While Manitoba 
government was out aggressively pursuing private interest for 
the Whiteshell nuclear accelerator, your government has 
resisted nuclear development in this province and now that 
resistance may cost our province over 100 well-paid, high tech 
jobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, how are discussions going with AECL, what is 
Saskatchewan putting on the table, and is the Premier going to 
bring up this opportunity to discuss this issue with the Prime 
Minister while he’s in Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all 
correct some of the very inaccurate information that the  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3003 

member is trying to spin here today. First of all, when it comes 
to uranium and the nuclear industry, Saskatchewan under the 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP have 
taken a leadership throughout the world. 
 
Obviously Uranium City, which was built during the days of 
Tommy Douglas, and the expansion of the mines during the 
1970s, and now the expansion of more mining during the 1990s 
— the vast majority of mining projects in this province when it 
relates to uranium is unquestionably . . . has been created under 
CCF and NDP governments. 
 
So the first element of your question, is that we’re opposed to 
it, is absolutely inaccurate. I mean history will show you that 
you’re absolutely false when you say that. 
 
Secondly, when it comes to the AECL agreement, you will 
know that the only provincial government that has put money 
into research and development with AECL is the New 
Democratic Government of Saskatchewan  not Conservatives 
in Ontario, not Conservatives in Manitoba, but our government. 
So to say that we’re opposed to the deal is absolutely false. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sex Education Curriculum 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Education or her designate. Madam Minister, 
what could you possibly have been thinking? You took 
taxpayers’ money, went out and purchased a thousand wooden 
penises for schools, even though no one wants those things in 
the schools. Madam Minister, can you confirm that this part of 
the sex education curriculum has now been cancelled? Can you 
confirm that you have pulled the 1,000 wooden . . . thousand 
penises? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, 
that I believe these wooden demonstrators are in storage. The 
intent was to make them available to parties that might want to 
use them as part of their family life education. Apparently a 
thousand were purchased, only 46 were sold  three to school 
divisions and the remaining 43 to health agencies. And the 
other 900-and-some are still available for anyone who may wish 
to purchase one. 
 
But I want to say to the member and the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that we cannot stick our heads in the sand and ignore issues like 
teen pregnancy, which is a problem in our province, a problem 
in our country, and sexually transmitted diseases. These are 
very serious matters that governments have responsibility, 
school boards have responsibility, to take seriously, and we’re 
going to continue to take seriously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
now what are you going to do with these 1,000 wooden 
penises? Maybe you could give them to the Department of 
Highways and they could use them to stuff the potholes. Maybe 
you could give them to provincial parks for firewood so the  

campers could have a big wieny roast. 
 
Madam Minister, I understand each of these wooden penises 
cost $4.10. That means altogether you’ve wasted about $4,000 
on wooden penises. That’s about the same amount you’re 
wasting on each NDP MLA’s (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) pay hike, although some people would argue that 
those members are more useful than your members. 
 
Madam Minister, exactly what do you plan to do with 1,000 
wooden penises? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if the member was concerned about 
spending taxpayers’ money properly, the member would not be 
prolonging the legislature when there’s very little work left to 
be done at a cost of $35,000 a day. 
 
But I want to say to the member that school boards and the 
government do have a concern about issues like teen pregnancy, 
which is a problem in our province, and sexually transmitted 
diseases. And I’m glad, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of 
Education has taken some leadership to develop family life 
education programs which are age-sensitive. They vary 
depending on the age of the student, which was subject to the 
approval of the Board of Education and which also are subject 
to the right of the parent to remove the child from such 
instruction if the parent sees fit. 
 
But I think most people in our society, Mr. Speaker, realize that 
these are serious issues, that we cannot avoid them, and that we 
must have this kind of public education and public discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Funding 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the past year since this government has been re-elected, it has 
done more to threaten health care in this province than in any 
one-year period in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
To name a few examples, this government has forced the 
closure of hospitals and long-term care homes. A letter surfaced 
proving the NDP held a gun to the head of the Regina District 
Health Board to close the Plains Health Centre. 
 
They have broken promises to properly fund facilities such as 
the geriatric unit at Providence Place, and they have 
demonstrated absolutely no commitment or regard for the sick 
and the elderly. 
 
As a result, we have seen health board members resign out of 
frustration, rallies are taking place around the province, and 
communities are taking legal action to protect the health care 
needs of local residents. And all of this is now threatening to 
blow up in the face of the Minister of Health and this 
government. 
 
Will the minister explain when they are going to restore some 
proper health care funding and have health become a priority of 
their government. 



3004 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  This question, coming from the Liberal 
Party, Mr. Speaker, is just the height of hypocrisy. The biggest 
cuts to health care in the history of our province have come 
from that party. And in this session, what we have seen from 
that party is not a proposal to maintain the public medicare 
system, Mr. Speaker, but statements from the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena that the U.S. (United States), 
American-style health system is more compassionate than ours; 
statements from the member from Arm River that we should 
have a pay-as-you-go style of medicine and the rich should get 
better medicine than the poor. 
 
And every one of those members, Mr. Speaker, opposes The 
Health Facilities Licensing Act, which is designed to maintain 
the medicare system which that party opposes and has always 
opposed, and what they are proposing, Mr. Speaker, is a 
two-tier style of medicine. 
 
And I have to say to the member from Wood River, we opposed 
your party 30 years ago when you opposed medicare, and we 
oppose your opposition to medicare today, and we will continue 
to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Economic Development 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Economic Development. When one speaks 
about the past year, it’s impossible not to think of this 
government’s choices and how they have affected our rural 
communities. 
 
Consider the fact that this NDP government has: broke a 
promise to return 10 per cent of VLT revenues to communities; 
announced a $20 million reduction in revenue-sharing grants; 
attempted to force amalgamation on RMs (rural municipality) 
through The Service Districts Act; broke the promise not to 
collect on the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
wind-up; closed Crop Insurance offices and rural service 
centres; and failed to provide compensation for millions of 
dollars in big game crop damage; and closed 28 highway 
maintenance depots. 
 
It has allowed our rural road and highway system to become a 
public golf course with 72 holes to the mile. And this Minister 
of Economic Development admitted that there is no grand 
strategy for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister in charge of Municipal 
Government or Economic Development explain why this 
government has totally abandoned rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
biggest problem facing rural Saskatchewan, as urban 
Saskatchewan, when we were first elected in 1991 was 
obviously the debt of the province of Saskatchewan. This was  

said everywhere we went, that the $15 billion of debt and the 
annualized $1 billion deficit was killing the economic 
development. 
 
I want to go through a short list for the member opposite on 
commitments we made during the campaign and what we have 
committed to and what we’ve done. First of all, we said we 
would balance the budget for 1996 and ’97. And we’ve 
announced a four-year financial plan to show balanced budgets 
through to the year 1999-2000. A commitment made, a 
commitment kept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We said that we would commit to 
reducing Saskatchewan’s total debt by $1.2 billion between 
1994 and 1999. And this projection was updated in our budget 
in 1996, and we now see that we are currently well on target to 
meeting that commitment. And I think that’s hugely important 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We said that we would put more than 100 education sites on the 
information highway. We’ve done that, and 100 sites . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Next question. 

 
Provincial Taxes 

 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have pointed 
out, an anniversary is generally a time to celebrate. But there’s 
little cause for the taxpayers in this province to celebrate today. 
This government continues to pick the pockets of Saskatchewan 
residents like never before. 
 
The average family of four in this province will pay $3,700 in 
provincial income tax this year and more than $1,200 in other 
provincial related taxes -– more than anywhere else in Canada. 
The NDP will also collect $100 million more in tax revenue this 
year than last. Of this figure, $62 million will come from 
individual income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what makes this even more astonishing is the fact 
that the Finance minister stated on budget day that, and I quote, 
“One of the best ways to create consumer confidence is to ease 
the tax burden.” 
 
Given this statement, would the Deputy Premier care to explain 
when Saskatchewan residents can expect meaningful tax relief 
in a tax reduction plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well we made the commitment to 
the public of Saskatchewan that once the books of the province 
were balanced, that we would use the surplus for three strategic 
areas. One, debt reduction; renew and back-fill, obviously, for 
the federal government’s cut to social programs; and reduce 
taxes. And we’re doing that. 
 
And I’ll just read out for the member some of the areas where 
we have made tax reductions and we will continue to do that as  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3005 

we deal with the debt, and monies are available. 
 
First of all the investment tax credit effective February 16, 1995 
provides $8 million in annual tax savings for Saskatchewan 
business. That should mean something. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Effective July 1, 1995 and tied to 
companies’ business activities, the measure of reducing 
corporate income tax will save companies $4 million. 
 
We said that we would deal with the reduction of taxes for the 
average Saskatchewan person, and to that end we have reduced 
the debt reduction surtax and that will provide 55 million 
annual savings for the taxpayers of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  So I want to say to the member 
opposite, while I agree to one extent that we will work as hard 
as we can to reduce taxes, a lot has been done, and with your 
help and cooperation a lot more could be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 122  An Act requiring Union Certification, 
Decertification and Strike Action by Secret Ballot 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
morning to introduce a Bill, An Act requiring Union 
Certification, Decertification and Strike Action by Secret 
Ballot. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through to members of the Assembly, 
16 grade 4 students from Montmartre, Saskatchewan. They are 
here with their teacher, Sandy Brown, who very diligently 
brings her class here every year. 
 
The class is accompanied by chaperons Carol Baumgartner, 
Vida Stevenson, Julianne Walbaum, Pat Sebastian, Wanda 
Eberle, and Pat Thomson. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the group later and discussing 
what the students are going to be doing for their summer 
holidays. Thank you. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Chair:  If the minister has any new officials, I would ask 
him to introduce them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mitch Demyen is here; but also last 
night, that wasn’t introduced, was Dale Sigurdson, ADM 
(assistant deputy minister). 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, there 
was a fair bit of philosophical debate in the Assembly yesterday 
when it comes to agriculture, when it comes to rail, or 
movement of product from the Prairies to market, whether the 
rail system . . . or whether it should be handled through the 
Canadian Wheat Board or a number of other issues. But 
certainly, Mr. Minister, one thing that, as I was following the 
debate yesterday, you talked about . . . safety nets and you 
talked about money being put into agriculture. And then you 
made a number of comparisons across the country. 
 
You also commented about the fact that in Saskatchewan what 
we’ll probably have left with at the end of the day is a crop 
insurance program and a NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) program. As I was listening to the debate and you 
were making the comparisons though, Mr. Minister, it seemed 
to me what you were doing was basically comparing apples and 
oranges, not apples to apples. 
 
I think you talked about how low Saskatchewan is. Well if 
you’d look at the fact of the million population . . . or how high 
it is basically, I think, per population versus some of the other 
jurisdictions — the reality, when it comes down to the actual 
farm acres and the fact that this province is an agricultural 
based province, comparing by population isn’t really a positive 
read as to what is going into agriculture in view of what 
agriculture puts back into the economy and into the community. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I think it’s fine to give comparisons 
based on population but that doesn’t really lay out what the 
reality is to the agriculture producer or to the individual, the 
working person, and the companies in the province that deal 
with agriculture. And so I just wanted to bring that to your 
attention. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you talked about crop insurance and how 
crop insurance has become one of the best protectionist 
programs, if you will, that a farmer can invest in, not only in 
this province but certainly in the country; that it is the be-all and 
the end-all. 



3006 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

And first of all, Mr. Minister, I would like you to try and tell me 
why anyone in Saskatchewan would look at crop insurance as a 
program that is worth investing in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well if I understand your question 
correctly, I don’t think the answer’s very difficult, and that is 
that, as I said yesterday, I think crop insurance is the only 
program that’s going to be left at the end of the day, barring 
some major disaster, which covers at least one province. 
 
I say that because of the cut-backs that have . . . that we have 
seen the reductions we have seen from Ottawa and the fact that 
the dollars in budgets have to be focused. We’re focusing on 
crop insurance. We’re trying to convince the federal 
government that they should continue to do the same thing. So 
far they have. 
 
So I think the crop sector programs, including NISA and crop 
insurance, will be what we have in this province. Now there 
were some complaints about crop insurance, and there always 
are, I mean, about any program. Some people aren’t satisfied; in 
some areas the usage was lower than others. 
 
So when we went through the review this year . . . when we’re 
going through the review, we’re trying to construct a program 
that would provide coverage to everyone at a reasonable price. 
And I think we’re doing that. We’ve gone through the initial 
stages of meeting with farmers out in the country. We’re now 
going to be reviewing the outline of the program with the farm 
groups and with some Crop Insurance representatives and trying 
to build a program, as I said before. 
 
And this is really easy to say and quite hard to do, but build a 
program that is efficient and simple  simple and efficient. 
The efficient part sometimes is easier than the simple part, but 
that’s one of the keys that I want. That’s why we can get away 
from the crop insurance agents. That’s why we want to get back 
to a mail-in/mail-out system  a simple program. It doesn’t 
have to be complicated. There’s lots around that are very simple 
and one-page applications. So I think we can do that with crop 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, as I look at the crop 
insurance program that is presently available to producers in the 
province of Saskatchewan, it doesn’t appear to me that crop 
insurance is a real option at all. Can you tell me what crop 
insurance has to offer to myself as a producer, to any producer 
in this province, that would give them any incentive or any 
particular reason, other than government saying if you don’t 
carry crop insurance, we will not give you any kind of support 
in the future if a disaster strikes . . . 
 
What you have for crop insurance today does not meet the need. 
It won’t even cover the costs of what it takes to even just put 
the crop in the ground, let alone get a return on it. It just seems 
to be the poorest program that we have out there. What’s left of 
crop insurance really is nothing. 
 
And as I said, there is no real incentive or initiative, and I’m not 
sure if I’m looking for the word incentive, but I think what most 
producers are saying, at least they should be able to look at crop  

insurance and if they’re carrying crop insurance such as they 
carry property insurance . . . You carry the property insurance 
based on the economic loss plus the recovery and the 
replacement factor. Crop insurance doesn’t offer that. So why 
would anyone in Saskatchewan look at crop insurance as an 
option? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I . . . On a regular basis the Tory 
caucus explain why there are five of them and only five of 
them. Because, Mr. Member, your opinion is in the minority, 
very much in the minority. 
 
I talked to a lot of people across this province and we’ve got 
reports back from the farm meetings that are around, and the 
overwhelming majority of people think that crop insurance is a 
good program. And that’s why they came out to help us 
improve that program, because there are always things that can 
be improved in it. But as far as . . . You’re saying that crop 
insurance is useless. Well I don’t even know that that warrants a 
discussion because it’s so far off base. 
 
Crop insurance gives you coverage up to 70 per cent with 
spot-loss hail or 80 per cent without spot-loss hail of your 
10-year average where your premiums are half paid by the 
government. It has the quality factor included if you hit a frost. 
It has, as I said, spot-loss hail. It provides a basis . . . Now I 
don’t know where you’re getting your calculations from or what 
you put in the value. At 70 per cent, if you have a 30-bushel 
crop average and you got guaranteed at 21 bushels to the acre at 
the market price, that pretty well covers your costs and then 
some. 
 
And so . . . But the fact of the matter is, if you’re saying that we 
should increase the coverage level . . . Because that’s what I 
hear you implying  it’s no good now because it doesn’t cover 
enough. 
 
So let’s say we want to go to 90 per cent. I can supply you with 
the numbers if you wish, and I’m sure you’ve seen them when 
you were in government. That’s why your government didn’t go 
to 90 or 100 per cent as you’re saying we should . . . (inaudible) 
. . . because the premiums are prohibitive. Once you get over 
the 70, 80 per cent level, the premiums escalate dramatically. 
So I totally disagree with your analysis of the value of crop 
insurance and I totally disagree that we should be increasing 
premiums in order to get up to a higher percentage. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Toth:  I guess, Mr. Minister, you just proved to many 
producers in Saskatchewan why crop insurance isn’t a viable 
option. And obviously the people you’ve been talking to are the 
individuals that you’ve coerced into believing that you are 
offering the best program that’s available to them. Come and 
talk to people in my area, individuals who have just dropped 
their crop insurance altogether because they do not see it as 
being a worthwhile investment. 
 
Number one, you talk about spot-loss hail. I’d like to know, Mr. 
Minister, the spot-loss hail program that’s in place now, if a 
person is carrying crop insurance and adds a spot-loss hail  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3007 

factor . . . and just using your example because that’s fairly 
close to what my area certainly represents. And if I could add 
this, Mr. Minister, just carrying the high level of protection, and 
I’m certainly not getting the market value for my product. The 
thing is, Mr. Minister, over the years I’ve been able to produce 
better . . . even in almost the poorest of years. I think I’ve had 
two or three claims in 20-some years of farming, carrying crop 
insurance. And I look back and I think boy, I could have put . . . 
just my premium alone could have made a nice . . . actually put 
a better investment . . . If I’d have invested that money I’d have 
a lot more to work with today than what I protected myself with 
crop insurance. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, maybe you could just explain to me one 
thing. When it comes to the spot-loss hail program, let’s say a 
hailstorm goes through an area. You’re carrying crop insurance 
and you put on the additional hail rider. And Crop Insurance 
comes out and makes an adjustment; it pays you hail damage. 
And when you go to harvest, let’s say you’re 5 per cent or 10 
per cent less than what you’re . . . protection factor. Does what 
you’ve already been paid in hail override . . . and you’ve 
already been paid, or is the crop loss over and above . . . the hail 
loss over and above what your crop loss factor may be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I understand where the member is 
coming from. You want double-dipping, and that was 
eliminated. No you can’t. But if you have spot-loss hail, you get 
that benefit of that spot-loss hail. But then if you have a total 
crop loss, of course, then the 70 per cent kicks in. 
 
Now if you want to double-dip, that’s fine. We could have left 
double-dipping in, or you could have got your hail plus your 
coverage. But you know, and I know  and that’s why I 
wonder why you ask the question  you know that that 
increases the premium. And there’s one thing  and this is a 
balancing act  that farmers have told us loud and clear, the 
one major factor for whether you have crop insurance or not is 
the premium you pay for the coverage you get. Premiums are 
number one. 
 
I just want to ask the member a question. If your theory is right, 
you said you could have put that crop insurance money into an 
account and you would have had a lot of money sitting there 
right now, well I ask you, has your house burnt down? Has your 
house ever burnt down? Maybe you want to figure all those 
premiums on your house insurance or your Quonset and yard 
insurance. Maybe you should just forget about insurance, 
period. Put it in the bank and be your own reinsurer. Is that 
what you’re promoting? 
 
Mr. Toth:  I find that very interesting, Mr. Minister, because 
I’ve actually got better coverage for the bit of insurance I’m 
carrying on my property than I’m getting out of a guarantee on 
crop insurance. And I’ve got to spend a lot of money on an 
annual basis to try and produce that crop. 
 
Now you talk about double-dipping, and I guess what I 
appreciate about the crop insurance program now is that hail 
insurance is a rider that you can add to it. Because of the fact 
that . . . what you just said, you just confirmed the fact that if 
you do have hail and you have a crop loss and you’ve already  

been paid out under your hail rider, that’s it. You’ve got one 
payment. 
 
Well the fact of putting the hail insurance as a rider is where it 
should be. If a person wants to take that chance and put that 
rider on his crop insurance, he can do that. If he doesn’t want 
to, then at least he can take that extra money and go to a line 
company and protect himself from some economic loss. 
 
Because quite frankly, Mr. Minister, you’re talking about the 
fact that . . . or I’m not exactly sure what you’re talking about. I 
guess you’re saying that all you’re trying to protect farmers 
from is . . . at least covering the cost, but they have nothing to 
live with for the rest of the year. And hopefully they’ve got 
something in their pocket that they’ve set aside for a rainy day 
so they can put a crop in in the following year. Because with the 
input costs where they are today, what crop insurance is 
offering barely covers input costs. 
 
And so therefore if a person wants to, they can carry the hail 
rider and just take their chances with crop insurance; so they 
can carry crop insurance, and then go and pick up some 
additional insurance which may bring, with crop insurance . . . 
they may be able to offer themselves, say, almost a 100 per cent 
guarantee on that crop. Although it certainly hinges on the 
possibilities of getting hail. And nobody, quite frankly, wants to 
see a hailstorm move through the area because it’s more than 
hail that is . . . or more than a crop that is damaged by a 
hailstorm. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it just . . . as we see crop insurance today in 
relation to the premium that is paid, it really does not offer the 
type of protection that a lot of people have been looking for. 
You probably heard a lot of producers, even a lot of your 
supporters, who have suggested that there should be a rider that 
basically covers you so at least it covers your input costs. 
 
And I’ve heard so many arguments on crop insurance as to how 
you design a program that kind of meets the needs of the fact 
that if input costs rise today and you’re only offering, number 
one, you’re offering 70 per cent protection . . . number two, 
your levels of price guarantee are much lower than what you’re 
able to get on the market-place; you don’t have that 
opportunity. 
 
The thing is, Mr. Minister, if you do have a crop loss, how are 
you supposed to cover your costs plus the payments that you’re 
making, whether on your land or your equipment, as well as 
live for a year, try and subsist for a year, under the current crop 
insurance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I’ve been here for awhile now and 
I’ve heard the member talk about how bad crop insurance is  
despite the fact that since we came into government we have 
made some improvements to the system and despite the fact 
that we’re going through a review this year, which is a 
federal-provincial agreement to review it every five years, and 
we’re out there trying to improve the program. 
 
Now I’ve sat here and listened to you criticize the crop 
insurance program despite the fact that you were in government  



3008 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

for a number of years and had what I would say is a program 
that was very similar to now; we’ve added a few improvements 
onto it. But my question to you, Mr. Member  I was sitting 
here listening to you  what are your constructive ideas? What 
kind of program would you like to see for crop insurance in 
Saskatchewan? Or do you want to just see crop insurance done 
away with totally? 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce guests, please, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and my 
thanks to the minister and the member from Moosomin for the 
courtesy. 
 
It is always a pleasure to introduce a group of young people in 
this Assembly, and it’s particularly pleasurable when that group 
comes from out of province. And we have seated in the west 
gallery today a group of 29 grade 6 students who are here from 
Major Pratt School in Russell, Manitoba. 
 
It’s very nice to have you here along with your teacher, Wayne 
Dunham, and your chaperons, Fran Wasyliw, Elaine Kahl, Pat 
Bartram, and your bus driver, Dave Adams. 
 
We’re so pleased that you’re visiting Regina and that you’ve 
taken the time to come and spend a half an hour or so with us in 
the gallery here. So welcome, enjoy the rest of your day. And 
will you please join me in extending to them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, and a 
special welcome to the group from Russell. I’m not sure if 
Wayne’s related to the Dunhams at Maryfield or not, but we 
welcome you. And my colleague, as we’re discussing crop 
insurance, my colleague, the member from Cannington, was 
talking about the Manitoba model and some of the advantages 
that certainly Manitoba residents had in the past couple of 
years. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to crop insurance and where we’re 
at today, the thing is, Mr. Minister, one of the reasons the GRIP 
program was brought into place was, it was trying to identify 
some of the inequities in the crop insurance program. And to be 
very candid, I’m not exactly sure that GRIP was necessary. 
 
I think of some of the . . . The biggest concern at the time was  

the fact that crop insurance was only benefiting you if you had a 
crop loss. And you know that and I know that. There was a time 
period where crop insurance did offer a dollar value which 
ended up being higher than the market value as markets 
dropped off. 
 
Mr. Minister, while you had that protection, the only way you 
got any of that dollar value was if you had a production loss. 
And the realities were when the production loss . . . if you 
didn’t have the production loss then you ended up you were 
protected a little higher but you only got the market value. And 
many producers were saying, well if I have the opportunity of 
guaranteeing . . . or my crop insurance program is saying is I 
can choose a $4.50 price per bushel for my wheat on 21 bushels 
then I should at least, if the market price happens to drop back 
to four and a quarter, I should be able to get a return of the 25 
cents per bushel because I’ve guaranteed . . . or I’ve insured 
myself for that. 
 
Unfortunately crop insurance doesn’t operate that way and 
that’s when the GRIP program came in, to try and bring in that 
price option. Now it would have appeared to me, Mr. Minister, 
that we should have looked at or taken a serious look at, at just 
guaranteeing the price and we may not have had to worry about 
the GRIP and you could have managed it under one program. 
 
And if there’s one area that is a real concern to most producers 
and why most producers are dropping out of crop insurance is 
twofold: number one, there’s no real guarantee that you 
guarantee your price unless you have a production loss; number 
two, most producers are finding out that because of their 
farming practices they’ve been able to increase their production 
but they haven’t been able to increase the guarantee. And they’d 
like to have the ability of going towards a specific, farm-related 
guarantee. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, is that program still in place? Can 
a person work towards individual farm protection under crop 
insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I think you know that individual 
coverage is an option. That’s what everybody chooses. But I 
find it very interesting  your comments, and I’m, by the way, 
still waiting for your recommendation. As a matter of fact, 
maybe you could table the representation you made to the 
committee that’s going around, to put your valuable ideas into 
that. In fact if you had them handy I’d be willing to look at it 
right now. 
 
The fact of the matter is I don’t think you have done that. You 
stand in this legislature spending . . . the order paper basically 
empty, spending what, four or five days now, 35,000, $40,000 a 
day of taxpayers’ money and you’re worried about . . . you’re 
saying the crop insurance . . . we could certainly take some of 
that money and beef up crop insurance if you weren’t willing to 
sit here and waste the time of . . . our taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
I’ve been sitting here in estimates now for eight hours in total 
with Ag estimates and I haven’t heard one constructive idea. 
And I mean I can be here as long as you want me to be here; I 
mean that’s the way the world works. But if we’re going to be  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3009 

here, why don’t we do something constructive? 
 
Now you’ve spent 30 or 40 minutes here running down crop 
insurance, but I just implore you to tell me what you think 
should be done. Put it down on paper. We’re going talking to 
everybody who wants to talk; anybody can write a letter to the 
Crop Insurance to make a submission as to how to improve the 
program. 
 
I ask you two questions. One, have you done that? And 
secondly, if you have, can you explain to us what those are? 
 
I just want to say one more thing before I take my seat. 
Traditionally, originally, and not very many years ago, when 
your Conservative government was in Ottawa and in 
Saskatchewan, we went from basically almost a hundred per 
cent funding from federal government to Ag programs . . . crop 
insurance was always 50/50 premium, but other programs. Then 
we went down to 70/30, 70 federal when your government was 
in, 30. And now when the Liberals are in it’s 60 per cent federal 
funding and 40 per cent provincial funding. 
 
And you know what that does for a province like Saskatchewan 
with 40 per cent of its GDP (gross domestic product) coming 
from agriculture? It makes it very difficult, and you were part of 
that problem. Give you the benefit that you want to get out of 
that, change that pattern. Tell us what you want us to do with 
crop insurance. Provide us your submission. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I find that very interesting, Mr. Minister, 
and I guess you want to spend some time in the Assembly. You 
sat over here and you thought nothing of killing day after day 
after day, sometimes going 20 days at a time, and you’d sit over 
here and had nothing positive to offer. 
 
And you’re complaining about the fact that you’re collecting 
$4,400 a day more, $4,400 more this session because of 
changes that you wouldn’t allow to happen, and you’re 
complaining about the fact that we may be losing $3,500 a day 
when we’re standing up for a construction company and the 
fact that the taxpayers of this province would have a savings of 
$30 million if you scrapped your CCTA agreement — that 
would offer you something to do in the area of crop insurance 
for agriculture producers in the province of Saskatchewan, 
which you just told us is one of the largest . . . agriculture is the 
largest economic factor and beneficiary to the province of 
Saskatchewan 
 
(1115) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’ve made a suggestion or two. If you 
address the fact of if you’re going to offer, if a person carries 
crop insurance and puts on a price option and if the price drops 
below that, there should be a factor that addresses that price 
option, that gives you . . . If you’ve chosen a price option, a 
level that crop insurance has offered, and if the price is below 
that, then there should be a factor in there that says fine, on that 
guaranteed production level that price option is guaranteed, just 
as your production option is guaranteed. 
 
That’s what a lot of producers have been coming to me and  

asking for. I’m suggesting, there’s an option for you. Mr. 
Minister, are you willing to take a look at that option? If 
producers are willing to guarantee that, would you be willing to 
take a look at it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I didn’t mean to rile you up, but 
there’s an old saying that when you throw a stone in the dark 
and the dog yelps, you know you hit the dog. And I think maybe 
this is part of it. 
 
You want to go back to a price guarantee. You want to go back 
to GRIP. Do you know what the premiums would be again? Do 
you know what you paid for GRIP premiums to what the return 
was? Do you know the value of the program? I think you just 
started up by saying that you don’t think we should go back to 
GRIP because at the end of the day it wasn’t a good program to 
start with. 
 
But what you want is a price guarantee. And I said earlier that’s 
the same thing as increasing the coverage. If you go from 70 to 
80 there’s a difference in premiums. If you go to 80 to 90 
there’s a significant difference in premiums. Same thing when 
you want to go to a price guarantee. 
 
This is insurance. And what we try to do as government, as you 
tried to do when you were in government, is balance to make 
sure the premiums were kept at a reasonable level to ensure 
participation in the program. 
 
Now we sent our Farm Safety Net Review Committee down to 
the U.S. to study their 50/50 option, their two-tiered system. 
Manitoba has introduced a form of that. The interest in 
Saskatchewan from the groups that we talked to  there is also 
an interest in that type of a program. And what that does is give 
50 per cent coverage for a very minimal rate to the producer and 
then you can buy up from there. 
 
But don’t forget this is an insurance program. The higher the 
risk, the higher the premium. We’ve got $430 million of debt in 
the reinsurance program of crop insurance. What you’re saying, 
to go to a program like you want, I think, and I haven’t heard 
any detail but from what I understand from listening to you, is 
that would probably increase that  increase the debt. 
 
And as the debt increases . . . right now the reinsurance debt of 
$430 million is about what  10, 11 per cent of premium? 
Runs about 10,11 per cent of the premium. By doing what 
you’re saying it’s going to increase it higher. We increase it 
higher . . . when you increase it, the producers fall off. 
 
We’re trying to get to a system where we want to include 
people. And as I said before . . . because do you think honestly 
there is going to be any more ad hoc funding out of Ottawa? 
Not unless there’s a major disaster in at least one province. 
 
We have to build a program that farmers can rely on. I agree 
with you to a certain degree there are problems with the 
program. But I’ll tell you that’s what we’re doing right now  
going through the whole routine, looking at every aspect of crop 
insurance, to make sure, because we know there are no more ad 
hoc programs, to make sure that program fits the bill,  



3010 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

whether in the north-east or the south-east or the south-west or 
the north-west corner of this province. 
 
So I would be really happy to have you place your submission 
in writing to the Crop Insurance Corporation and it will be 
considered duly as all other submissions are. But I don’t think 
that we can do what you want. I don’t think you can . . . 
because the premiums would be prohibitive. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, why didn’t you let farmers 
decide to have the choice, if you will? If the premiums are 
prohibitive, farmers will decide whether or not they want to 
guarantee the economic return, that dollar value. You’re not 
giving them that choice. That choice isn’t there right now 
unless maybe it’s something you’re looking at. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, for you to stand here and talk about 
how bad the GRIP program was, the reality was, Mr. Minister, 
is that that program would have most likely balanced itself out, 
but you unilaterally changed the program in the province of 
Saskatchewan. You unilaterally changed it, then you took away 
any option of any producer to challenge the provincial 
government or even to sue the provincial government for loss. 
 
So while you run it down on one hand . . . number one, Mr. 
Minister, one of the reasons you unilaterally changed the 
program is because you didn’t like the fact that there was a 
program that producers across this province had the ability to 
enter into. And yes, it had a cost; it was a cost that some 
producers chose to get out of the program. The only producers 
that really lost on the program were the producers who chose to 
stay with the program and then had the government pull the rug 
out from underneath their feet and left them, as we saw this past 
spring, with bills coming out of your Crop Insurance office. 
And in some cases bills . . . you could have saved . . . the cost 
of the stamp would have covered the bill that you sent out. It 
was just totally ludicrous, some of the bills that you sent out. 
 
And if you wouldn’t have pulled the rug out from under 
people’s feet, Mr. Minister, after that choice they made . . . 
Whether you like the program or not, you had promised that 
you would make it better; then you pull it out from under their 
feet. And the only persons that really benefited were the ones 
who looked at your government and said, oh oh, we better bail 
out while we got a chance now. And they’re looking back and 
smiling and saying, boy that was the best decision we ever 
made, because while the people who believed you, that you 
were going to at least maintain or make the program better . . . 
the ones who stuck with it were the ones that ended up paying 
dearly for it. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, one has to wonder what’s going to be left 
at the end of the day. Your talk about going around consulting 
with people, I haven’t seen anything yet through any of the 
consultations that have taken place with any department 
whereby the positions that have been put forward have actually 
changed what the department has already come up with as a 
view or an object that they would like to reach. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, you’re talking about consulting people. I 
hope that indeed there are groups that will take the time to  

submit proposals regarding crop insurance, because certainly in 
our area producer after producer has just decided it isn’t a 
program worth entering into. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand June 25 is the cut-off date for an 
acreage report. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I also understand, and I’m not sure if this is the 
first time that it’s in place, or whether it’s in place and this is 
just the first time it’s been made known to producers, but if a 
producer doesn’t submit an acreage report by the 25th an agent 
. . . or not an agent, but a crop adjuster may take the time . . . 
will be sent out to check and do an acreage report and charge 
that cost to the producer. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We didn’t bring our official in from 
Crop Insurance in Melville, as you know. We’ve had him in 
here three times at least now. And the reason I didn’t bring him 
in is because the whole process we’re going through here is just 
simply your filibustering the legislature until you get 
satisfaction on your CCTA. And there again, it was an added 
expense. 
 
I can get that answer for you in detail, but right now I wouldn’t 
want to . . . I don’t know for sure if that is available or not. But 
I can get you that answer. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And again I just remind 
you of the fact that you thought nothing of keeping officials 
sitting out in the foyer there for days on end. Officials from a 
number of departments would be invited in because your House 
Leader would say that we’re going to do this business and we’ll 
probably get to this, so you better have officials available. It 
didn’t matter where they were. They’d be sitting out there and 
we’d have to bring them in day after day after day. 
 
And I guess maybe part of it comes back to the fact that the 
House Leader at the time . . . the Government House Leader 
should’ve just said, fine, these are the officials that’s here, this 
is what we’re on. And if you don’t like it, fine. But while we 
made different estimates available on many occasions, your 
so-called opposition certainly wasn’t very cooperative and 
thought nothing of keeping officials . . . just having them sitting 
around here twiddling their thumbs. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re looking for suggestions with regards to 
crop insurance or NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account), a 
suggestion that has been brought to my attention, something 
that I’ve offered time and time again  I’m not sure where 
we’re at today. I’m not sure if you’ve even taken the time to 
discuss it with the federal Minister of Agriculture  but we 
talked about the NISA program. And very forthrightly or 
candidly, I would suggest to you that I think the NISA program 
is a good program. I believe it’s a good program because it 
gives a producer the option to build for their future, and it gives 
the producer control over their future as well. 
 
One thing that I think that would even add to and could benefit 
the NISA program, Mr. Minister, is to allow producers the  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3011 

ability to, if you will, when they move a product to market, 
asking the . . . before a cheque is being made up, that there be a 
check-off available to them where they could suggest to their, 
whether it’s their grain buyer or whether it’s to a livestock 
marketing agent, that they would check off say 5 per cent that 
would go directly into the NISA account rather than waiting 
until the end of the taxation year and determining at what level 
you could put in, what level you would get some support from 
the federal government. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ve given any thought to this, if 
this has been brought to your attention, and whether you’ve 
talked to your federal counterparts about this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Of course the problem with that is that 
you won’t know what your eligible net sales are until the end of 
the year, because your sales are your eligible sales minus costs, 
and at the end of the year you get your net  what you can 
contribute on. 
 
I mean it would be nice to be able to do that, but I think it 
would be a higher administration cost because you’d have to be 
guessing at what your eligible net sales by the end of the year 
would be. And if you start hauling your grain, you know, 
midway through the year, how much would you deduct? I don’t 
know how you’d know that. Maybe you can help me out there. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, as I look at the program, 
there are a number of options open to producers. Number one, a 
producer can choose to just put in a matching contribution. 
You’ve got your  I believe it’s on gross  you’ve got your 
gross sales and there is a percentage that the federal government 
would match. And you can contribute to that matching factor or 
you can contribute over and above that, Mr. Minister. 
 
What you put in over and above is a choice that you would 
make. And in most cases, most producers would have a rough 
idea after two or three years roughly where they are with 
regards to the amount of dollars that they generally would put in 
on an annual basis and could make a choice as to whether they 
would make a 1 per cent or 2 per cent or up to a 5 per cent 
deduction. I don’t think they would go very high over . . . or too 
much higher than what they basically would get support from 
governments as far as the matching contribution. Because, Mr. 
Minister, most of the economists would suggest that there is no 
economic benefit to the program over and above what the 
matching grant is or matching support from governments are. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the reason I raise it is because most producers 
find that once they’ve reached their taxation year, by the time 
they’ve paid their taxes and then start looking at NISA 
contribution, they find that . . . and we’re already into the . . . In 
most cases most producers go the calendar year and then the 
paying tax by April 30, you’re already into the heavy expense of 
your crop production year and they just don’t have the cash 
available. And it seems to me that if you’re able to put it up 
front, such as a working person has all the deductions taken off 
their cheque before they get . . . and they get a net cheque, so 
they know exactly what the bottom line is. 
 
And I think this is something that could work, Mr. Minister. It  

basically gives the producer the opportunity to make a personal 
choice as to the level they would contribute, and therefore they 
don’t have to try and find the funds when the NISA report 
comes out and this says, well you can produce up to . . . this is 
the matching funds available. You can contribute that amount 
or you can make a matching . . . or you could make a 
contribution over and above to a certain level. 
 
So it’s a choice that a producer would have and maybe all 
producers wouldn’t take it. But it gives them an opportunity to 
make sure that they do have some funds available to put into the 
NISA program to help them build for their future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I don’t disagree about the 
convenience to the producer. I mean the problem remains, 
unless you change it from eligible net sales, because there’s no 
way of knowing what your net sales will be at the end of the 
year. If you change it to growth sales or something like that or a 
percentage, you might be able to do that. 
 
Like, I don’t disagree with the convenience to the producer. I 
agree with you 100 per cent. It’s just the administrative 
challenge that’s there would almost prohibit it from succeeding. 
But what I’ll endeavour to do is we’ve talked about this . . . the 
officials have talked about this a little bit. We’ll keep looking 
into it because we don’t disagree with your concept. So that’s 
fine. 
 
And I think that we have agreement . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . you have one more question? Okay. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Yes, Mr. Minister, I understand somewhat where 
you’re coming from, but in view of the fact that most producers 
now have the option of being able to establish their NISA 
accounts, their own individual amounts within a local lending 
institution, a choice could be made at that time to have it go 
directly to. And I’m not sure whether that becomes an 
administrative factor or a cost to the NISA program. 
 
But it’s certainly something I think that could be looked into 
that would just guarantee producers the ability to make sure that 
they do have some financing available to put into the NISA 
program rather than being . . . finding your ability to contribute 
is now but they don’t have the finances available by the time 
they pay taxes and getting into the cost . . . the production, crop 
production year. 
 
So that’s something that I think that maybe your department 
could certainly look into and offer as an option or the ability for 
producers to do that, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate if you’d 
look into it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Certainly. And there’s no problem doing 
that. In fact, I would invite you to contact the department to get 
lined up with the right person to further discuss this in detail, 
some of your ideas, because it’s . . . like I say, I don’t disagree 
with the concept. And if there’s some way we can work through 
the administration, then we’d really appreciate your help on that 
or your ideas on that. 



3012 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

Well I guess by agreement we’ve got . . . I’ve got to slip out to 
the Farm Progress Show. So I will, Mr. Chair, I move we rise 
and report progress. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Rise, or just report progress? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Did I say rise? No rise. I move we report 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today 
my deputy minister, Brent Cotter, and Elizabeth Smith who is 
the director of administration. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here today. 
 
We do have a number of questions that we would like to ask the 
minister. There are a number of issues on the plate right now 
with Justice, like the Kerrobert court-house, such as the 
Firearms Act, such as various other items within the Justice 
department that need to be clarified. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, before we get to anything in depth such as the 
Kerrobert court-house and the decisions there, I have some 
questions that are presented to us by individuals who have run 
into some concerns within the justice system, not in the 
criminal sense but simply in matters of administration within 
Justice. 
 
I have a note here from a Richard McNair from the Arcola area 
who is trying to get a name registered for a corporation, and 
he’s having a great deal of difficulty with this. As he explained 
the circumstances of the situation to me, if you want to get a 
name for a corporation you fill out an application form, send in 
a fee, and approximately five days later you get back a letter 
saying yes, you were accepted; no, you weren’t. No 
explanations, just yes, you are; no, you aren’t. 
 
If you want to put in another . . . if you are rejected, if you want 
to put in another application, you get another application form, 
send in another fee, five days later, yes or no. If it’s no, you do 
the process over and over and over again until finally you get a 
name that the corporations branch of Justice will accept. 
 
In other jurisdictions such as Manitoba where this particular 
businessman also operates, he phones up the Justice department 
who looks . . . the department that looks after the names. He 
says, can I have this name. They look on the computer and say 
no, that one’s being used. Then he gives them a few alternatives 
and they finally say yes, this one is good. And it’s all done over 
the telephone in a very short period of time. 
 

He may very well have to pay a fee to get it registered after that 
point, but the search itself is very efficient. It’s done on a very 
short time basis, not as in Saskatchewan where it takes you a 
week to get a no, and then you’ve got to pay another fee to get 
another no and pay another fee to get another no. 
 
Perhaps this is Justice’s manner of raising funds for the 
provincial government, I’m not sure. But it certainly doesn’t 
help or encourage business in this province, Mr. Minister. And 
I’m wondering if you could explain the process for picking a 
company name in this province, and how the process works, the 
time factors involved, and the fees being charged every time 
someone has to fill out one of these application forms. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. I’m a bit surprised by this question, 
given the undertaking made by the member from Moosomin on 
May 23 when he indicated that the questions that would be 
following for our department would be such that they would 
only arise out of the globals which we have provided. It’s my 
understanding that that’s what we were going to do and that, 
therefore, I didn’t need the full departmental officials here. 
 
I will try to respond to some of these questions, but I’m quite 
surprised given the undertaking that was made on the record on 
May 23, that the questions would all relate to the answers to the 
global questions which we provided. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, things are fluid in 
government and you have to be prepared to shift gears. And 
we’re waiting for your government to shift some gears and 
make some decisions which seem to be difficult in forthcoming. 
Therefore you, Mr. Minister, have to be able to shift gears also 
and meet the requirements of the day. The requirements of the 
day are to answer some questions, and this is a particular 
question dealing with company names and how the process 
works, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you for that question. Basically on 
name searches there are obviously two systems. One for federal 
corporations and you work through the federal system. There’s 
one for the provincial system. 
 
If you have some concerns that have arisen, I would suggest 
that you send the information over and we will try to find the 
information within the department as it relates to the provincial 
name search. The process is quite clearly one where they check 
through to see if there are any similar names, and they deal with 
those ones. 
 
So I’d be happy to take that information and send it to the 
corporations branch and they would find out what the problem 
is. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well the problem, Mr. Minister, is how 
archaic the system is operating here. They should be able to go 
through, look on a computer list at the names that are 
comparable to that, do a word search, and determine whether or 
not that name is being used. It doesn’t seem to me like it takes a 
whole bunch of bureaucracy to do that. It doesn’t take five days 
to do that. And it certainly shouldn’t take an ongoing fee 
process to do that so that every time you have to resubmit a  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3013 

name, you have to pay another fee. 
 
It seems to me it’s just a means of taxation with another name 
to generate more income for the Minister of Finance. So surely 
your department can make that process somewhat more 
efficient. I know that you have been buying a number of 
computers for your department. Perhaps one of those computers 
can be used in that area for doing name searches. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, perhaps you could indicate to us what the fees 
being charged for every one of these kinds of searches is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m quite surprised by your question 
because all of this information is on computer. It’s the 
information about corporations is all generated through the 
computer system, and so that the types of questions that you 
have . . . I suggest that you provide us with the information and 
concern that you have and we will check with the corporations 
branch to see if there is some particular problem. 
 
From my own experience in many years of practice, the only 
time when there was a problem with corporations branch and 
the names is when there were some other names that were very 
similar which were going to cause some confusion. And often, 
to sort that out, it took everything up to a lawsuit to decide 
which name could be used. And so unless we have some more 
information, it’s very difficult to answer your question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that in this 
particular case what the problem is, though, is the unwillingness 
or the inability of your department to give an answer over the 
telephone as to whether a particular name is already in use or 
whether it will cause a conflict, because you have to fill out the 
application form, send it in with the fee, wait for a written 
response back from your department. So how do you make a 
quick adjustment? 
 
You know maybe the ABC rental company is already being 
used. If you could look up in the list, maybe you could have 
ABE rental company, and it’s acceptable. But if you have to do 
that every five days or every week and send a new fee in every 
time, that’s where the problem lies, Mr. Minister. You have to 
be able to make the adjustments quickly, review the process 
quickly, so that the person making the inquiries can make a 
determination on it, Mr. Minister. That’s where your 
department is falling down on this. They are using the 
bureaucratic process to simply slow up business in this 
province. 
 
If you were to use the computers that you say you already have 
available, give someone who’s making an application access so 
that they can communicate directly with the person to determine 
what name is already out there. Is the name I’m inquiring about 
already being used? If not, fine. If it is, how can I change to 
make that adjustment, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I would really appreciate if you 
would provide more information about this concern. We already 
have a program where you can do telephone access to get this 
information, and there is a fee for that, that’s right, but we also 
have a method of whereby you can use remote access to access  

the name registry, and that’s possible to do as well. 
 
So if there is some problem it may be that whoever has written 
to you doesn’t understand how they can get the remote access 
into the corporate records. So if you would provide the 
information, we’ll follow it up and deal with that. But we’ve 
had that process for a while. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Obviously this 
person has been talking with someone in your department and 
they . . . if there’s remote access available, that information was 
not passed on to them because the information this businessman 
received was: fill out the application, send it in, we’ll review it, 
and we’ll let you know in five days whether it’s yes or no. And 
then you can fill out another application form, send in the fee, 
and in another five days we’ll let you know. So somebody in 
your department isn’t passing the information on to the business 
people when they phone in for a name information on what 
names are being used. 
 
So I certainly will pass this information on to you, but perhaps 
your department needs to review the policy and how they’re 
dealing with it. And perhaps the personnel need to be informed 
that they should be letting the people calling in know that there 
is a remote access available and how to use it. I believe that 
would be a proper change in procedures, Mr. Minister, and 
perhaps you can direct your personnel to do that. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you on behalf of my colleague 
from Wood River who is unable to be here at this time, a group 
of grade 4 students from Assiniboia School. They are 
accompanied by their teacher Janice Erfle; and the chaperons, 
Mrs. Reid, Mrs. Padfield, Mrs. Swidzinski, and Mrs. Jacob. 
 
And I would just like everybody here in the Assembly to 
welcome them here this morning. And I will, on behalf of my 
colleague from Wood River, be joining you for drinks shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I would just like to say I’ll look 
forward to receiving that information and also your suggestions 
about the procedure, and we’ll work with that. 



3014 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
since you’re interested in discussing the globals, we’ll move on 
to the globals for a little while. And I have a number of other 
questions as they relate to the globals. These are questions that 
were not answered or were not asked perhaps. 
 
But I wonder if you could provide us with the detail of all 
educational leave and professional development programs 
within your department; state the purpose of each case; state 
whether this was paid for by the department or by the 
individuals; if paid by the department, state the cost; if paid by 
individual, estimate the cost to the department of the 
individual’s absence from work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s my understanding that this was not 
one of the global questions, so we have to take that one under 
advisement and see if we can put that information together. Is it 
your understanding that it was included in your global 
questions? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, some of these questions 
may have been included and some of them may not have been. 
But they were not answered, nevertheless, so that’s why we’re 
asking them now. 
 
I passed the information on last week to the House Leader. He 
agreed to pass them out to all the ministers for responses. I 
know that some of the other departments had not received these 
requests. Some of the other ministers that we talked to since 
that time hadn’t received them, but they have all agreed to 
answer the questions. 
 
The Minister of Finance looked them over when she was in for 
her estimates, took some time and looked them over carefully, 
and then made the determination that she was prepared to 
answer all the questions. I believe most of the other ministers 
have agreed to answer the questions also. 
 
I don’t know if your officials know the answer to this; I don’t 
know if you have any information on the educational leave 
programs at all within your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I can answer part of it. There’s a limited 
educational leave program in the corrections part of the 
department. Other areas, there’s very little of this. But we 
would be able to go back and review everything to see if we 
could find answers to this question. I’d be happy to do that for 
you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you very much. I wonder if you 
could give us the total payments to RRSPs (registered 
retirement savings plan) and other contract benefits provided to 
any employee that are outside the benefits provided by the 
Public Employees Benefits Agency. So this, more specifically, 
would be such as contract employees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Zero. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  That’s the number I like. Thank you. 
Could you list and detail the costs of all club memberships, 
season tickets, etc., held by the department and detail the costs  

of all other entertainment expenses incurred by the department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The cost for memberships, club 
memberships, zero. There’s no provision for that. As far as the 
question of entertainment, that’s not as clear. There may be 
some situations where we would host a luncheon for example, 
if the federal Minister of Justice came to Saskatchewan, and 
there’d be some minor costs there . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well he doesn’t come here for very long usually, so I think 
the costs of those are usually minimal. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Coffee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Coffee, that’s right. And I think the other 
question was on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As far as season 
tickets go, there are no season tickets. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Whenever the federal Minister of Justice comes to the province, 
perhaps entertaining him should not be part of the 
considerations. Making him sit down and do a significant 
amount of work may have certainly some value because . . . and 
we will get into some of these issues here after a bit. 
 
But we certainly do have some disagreements with him on a 
number of issues. And perhaps it would be well advised to take 
him out and allow him to meet some of Saskatchewan’s people 
rather than having him closeted in a small meeting. Because I 
have attended a meeting with him where that is exactly the 
procedures he used, was to take a significant number of people, 
approximately 50 people, put them in a room for a very small 
period of time, allow everybody to introduce themselves and 
give a little short statement, and say, well thank you very much, 
ladies and gentlemen, for the consultation, and then get up and 
leave, where there was actually no consultation taking place. 
The time was all taken up by comments . . . introduction and 
then comments by the MP (Member of Parliament) for Souris 
Moose Mountain and the MP for Saskatoon Humboldt and no 
time left for consultation. 
 
Mind you, with this particular minister consultation means, 
listen to what I say; I’m not prepared to listen to what you have 
to say. So I think perhaps to take that minister and sit him down 
and . . . some very serious discussions with some of the real 
people in Saskatchewan and not just a couple of people 
closeted in a small room, I think would be most beneficial to 
that federal minister, and hopefully to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the other areas, Mr. Minister, that I’m particularly 
interested in deals with CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) 
vehicles. I wonder if you could give some indication as to who 
within your department, the deputy minister, within the heads of 
your departments are entitled to CVA vehicles, who utilizes the 
CVA vehicles, and who would use personal mileage for their 
travel expenses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The only CVA vehicles that are presently 
being used are the one that I use and the one that my deputy 
minister uses. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are other 



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3015 

people within your department entitled to CVA vehicles but are 
not using them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are people who are entitled to use a 
CVA vehicle if they need to travel somewhere, but there aren’t 
any people that are entitled to use them full time other than 
possibly the chief judge of the Provincial Court, but at this time 
he doesn’t use one at all. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you. Someone such as the chief 
judge, when he travels then would he be entitled to personal 
mileage claims? And the other heads of the departments, are 
any of them entitled to CVA vehicles but use the personal 
mileage claim instead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Within the department the chief judge 
would get mileage when he needs to be on the road. But 
practically, what we try to do is encourage anybody who is 
going to another place to analyse whether it’s best to use a CVA 
vehicle or their car and use whatever is most economical. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I wonder if you could give us an 
indication of how many miles your department is charged for 
personal  or kilometres I guess now since we’ve changed  
how many kilometres your department pays for personal 
mileage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Perhaps you could clarify the question. 
Are you saying how many miles that employees in the 
department might charge in mileage for the use of their own 
personal vehicles? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  For those people who are entitled to a 
CVA vehicle, such as the deputy minister, if he was using his 
personal vehicle and charging mileage, personal mileage to the 
department, those are the answers I’m looking for. For those 
people who are entitled to have a CVA vehicle, not just 
somebody who is going to drive from, say, Legal Aid in Regina 
is going out to Fort Qu’Appelle or something for a case on a 
particular circumstance, may access a CVA vehicle for that and 
then come back, but normally they would not have access for a 
CVA vehicle. 
 
But for someone such as the deputy minister or the heads of the 
department, the chief judge, who normally has access to a CVA 
vehicle, I’m interested in how many personal mileage claims 
they put in and what that mileage was and if any of them would 
put in a claim for 25,000 kilometres or more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer is there aren’t any 
people in that situation because it’s just the deputy minister and 
I that have vehicles, and through the way the tax system works, 
well we end up having a charge for the personal miles that we 
use on those vehicles. 
 
So I think, practically, it’s not a problem within our department. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I may 
come back to some more questions on the globals here in a bit. 
 
But I have some questions from Justice as it deals with no fault  

and no-fault insurance. How many other provinces have gone to 
the no-fault system where claimants for the insurance company 
do not have the right then to go to court under the no-fault 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This is really not in our department. The 
issue is really dealt with by the minister in charge of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). And I’m not sure if 
you’re finished with questions for him or not, but if you are . . . 
But I’ll give a brief answer. But you recognize that this is not an 
area that we are particularly involved in. 
 
But practically, there are no-fault regimes  they’re not all 
exactly the same  in Ontario, Manitoba, B.C. (British 
Columbia), and Quebec, and they all have different provisions 
which I’m not fully aware of other than that they do have 
no-fault systems. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, if a claimant was to 
seek a court challenge within . . . under the no-fault system as in 
Saskatchewan, what involvement would the Department of 
Justice have in those cases? 
 
Are they strictly civil cases where SGI would provide solicitors 
or barristers for one side of the case and the claimant would 
have their barrister or solicitor there on the other side? Does 
Justice become involved at all in these situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the simple answer is no, we 
wouldn’t get involved at all because it’s a civil lawsuit. The 
only possible time that we would get involved is if there’s a 
constitutional challenge. 
 
And any time a constitutional question is raised in any court 
case in Saskatchewan, we receive notice. Sometimes we will 
elect to get involved; most of the time we will not get involved. 
But that would be the only time, is if there was some kind of 
constitutional challenge to the legislation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the 
no-fault insurance in the other provinces  and they may be 
slightly different, as you have said, to the operation in 
Saskatchewan  has there been a constitutional challenge on 
the no-fault insurance by someone who feels that they’ve been 
aggrieved by the circumstances, that they have not received 
proper satisfaction, or that their rights have been abridged by 
the fact that under no-fault insurance they are not allowed to 
seek remedy in the courts for any grievances they may have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think there have been some challenges, 
constitutional challenges, but there have been no successful 
challenges to date. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps in 
Saskatchewan, since we seem to be having a number of 
problems with the no-fault insurance, someone may be able to 
challenge successfully, because there is a great deal of problems 
in there. 
 
We see families that are not receiving proper compensation, we 
see individuals who suffer grievous harm and yet do not receive 



3016 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

the compensation to which they would have . . . one would have 
expected them to be entitled and which they themselves had 
expected to be entitled under their understandings of the 
insurance that they had purchased. 
 
In fact, one case that I brought up here last week, the lady had 
been offered a benefit social, that people would do some 
fund-raising for her benefit. And her response was no, no, no, 
you don’t need to do this; I have insurance. 
 
Unfortunately when circumstances developed and it came down 
to actually accessing that insurance, she found out she didn’t 
have the insurance that she believed she had. And so I think 
there may very well be some challenges issued against the 
no-fault insurance in Saskatchewan, and the Department of 
Justice could become involved. 
 
Mr. Minister, bankruptcies in this province are also a problem. 
And when a person declares bankruptcy, what are they able to 
take as possessions as exemptions to the bankruptcy? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Bankruptcy Act is a federal law and 
what the federal Bankruptcy Act does is incorporates The 
Exemptions Act of Saskatchewan. The answer would be right 
here on the Table for you if you’d like to pull out the Act, and it 
would set out what the exemptions are. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. A number 
of items under that Exemptions Act though are fairly archaic 
and perhaps need to be revised. I don’t think too many people 
today want to rescue their cream separator under The 
Exemptions Act. And I believe that is one of the items that is 
under that Act . . . or 40 bushels of potatoes and those kind of 
things. 
 
But there are changes happening in the law as we go along. 
There has been changes made to The Credit Union Act which 
allows them to take different securities in their banking 
processes from individuals and farmers. 
 
So how does the Saskatchewan Exemptions Act mesh with the 
changes that are happening to The Credit Union Act to bring 
The Credit Union Act closer to what the banking Act has, 
particularly closer to section 178 of the banking Act? And how 
is this going to mesh with the current Exemptions Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that part of the difficulty you have 
is that the only things included when you’re dealing with a 
bankruptcy are the assets of the bankrupt. And anything that’s 
secured, whether it’s under section 178 or whether it’s under 
securities that are registered under personal property security 
registry or through some other means, all those items aren’t 
included in the bankruptcy because they don’t belong to the 
bankrupt. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but under 
a personal bankruptcy in The Exemptions Act in Saskatchewan 
are there not exceptions made for a person’s work? A 
tradesman can protect his tools from bankruptcy. I believe a  

person can exempt their house from the bankruptcy up to, I 
think it’s $30,000 of value. 
 
A case has been brought forward to a colleague of mine of a 
woman who is facing personal bankruptcy, going through the 
system. She needs her car to get to work but her car is being 
seized on her. Is some form of transportation exempted under 
The Exemptions Act from seizure by bankruptcy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m not operating here with all of the 
information about this legislation but I will try to give you a 
simple answer. I think that under The Exemptions Act there are 
some very clear rules. The best place for these kind of questions 
to be answered by a person like you’re talking about is to go to 
a trustee in bankruptcy. They have very detailed explanations. 
Often they provide this service for free when people have 
inquiries. And at this stage I think that would be your best bet 
for something like that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well it would 
certainly have to be for free if a person is going through 
bankruptcy because they obviously haven’t got the financial 
wherewithal to support the person as it is. So it would be very 
difficult to go to a lawyer and pay a large fee for advice on 
bankruptcy. Now perhaps if a person has a large amount of 
assets and are trying to protect something, they have something 
of value with which to work. But in this particular case, a 
woman who can’t even protect her vehicle from bankruptcy, 
obviously does not have the financial wherewithal to provide 
that support. 
 
Perhaps you could send us over a list of those bankruptcy 
trustees that she could perhaps consult with or that would be 
within her locale that she could deal with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think if you just turn to the Yellow 
Pages that there’s very detailed information there and she could 
call any of the people that are in the phone book. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not 
sure though if it lists them under bankruptcy trustees or not 
though. There is certainly a large number of lawyers and 
solicitors listed in there but how many of them are bankruptcy 
trustees I wouldn’t know without at least taking a very serious 
look at the Yellow Pages in the book. But perhaps the 
department is aware of who is available in which areas of the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well it is listed under trustees in 
bankruptcy. These people are accountants, chartered accounts; 
they’re not lawyers. And the bankruptcy office here in Regina 
for this part of Saskatchewan would, I’m sure, be happy to give 
a list of all the people who are available in whatever area of the 
province this person is involved. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
Premier is currently down at the first ministers’ conference. I 
believe that you attended a ministers of Justice meeting not that 
far in the past. Has the concerns raised for the past year and a 
half, two years, dealing will Bill C-68 . . . were they raised at 
the Justice ministers’ conference? Will the Premier be bringing  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3017 

up the concerns of Saskatchewan residents in dealing with Bill 
C-68 at the premiers’ conference, at the first ministers’ 
conference? 
 
Mr. Minister, as you are well aware, having toured the province 
with us, not together in the same vehicle, but ending up at the 
same meetings . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Us in car; you in plane. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes. That’s basically how it works. But 
we end up there at 40 below weather. Mr. Minister, what is 
happening at the federal level between your department and 
your colleagues in the other provinces and with the federal 
Minister of Justice in dealing with Bill C-68? 
 
There were regulations presented that were extremely onerous 
and totally unacceptable. The federal minister pulled them  or 
his bureaucrats did; I’m not exactly sure who authorized that or 
who authorized their release initially. But I am extremely 
suspicious that these regulations released were to put the fear of 
the Lord in everyone so that when they could bring them back 
they could say, well look how much better we have made them, 
how great they are today because they’re only slightly less 
onerous than what they were before. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what’s happening on that front? Where is this 
discussion with your colleagues, the other ministers of Justice, 
and where is this discussion between the Premier and the Prime 
Minister of this country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m very pleased to answer that 
question. When we went to the federal-provincial-territorial 
ministers’ meeting in Ottawa in May we arranged, as ministers 
of Justice from Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, British 
Columbia, Northwest Territories, and the Yukon, that we would 
get together to specifically discuss our strategy relating to Bill 
C-68. 
 
While we were in that meeting we got notice that the Minister 
of Justice had withdrawn the regulations. It’s our speculation 
that he understood that we were going to be making a fairly 
strong statement about all of this and that it was actually the 
work that we were doing that precipitated this change. 
 
Now the official version that we got wasn’t exactly that, but 
you’ll have to go a long way to persuade me that it wasn’t the 
work that we were doing that in fact raised the concern about 
these regulations. 
 
Now since that time, as you well know, I have set up a 
Minister’s Technical Advisory Committee and it included some 
very able people from within the various interested 
communities in Saskatchewan to review those regulations and 
also review the kinds of information that we are getting from 
the federal government. At the moment it doesn’t seem to be 
very much, but we are reviewing very carefully with these 
people who . . . in the community. We have received some very 
good advice and some good assistance as we try to deal with 
this. 
 

We still have a very strong suggestion that the only way this can 
be resolved is if this Bill is repealed or amended in some way to 
recognize the various areas within the province, and how we 
deal with the gun regulation and gun safety in a completely 
different way than they might do in Toronto or Vancouver. 
 
I guess my own personal sense of this is that federal 
government’s in a corner. They don’t know what to do. We are 
continuing to put the pressure on. The whole issue of the 
constitutional challenge is still very much on the burner. And 
we’re working together with our other, primarily western 
ministers of Justice, although we’re pleased to say that the 
Ontario minister of justice and Solicitor General are also very 
much involved in the discussion now. 
 
So we’re in a difficult spot because we still don’t have the 
regulations which would allow the challenge to be fully defined 
in how we might do it. But I think you can be satisfied with the 
work and the monitoring that we’re doing right now. 
 
I know I appreciated the member’s assistance throughout all of 
this because he’s been very able to access other information that 
we’ve haven’t been able to access, and then vice versa, we have 
shared information with him. And it is clearly an all-party 
concern here that we’re working with, and that’s continuing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m 
particularly interested in the comment that you made that 
British Columbia was at the table during that discussion and 
seems to be onside. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I didn’t include British Columbia. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I wish you had’ve included British 
Columbia then. Because I certainly think it would strengthen 
your hand if you could bring another province, and particularly 
the province with the third highest population in this country  
we have Ontario with the largest population now  onside. It 
would be I think helpful if British Columbia could come onside 
or would come onside. 
 
What kind of discussions have you had with your counterpart in 
British Columbia on this particular issue? What kind of 
influence are you trying to exert on him to come onside on this 
particular issue? 
 
Obviously they have just gone through a provincial election 
there. They have a new Minister of Justice perhaps, and I’m not 
aware if that changed or if it didn’t change. But there were a 
number of cabinet ministers who were defeated so perhaps the 
new Premier has made some changes there. 
 
But have you talked to the Minister of Justice in British 
Columbia since their election? Is there any sense of any 
possible change there? I know that it was the Minister of Health 
prior to the election who was supportive of the position that the 
three prairie provinces had taken on this particular issue, 
although he couldn’t seem to get through the cabinet the total 
agreement from the provincial government in that case. 
 



3018 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

But what kind of discussions have you been into with the 
Justice minister in British Columbia on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I have not had a chance to talk to the 
Minister of Justice in British Columbia. It’s Mr. Dosanjh and he 
is the same person that was Minister of Justice prior to the 
election. 
 
Basically I don’t think their position has changed too much, 
although I know that they are carefully reviewing this whole 
area because of some of the very prominent incidents that have 
taken place in British Columbia over the last six months. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps we’ll 
move a little bit away from the broader policy area of gun 
control to some of the more specifics. And this deals with 
administration in Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the current system, the police forces, the police 
departments in the various areas, assign an officer as the 
firearms officer for that area, such as an RCMP detachment in 
Carnduff will have one officer perhaps, or as in the case of 
Carnduff, all of the officers are designated as firearm officers. 
There are problems though when you get into the major centres 
of Regina and Saskatoon, that it seems that they are appointing 
one officer to be the firearms officer. If that officer is not 
available for duty on a particular day or is gone off on holidays, 
then everything stops in that department because nobody else is 
assigned to it and therefore you can’t go and get your firearms 
application form or you can’t submit your firearms application 
form for review. You can’t go in and get a travel permit or 
make an application for a travel permit because the officer in 
charge isn’t there and is going to be gone for three weeks. 
 
We had this problem arise at Christmas time. Two people from 
the city of Regina wished to attend an international shoot in 
Dickinson, North Dakota. They couldn’t get travel permits 
because the officer in charge in Regina was on holidays, was 
gone for the Christmas holidays. So they were not allowed to 
participate because they couldn’t get travel permits. 
 
What are you doing in this field to alleviate that problem? One 
of the things that I think could be done, particularly for the 
Regina area  and it would be not as convenient for the rest of 
the province — but the chief provincial firearms office is in 
Regina. Why could that office not supplement the services 
provided by the police departments in this province when the 
police departments are not available to provide the service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the question that you raised about 
the person wanting to travel in December, we haven’t heard 
about that before within those of us that are here today. And 
we’ll follow up on that. 
 
I think you have a good idea about setting up some other 
alternative people who would be available. And the police are 
the ones that have this function within their duties and it would 
seem to make sense that we would, through the Chief Firearms 
Officer, go to the police forces and say, well look you do need  

some kind of a backup system for when the people involved are 
not there. So that’s a good suggestion and we’ll follow up on 
that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure 
how many other designates around the province the Chief 
Provincial Firearm Officer has other than the officers in each 
detachment. 
 
Since this law is also a federal law, is there opportunities that 
the RCMP, since they have barracks out here with a large 
number of RCMP officers available, could they provide some 
of the service if the city police from Regina, the officer in 
charge, was not available. Or perhaps your department should 
contact the metropolitan police organizations  Regina, 
Saskatoon, Estevan, Weyburn, and those that have their own 
police detachments  to encourage them to have more than one 
officer assigned to this particular area of duty so that there is 
always someone available. 
 
And I’m not saying that they should be available at midnight, 
but they should be available during the working hours of the 
day to meet the requirements of the citizenry when it comes to 
making applications for firearms acquisition certificates or for 
travel permits or any other of the forms that are going to be 
needed, particularly in the case where these new laws and 
regulations are coming down which are going to involve a lot 
more bookwork. 
 
I think there’s going to be a need to have people available. You 
simply can’t wait until somebody comes back from holidays 
three weeks or a month later if you want to attend a gun show 
some place and take your equipment there to put on display and 
for sale. 
 
So I think we need to do something, Mr. Minister, to provide 
that the service is available. That’s one of the great fears that a 
significant number of people in the firearm community have, is 
that under the proposals of C-68, because of the onerous 
regulations in place and the need for so much paperwork, that 
one of the restrictions that could be put in place by the federal 
Liberal government would not be saying you can’t do this, but 
rather saying, you can do this but here’s the steps you have to 
go through, and then cutting out a part of those steps and 
making it so impractical or so unavailable that nobody can 
move through the steps to actually come out the end with 
whatever it is they desire to do. I think that’s a great fear, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
What we have here happening already under the circumstances 
is something like that, where if you pull one cog out of the 
mechanism, the whole mechanism stops. There should be 
alternate routes that people can take to achieve the same end, 
meet the same requirements. It’s not dodging some of the 
requirements, it’s meeting the same requirements to achieve the 
end that they’re entitled to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think you’ve pointed out a concern 
that we all have about the present legislation and the future 
legislation. And it was stated very strongly by me when we 
were at the ministers’ meeting, that the costs of this  the new  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3019 

program that the federal government set up  are so imprecise, 
we don’t know what they’re going to be; that to do all of the 
steps, it’s almost going to be impossible. 
 
A good example of what you’re talking about, as far as the local 
police are concerned . . . One of the difficulties, frankly, is that 
we still do not have a financial settlement on the previous 
legislation and so a lot of the local police forces don’t have the 
money back from the licensing fees over the last three or four 
years. And one of the big difficulties that we’ve had, even 
listening to the federal government when they talk about the 
fees and the sharing of fees for the new legislation is . . . we 
just say to them, look, we’re not even going to listen to you 
about that until you sort out what happened with the last Bill. 
 
And so part of the frustration, for example, with some of the 
city police forces is, where do they get the money to pay for 
some of these extra services. And it’s a frustration all around 
and it points to some of the real difficulties with the federal 
legislation. It appears to be falling on deaf ears when we try to 
deal with this, but it’s also . . . I think part of any kind of 
challenge we might make is exactly the argument that you are 
talking about, is you are attempting to set up an impossible 
bureaucracy  talking about the federal government  to 
accomplish something that you’re not going to do necessarily 
directly, but you do it indirectly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps you 
can give some indication of where that financial settlement is at 
today. I believe it was two years ago or so that it was in a deficit 
position of $800,000, give or take some in there. Has that 
increased, decreased? What is happening to it at the present 
time, Mr. Minister? And what leverage does your department 
have on the federal minister to get that money flowing through 
the system so that the backlog of lost financial resources can be 
caught back up again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well all I can say is they put some more 
money on the table but it’s still not enough. And that one of the 
real frustrations is we don’t want to sort this one out on a less 
than full compensation basis because we see that the next 
regulations which . . . who knows when they’ll come  will 
then build on this base. And so if we agree to something that is 
less than full compensation for the police forces that are doing 
this work, and less than full compensation for the province, 
then we will be subsidizing legislation which we don’t think is 
appropriate for Canada. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that 
indeed we need to get our full compensation from the federal 
government in this particular area, including the backlog. And 
in fact, is I would even suggest to you perhaps you should start 
tacking interest onto that to give them a little more incentive to 
make their payments. I know that come April 30, if I don’t 
make my commitment to the federal government, they certainly 
start adding interest onto what I owe them. 
 
Now I think in reverse, perhaps we should do the same thing. 
And I know that the provincial government gets their slice of 
that interest too, if I don’t make my commitment by April 30. 
So perhaps a little added incentive needs to be applied to the  

federal government, and perhaps that’s what the Premier should 
be doing today when he’s talking with the Prime Minister. 
They’re talking about some of the constitutional issues today. 
Perhaps they need to be bringing forward that all of these 
changes cost money, and if the federal government is going to 
impose changes on us, then they have a duty to provide the 
financial support to meet those changes. And I think perhaps 
the Premier needs to be reinforcing Saskatchewan’s interests in 
this area. 
 
During the discussions on constitution, one of the items that 
reoccurs over and over and over again is the idea that Quebec 
has a distinct cultural uniqueness in Canada. I think our Premier 
should be reinforcing the fact that Saskatchewan also has a 
unique culture, as does Alberta and Manitoba. I think all you 
have to do is look at the political process in all three of our 
prairie provinces. We often get lumped in together  the 
Prairies, one homogeneous mass. 
 
Well that’s not the case, Mr. Minister; we are indeed separate 
entities. We not only are separate entities but we have 
developed different cultures. Look at the politics of the system. 
Where is Alberta politically in comparison to Saskatchewan? 
One has traditionally had a right-wing government, one has 
traditionally had a left-wing government  of which you’re a 
member today. We have developed from different routes. We 
have developed along different patterns. 
 
And about the same time, 1944 or a little before that, two 
charismatic religious personalities, ministers in their churches, 
came to the floor politically. One went left and one went right. 
It reminds me of that song that the guy used to play on Bonanza 
sang . . . Lorne Greene sang about how he went one way and 
his buddy went the other way. And that’s the way it is between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. We have chosen different paths, we 
have different cultures, and that needs to be recognized in 
Canada. We look at our . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, I 
will not sing; there is a limit to what I will do in a filibuster. 
 
Mr. Minister, we look at Manitoba and Manitoba has sort of sat 
on the fence between those two. They traditionally elect 
governments with one-person majorities. And I think that 
shows another example of how their culture is different than 
that in Saskatchewan or different from that in Alberta, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So we are all unique across Canada; we have developed our 
own cultural identities you might say. And I think that needs to 
be recognized, and under Bill C-68 that is failed . . . that is not 
recognized in that area. Particularly again we look at our native 
brethren and their culture is not recognized under Bill C-68. 
 
So I’d like to ask you some questions on that particular area, 
because under Bill C-68 there are written exams to be taken, 
you have to take courses, you have to write tests. What kind of 
provisions is Saskatchewan looking at for those areas where 
there is a significant number of non-English-speaking people, 
particularly non-English-speaking people who do not read and 
write, as is the circumstance in a number of the northern 
communities. 
 



3020 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

At the meeting in Saskatoon that I mentioned where Allan Rock 
was at, one of the representatives from the PA (Prince Albert) 
tribal council talked about Joe who was out trapping in the 
bush, and there was no way that you were going to be able to 
get Joe to come in 60 miles from the trap line to write the exam. 
But even if he did come in, he would never be able to read the 
exam because he didn’t read English and he didn’t write 
English. He could talk the Cree language, but he was not fluent 
enough in English to be able to take the exam and carry it out. 
 
So what kind of provisions is Saskatchewan looking at, at 
putting in place, to deal with those kind of circumstances? 
Under the current situation there are already exams to be taken. 
If you’ve never had a hunting licence and you wish to get one, 
you have to take the federal firearms course. You have to take 
Saskatchewan’s hunter safety course. 
 
So you must have some plans in mind to deal with those 
already. You may already be dealing with them. So what do you 
have in place today; what do you propose to have in place 
tomorrow under Bill C-68? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that you know that presently 
we have had the ability to tailor these tests and all of the 
arrangements around what happens in Saskatchewan. And one 
of the very strong arguments that I have made to the federal 
minister is that that’s what’s wrong with Bill C-68. It doesn’t 
take into account the various regions of Canada. It doesn’t take 
into account how we do things here. 
 
We’re in a situation where we don’t have the regulations. We’re 
obviously waiting, like everybody else is, to see what the 
regulations are. The Technical Advisory Committee that I have 
set up has looked at some of these things, raised some of the 
same kinds of problems that you’ve raised, and practically, we 
are strongly suggesting that if this legislation is going to be 
used, it needs to be amended to reflect the fact that each 
jurisdiction can manage and deal with the question of . . . 
 
(1230) 
 
The point that we make in Saskatchewan is that we have 
developed a very effective and safe system, including many 
courses that are worked together with the gun owners and with 
the firearms registry, firearms officer office, and we want that 
kind of a thing to continue, to build on what we already have. 
 
And I think practically we’re not in a position  because we 
just don’t know what the regulations are  to understand how 
it’s all going to come together after here. We’re strongly saying 
to them look, this isn’t going to work here unless you give us 
some provincial flexibility. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  And thank you, Mr. Minister. I asked 
you earlier — and because I asked it in amongst a number of 
other questions, you missed it — what is the Premier doing 
about this? Will he be bringing up these concerns at the first 
ministers’ conference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I don’t think this particular item is 
on the official agenda of the meeting. But you previously  

indicated that this was a constitutional issue as we look at sort 
of the passing of responsibility  but not the passing of money 
 from the federal government to the provincial government. 
And I would note that one of the difficulties this issue might 
have in all that discussion is that the Premier of Alberta has said 
any time the word “constitutional” comes up, he’s out of the 
room. And so we’re in a situation where some of the issues 
around this kind of a problem are not going to be dealt with if 
they’re going to be dealt with in a constitutional way. 
 
Now I think practically, they have some very long check-lists of 
things when they talk about the reorganization of 
Confederation. And presumably if this issue comes up, then I 
know the Premier will be putting forward the position of this 
government. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. While 
some of the premiers may leave the room . . . and I believe that 
Lucien Bouchard has also announced that in all likelihood he 
will do the quick exit also if the word “constitution” is 
mentioned. 
 
But supposedly the Premier of this province is a personal friend 
to the Prime Minister. And while it may not be officially on the 
agenda, that would allow him an avenue  while they’re sitting 
around having coffee between meetings perhaps  to bring the 
issue to the fore. 
 
I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan find it acceptable 
though that the Premier would wait for somebody else to raise 
the issue before he’s prepared to discuss it. I believe he should 
be initiating the discussion and bringing it forward to the first 
ministers at the conference, just as you, Mr. Minister, should be 
bringing it forward to the Justice ministers whenever you meet 
with them, and the Minister of the Environment should be 
doing the same thing whenever he meets with his counterparts. 
 
I think we need to take the initiative, every chance we get, to 
make sure that this particular issue is brought to the fore, that’s 
it’s discussed, and that a resolution is found to this particular 
issue, Mr. Minister. 
 
So perhaps if you’re talking with the Premier of this province or 
the minister responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs some 
time before the conference ends, you can mention to them that 
this is an item that the people of Saskatchewan would like to 
have discussed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that what you’ve stated is 
clearly the policy and plan of this government. I know that 
whenever I have met with Mr. Rock or with any of his senior 
staff, this is always part of the discussion, because they know 
how strongly we feel about dealing with this matter. 
 
And we’re also in a situation where we need to have a solution 
on this one because it’s going to cause a great deal of confusion 
within many of the communities in Saskatchewan, if not all of 
the communities in Saskatchewan. And that has been reiterated 
by me in all my discussions with the federal minister and when 
the staff meet with these various people. 
 



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3021 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just a 
follow-up. I was just in a debate with, you remember, your 
colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, a few minutes ago and 
he raised the issue of offloading by the federal government that 
your government has had to deal with or is continually dealing 
with. We’ve had that debate with the Minister of Health about 
offloading. 
 
And coming back to Bill C-68 and the problems that could be 
associated with registration of firearms in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it seems to me that this is just another avenue 
following up on some of the debate that’s taken place with my 
colleague, the member from Cannington, that the province may 
find itself with another cost to bear. And certainly in the 
province of Saskatchewan it’s a cost when it comes to 
registration and who’s going to handle it, who’s going to 
manage it, and who’s going to pay for the funding. 
 
If it’s something that ends up in the hands of . . . the 
responsibility of the provincial government, it just takes more 
money out of programs and services that we’re trying to provide 
to the persons and the community of this province. 
 
And so I think it certainly behoves you, Mr. Minister, and 
certainly to continue to pass on to your colleagues and the 
Premier, that it’s imperative that we get a resolve to this. And 
that the federal government, I think, have basically crossed the 
line in some of their programing and what they’re basically 
telling regions of Canada that they must . . . must and must not 
do. 
 
And I think there are many people across this province who 
have become quite annoyed at what the federal government has 
unilaterally done in the area of gun control and in the area of 
other concerns regarding funding for health and funding for 
education. 
 
And if we don’t, I guess, join together and join with some of 
the other regions or some of the other provinces and address 
some of these concerns, and raise them very emphatically, we 
may find that a greater and greater burden is put upon an area of 
Canada where the population base is being basically stepped on 
and carrying a heavier and heavier burden. 
 
And so I concur with my colleague that it’s imperative that you, 
in your position, Mr. Minister, do everything that you are 
physically capable of. I use the word physically in conjunction 
to your stature in this Assembly, physically compared to some 
of the others. I think you have . . . may have that ability, but 
certainly it’s imperative that, in your position as Justice minister 
with the responsibilities you carry, that you indeed raise and 
emphasize as emphatically as you are capable of doing, that 
Saskatchewan . . . People in Saskatchewan are just not pleased 
with the way the federal government seems to continue to 
shoulder, offload, or push off onto Saskatchewan residents 
these type of costs, and which then takes away from some of the 
other services that we would like to provide. 
 
And so I encourage you again, Mr. Minister, to indeed stand up 
for the concerns that have been raised. And I’ve got a number 
of other questions I’d like to . . . area I’d like to get into, but  

maybe I should just give you a chance to respond before we 
move into some other areas, versus complicating the issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well what I have found over the years is 
that good humour and positive discussions with people usually 
accomplishes a lot more than the use of physical presence, 
although maybe it’s a combination of my own good humour 
and my physical presence that does that. But in this particular 
operation, if that was the only question . . . I don’t know if 
you’ve met Mr. Rock, but he is substantially smaller than I am. 
 
In this particular area you’ve actually hit on one of the major 
points that I made at the ministers’ meeting in May, and that 
was that however the system is being designed by the federal 
government, they are pushing all the costs down to the 
province; but even more so, they’re pushing it right down to the 
municipal level. 
 
Because the real difficulty that we have is that it will be the 
police forces that bear the brunt of this legislation, and it’s quite 
frustrating for us as provincial politicians to try to explain to 
local municipalities that legislation which is coming federally, 
which sets up a complicated registration system, is actually 
going to increase the costs of local policing. 
 
And that is one of the reasons why we have been stubborn in 
our negotiations on the sharing of the policing costs, to make 
sure that we get full compensation from the federal government. 
And that’s the same kind of position that we’ll be taking when 
we deal with any of the new regulations and policing costs that 
are going to come from that point. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I certainly concur with you, Mr. Minister, 
because I’ve talked to some of the members of the . . . even the 
local RCMP detachments and they really are not looking 
forward to the day when this Bill C-68 actually comes into play 
and the regulations are in place and then they have to start 
enforcing it, because they’ve worked so hard to try and build a 
liaison between the communities. 
 
In some cases, they’ve taken a hit over circumstances that have 
taken place in the past and they’ve tried to come to a more 
workable . . . and an understanding between the residents of the 
communities that they serve, and they just feel that this is just 
going to create an antagonism whereby the respect they’ve 
gained is going to be destroyed. So it certainly does become an 
issue. 
 
And when it comes to stature, Mr. Minister, I think that your 
stature versus my stature, if we were in a room together and 
someone had a question, you would certainly prevail, and I 
appreciate that. So that’s one of the reasons I raise that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get into another area, and a couple of 
straightforward questions, and I’m going to raise right now, that 
you may or may not have an answer to, and they may not deal 
specifically in some cases with some of the discussion that’s 
been taking place. But a call I made last night to a resident and 
a question that arose, and I’m raising it so that I can respond to 
it, is in regard to bankruptcies. 



3022 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

What I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if a person files for 
bankruptcy, what can a person hold onto or continue to hold to 
to maintain an existence or to continue to provide for 
themselves? I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you’d have any 
knowledge in that matter. It seems to me the concern that was 
raised with the person that had brought it to my attention all 
stems back to a decision that was made by the courts regarding 
a maintenance and this . . . this goes back to some discussion 
we had a while back as to what it left this individual with. 
 
And it happens to be a lady that we’ve been talking about. And 
now in order to try and maintain what she’s worked so hard to 
live with over the years and to build for herself, she’s told, I 
believe, that she can keep part . . . or keep a home if the value is 
below a certain level. But she’s been informed that she’s got to 
take her car down to Brown’s Auction Rooms and just sell it 
off. And if I understand correctly, there isn’t much more than 
maybe 2,500 or $3,000 value on the vehicle. 
 
So I’m just wondering, and the other thing is she just found a 
job and it’s at the other end of the city. And while this happens 
to be local, there are other people who have circumstances, say 
in rural areas, that need to commute. 
 
So I’m wondering what is a person left with, or what do the 
bankruptcy laws kind of leave a person with, that I can get back 
and just kind of inform this person what they rightfully have the 
ability to hold under the bankruptcy laws if they file for 
bankruptcy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well this happens to be the same question 
that your colleague asked about 30 minutes ago. And I think he 
was probably asking it on your behalf, but since that time I have 
grabbed the legislation from the centre table. 
 
And what happens is the federal bankruptcy law  it’s federal 
law  incorporates The Exemptions Act from Saskatchewan. 
And The Exemptions Act  and I’ll give you the copy of it 
later so you can look at it  sets out the types of things that are 
protected. 
 
And specifically as it relates to a motor vehicle, it has set out in 
section 2(1)(5) that there’s an exemption for: 
 

one motor vehicle where it is necessary for the proper and 
efficient conduct of the execution debtor’s business, trade, 
calling or profession; provided that the motor vehicle is not 
in addition to the automobile or motor truck mentioned in 
paragraph 4; 
 

Paragraph 4 is repealed. So basically you’re allowed to have 
one vehicle if you need it for your job. And so it would seem to 
me that there are some possibilities that this woman could use. 
 
I advised your colleague earlier that there are information 
services available, both through the bankruptcy office in 
Regina, but also through trustees in bankruptcy. They often will 
provide this kind of information free of charge because it is a 
marketing device for them. 
 
(1245) 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, and I wasn’t quite sure . . . Yes, I 
was called out to meet with another group and I didn’t realize 
Justice was coming up, and I fired that question up in case I 
didn’t get a chance to ask it. So I’ll certainly talk with my 
colleague to get more information about what you shared with 
him. 
 
Another question, Mr. Minister, is a while back, I think it’s 
about two or three weeks ago, we had raised a question 
regarding the investigation of the Crown prosecutor in the 
Robert Latimer case. And I notice by the Star-Phoenix, June 13, 
this investigation was supposed to be completed by the end of 
the month. Now I think at that time you had responded, Mr. 
Minister, this investigation was still ongoing and therefore you 
really couldn’t respond to it. 
 
The question I would like to ask though, Mr. Minister, when 
this investigation was originally entered into or called for, were 
there no guidelines as to a time period you wanted to have this 
investigation completed in this case, or was this a wide open 
investigation that basically could go on and on? 
 
And I think that’s the concern, Mr. Minister, that we’re trying 
to raise. And we’re wondering why, if there weren’t any 
stipulations, why there weren’t some that would have basically 
allowed for what would have been felt to have been an adequate 
time period to do a proper and thorough investigation that 
would have said at the end of the day we’re going to have, 
rather than an open one. So that’s the question I have: was it 
basically an open investigation that could go on for ever or were 
there some guidelines that were set in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think it’s clear that the guidelines 
were to do a thorough review. It also involved investigation by 
the police, and we can’t interfere with that at all. We’re in a 
situation where ideally we would have liked to have had the 
information a number of months ago, but it’s quite a 
complicated matter and it has gone for outside legal review 
from outside of prosecutions within Saskatchewan. And so we 
have a number of different factors that are more complicated in 
this situation and I don’t know if they totally justify how long 
it’s taking, but everything is being pushed ahead as quickly as 
we can. 
 
Mr. Toth:  In the past, Mr. Minister . . . or, Mr. Minister, 
maybe I could add, have we had investigations called for such 
as the one we’re presently discussing regarding the Robert 
Latimer case? Have there been such investigations in the past? 
 
And have there been time lines established as to the length  
how long that investigation should go on? Would it be 
appropriate to set a time line? Or in the past if it had just been 
kind of open-ended . . . and I appreciate the fact that you 
mentioned that the investigation actually has gone into, I 
shouldn’t say more detail, but the investigators certainly have 
had to look at a lot of different scenarios regarding this case 
which has resulted in what would appear to be maybe a longer 
time frame than what you would have anticipated when it was 
originally put in motion. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure whether you were the minister at the  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3023 

time, but that really doesn’t matter. I’m just trying to determine 
whether or not these types of investigations would have a time 
line set down with them, whether they’ve been done in the past, 
or the fact that they may be a little more complicated than what 
would be originally set upfront so basically they’re left 
open-ended hoping that there is quicker resolve sooner rather 
than later. Is that the case how this one would have worked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, we’re not in a position where we can 
set time lines. These are police investigations, and the police 
work to obtain all of the information that’s necessary before 
anything further can be done. And we’re not in a position where 
we can set a time line for the police. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could we 
get a commitment from you that when a report is finally arrived 
at, and a report is given to you and there’s information 
available, that that would be available to our office as well 
under the guidelines of the investigation as it’s been put 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, we’ll undertake to provide you with 
the decision as soon as we know it. And it’ll be . . . well we 
anticipate by the end of the month that it’ll be a clear decision 
what’s going to happen here, and the information. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, another question that I talked a bit 
about the last time we had met. I think I’ve raised it and I’ve 
seen it as I think something that can be somewhat positive, is 
the use of sentencing circles in the aboriginal or our first 
nations community. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can tell me how many 
sentencing circles have taken place to date, and how your 
department feels about these sentencing circles; whether or not 
they’re achieving some of the goals and achieving the purposes 
that they have been set forward, and if they are indeed 
providing a positive view with regards to justice and the 
implementation of justice within our first nations community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m very pleased that you asked that 
question. In Saskatchewan we’ve had in excess of 200  I 
think it’s maybe approaching 240 or 260 sentencing circles. 
And what we have to remember is the sentencing circles take 
place after a trial, and so it’s at the end of the process. 
 
We have about, I think three or four or five of this 
approximately 240 number that have had some concerns raised 
about them, and those are the ones that we hear about in the 
press. 
 
So I guess what I would have to say is, from administration of 
Justice perspective and also from discussions with friends 
within the aboriginal community, that this process of a 
sentencing circle has been of great value in the system, and it’s 
something that we’ll continue to look at. 
 
I think also though, I would like to say that the concept of a 
healing circle, or as they talk about it in New Zealand . . . in 
Australia, family group conferencing, we are looking at moving 
the process more towards the front end of the criminal justice  

process before we get into the full process of the law. Because 
there are often situations where if you can get the people 
together to deal with a particular problem it may not be 
necessary to lay criminal charges and proceed right through the 
whole criminal court process. 
 
And we are looking at that and our whole restorative justice 
initiative which we in government, especially in Justice and 
Social Services, are looking at, looks at these possibilities and 
the use of some alternatives instead of basically just charging 
somebody, convicting them, and then trying to sort out after 
you’ve ended up labelling them in some way that isn’t very 
helpful for their long-term rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think, Mr. 
Minister, some of what you’ve just talked about certainly goes 
along with a quote I have here that comes from a Provincial 
Court judge who says, “Most people think you don’t have 
justice unless you punish someone, but our punishment oriented 
system hasn’t worked very well.” 
 
Certainly I think when we look at the results and we see what’s 
happening and just talking to individuals, the people that I 
know who are even working in the correctional system that we 
have today, one has to wonder why we have continually in 
some cases used, if you will, a punishment system that basically 
puts people behind bars for what seemingly . . . a case that may 
have been able to be dealt with in another manner. 
 
And you talked about working together with the innocent victim 
and bringing them face to face and maybe addressing it. 
Because I think if I hear you correctly, you and I may agree with 
the fact that it’s costing us an arm and a leg just to run the 
correctional system as we know it, as we know it today. 
 
Of the 200-plus cases you’ve talked about here, can you give us 
an idea of what basic monetary saving has taken place as a 
result of the sentencing circles, and the fact that maybe we’ve 
been able to deal with a punishment mechanism that has been 
more wholesome for the perpetrator and has addressed the 
concerns of the innocent victim, and that has possibly done it 
outside of just putting an individual behind bars for a period of 
time that is certainly costly to the system to operate and provide 
that service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think it’s a bit difficult to answer 
that question about the savings of court costs, because the way 
the sentencing circles are set up they’re at the end, after all the 
court costs have been expended. And so that’s one of the 
reasons why we’re very pleased to hear you talk about the 
family group conferencing and some of these things that we’ll 
do at the front end of a matter, rather than going right through 
the whole court process. 
 
Where the costs could be saved  and once again, it’s a bit 
difficult to know exactly  is where there are community 
alternatives, where matters are dealt with within a community, 
as opposed to incarceration. Then we do save the costs of 
locking people up in the system and all of the attendant costs of 
that. 
 



3024 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

And I’m not sure if we can actually do a calculation of that, 
other than to say that sometimes it’s hard to put a dollar value 
on a life that has been retrieved from some very difficult 
situations through the help of a community, often the 
community being their family, their teacher, their pastor, their 
neighbours who say yes, with this process we’re willing to 
come up with a community solution. 
 
And I think all of us in Saskatchewan would be very pleased if 
we could move to a system that emphasizes the offender’s 
responsibility but also the community responsibility to help, and 
that the victim is part of the process and is able to come with 
some kind of healing out of the whole thing. 
 
So we’re pleased that we’re trying to move the whole system in 
another direction. We’re also very pleased with the response 
that we get all across Saskatchewan when we talk about this. 
And if you have suggestions and ideas  because I know 
you’re specially concerned about some of these areas  I’d be 
happy to take them and see how we can add the ideas into our 
discussion. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
question I was raising  and I guess I never thought of the fact 
that the court system might have some savings there  I was 
thinking of the fact of once a sentence is arrived at and having 
gone through say, a sentencing circle rather than a judge just 
saying, well this person has been found guilty, and therefore I 
sentence you to an incarceration of say, three months or six 
months or whatever, I was thinking of the fact that based on 
what it cost for incarceration, if there’s anything that we may 
show that . . . because a person may not have been incarcerated 
but through a sentencing circle was able to understand the 
severity of the crime and how they meted out justice there. 
 
I think there possibly have been, and could have been or may 
have been, some actual dollar value savings as a result of the 
fact of not incarceration versus incarceration. And maybe you 
could respond to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  What I can say is that we estimate that it’s 
about $83 a day to keep a person in a correctional centre, an 
adult. For young offenders it’s about $140 a day because of the 
way that is set up. So those costs would clearly be saved if there 
was some alternative community sanction. And so that is a clear 
saving that is important for us as taxpayers. But I think it also 
should be emphasized that community sanctions and 
community solutions cost some money too, but they don’t cost 
nearly as much as our institutional incarceration. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Minister. And I guess that’s where 
I’m going to get to a bit of the costs, the costs that may . . . not 
all the savings may be there. And I raise that in view of a recent 
Star-Phoenix article where the headline was, “Government tall 
on talk, short on cash for native justice initiatives  judge.” 
And it talks about the fact that . . . the first line is: 
 

Provincial officials talk a good game when it comes to 
supporting aboriginal justice initiatives such as sentencing 
circles, but often neglect to back up the chatter with cash, 
says a Provincial Court judge. 

And if as I gather correctly just from the article that I’ve quoted 
from and going through the article, I think the judge here is 
bringing out the fact that while the sentencing circles have 
worked  and I think this particular individual that’s been 
involved and a number have been utilized in his jurisdiction  
the feeling I get is that a number of the aboriginal community, 
the elders that have been asked to be involved, that there 
certainly isn’t any cash or compensation for the time that they 
give towards being involved in the sentencing circles. 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if there is a program in place 
whereby there is some compensation for . . . Because I gather 
from this that sentencing circles don’t just happen in a matter of 
five or ten minutes, that they are somewhat time-consuming to 
be effective, as in the first nations community including the 
elders, is something that is necessary for them to be really 
effective. And the feeling I get from the article I read here is 
that there should be some compensation, if you will, for those 
individuals who would be involved in the community. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could 
respond based on the comments made here. Your officials may 
be aware or may not be aware of some of the concerns that have 
been raised. And I wonder if you could give a response to that, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
The Chair:  It being 1 o’clock, this committee stands 
recessed until 2 o’clock later this same day. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3025 
 June 21, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I move we report progress. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we have some 
guests up in the Speaker’s gallery who have just joined us  
Garth Shoemaker, a good friend of mine from the Kennedy area 
who is teaching up at Guernsey, along with a family, the Cook 
family from . . . And I forgot to ask exactly where. But they’ve 
joined us in the gallery for a minute and I’d like to ask the 
members to join me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
other evening we were discussing Whitespruce and a number of 
concerns with regards to addiction and addiction services in the 
province. 
 
It just so happened as we were discussing that . . . or had a 
discussion last night about addictions and the Whitespruce 
facility and what the changes that are taking place, the 
movement from . . . of the services at Whitespruce to Calder 
house, that the phone started ringing. And a gentleman phoned 
us from the Melville area and then took the time to come in this 
morning and raise some questions. 
 
And what he was . . . some of the questions he was raising, Mr. 
Minister, was the fact of the addiction services and the services 
that are currently out there to address addictions with regards to 
people. Now I understand, Mr. Minister, that while we had 
Whitespruce, and we still have it today . . . that before too long 
it’s going to be amalgamated together with Calder, that there 
are a number of organizations around the province, NGOs 
(non-governmental organizations), that are providing addiction 
services. 
 
And I believe these groups have come seeking some assistance 
to provide services . . . for addiction services within different 
districts. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister: how many of these 
affiliates do we have in the province providing addiction 
services; how many are funded; and, Mr. Minister, what is in 
place today to address some of the shortfalls in funding that is 

available, and in some cases, if I’m correct, maybe even more 
economical than what we’re currently providing through the 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The information I have is that we’re 
spending through the district health boards $6.1 million. And at 
the present time  well ‘95-96, the last complete fiscal year  
through the non-government organizations, we’re spending 
$5.58 million as follows: MACSI, which is the Metis 
Addictions Council, $1.8 million; Whitespruce, $2 million; St. 
Louis Rehabilitation Centre, $634,700; Calder Centre in-patient 
treatment, $1.1 million. 
 
And through the northern health services branch, $1.2 million. 
They provide money in turn to a variety of NGOs including 
Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, Kiyenaw Centre, Creighton ADS 
Council, Clearwater Rehabilitation Centre, Ile-a-la-Crosse 
Rehabilitation Centre, Mitho Menoo Centre, Pine Island 
Out-Patient Centre, Robert Simard Centre, and Sandy Bay 
Rehabilitation Centre. 
 
The department also funds . . . I mentioned MACSI. There’s the 
MACSI core that would be the central agency, the MACSI 
Youth Centre in Regina, the MACSI Crisis Centre in Regina, 
the MACSI Rehabilitation Centre in Regina, the MACSI 
Rehabilitation Centre in Saskatoon, the MACSI Detoxification 
Centre in Prince Albert, the MACSI Rehabilitation Centre in 
Prince Albert, SABAS (Saskatchewan Association of Boards of 
Addictions Services), and I think that would be the major 
spending by the department. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, does the AIA, or Alcoholics 
Intervention Association, get any funding or have you looked at 
helping fund some of the programing that they’re involved in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That is not a familiar name to us. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Okay, I believe . . . and the gentleman that came 
in to see me, John Persson, and his wife, Carmen, are actually 
involved in Saul Cohen, an organization in Melville that has 
provided addiction services, and in fact they’re in the present 
process right now of talking with some of the districts as far as 
working . . . putting together an addiction program that might 
be workable in a number of the districts. 
 
Mr. Persson in fact I believe did talk with you, or talked with 
your caucus health committee when you were seeking some 
input regarding addiction services and unfortunately has felt 
there really has . . . some of the suggestions brought forward 
have fallen on deaf ears. And I think you mentioned that you’re 
not familiar with them. 
 
Well the service that they provide, as I understand, is a 
treatment service working with individuals and helping them 
and in some cases even acting as a referral to individuals, 
sending them . . . referring them to Calder Centre if the type of 
service that is needed is beyond what they can do. 
 
They’re basically, at the present time, a volunteer organization 
and they’re seeking some assistance as they’re involved  



3026 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

throughout the province through small organizations, charitable 
organizations, and providing services to people with addictions 
and helping them overcome their addictions. And, Mr. Minister, 
they have suggested that they could provide as good a quality 
service as you are providing through even Calder or 
Whitespruce for in the neighbourhood of $250 per client. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if just some of this 
information has helped just jog your memory as to whether or 
not you’ve had the pleasure of meeting . . . I know your health 
committee has met with them because they indicated they had 
met with the health committee to put forward some suggestions 
as to how we develop programs to meet the needs of individuals 
facing addictions who are trying to overcome those addictions 
within our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I don’t know if the member is aware 
that as of April 1, 1995, the department transferred the funding 
for addiction prevention and treatment services to the districts. 
And groups like the one you’re referring to would go to the 
local districts, and it would be up to the districts, in addition to 
the provincial programs that I’ve referred to, to decide whether 
they wish to contract with the organization you’re referring to. 
 
And I may well have met the individual you’re referring to. I’m 
not saying I haven’t. I’m simply saying I don’t recall at this 
moment. I have certainly met with a number of people involved 
in alcohol and drug prevention and treatment services and this 
may well . . . these people may well have been at a meeting 
which I attended. But in any event, the funding has been 
transferred to the districts and that’s where such an organization 
would go for money. 
 
Mr. Toth:  That may explain, Mr. Minister, why they felt 
they got a good reception down in Weyburn at . . . and I forget 
the name of the health district. So that the fact that what you’re 
telling me right now, other than Calder and Whitespruce where 
you fund them directly, most of the funding now for addictions 
is all part of that global funding. And I guess, Mr. Minister, 
what I would suggest to you, coming back to funding, as I’ve 
talked to different health districts and talked to them about their 
funding, they have lobbied and they’ve suggested that they 
would like a global package available to them versus a package 
that says you’ve got so many dollars in this area and so many 
dollars in this area, and this is where it’s to be spent. In view of 
the changes that take place that they have no control over, they 
feel if they had access to global funding that they could 
certainly meet the needs that are out there. 
 
And I think the other day or it wasn’t . . . probably about a week 
or so ago when we discussed it last time, you gave me some 
indications that the reason you had it in place because of the 
fear that districts would move funding from community 
services into facilities and you didn’t want that. I think . . . I 
would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that many of these districts 
out there, many of the people that have been elected and 
certainly appointed to work on the districts and to meet the 
needs of the clientele within their district would have the ability 
to determine and would know, where they would get the best 
bang for their dollar. 
 

(1415) 
 
And I guess I’m quite concerned, as they are, with the fact that 
while you cut funding . . . on an annual basis you’ve indicated 
 although the federal government I think has also said, trying 
to offset some of the criticisms they’re getting, that there’ll be 
another year or two of cuts and then they’re going to increase 
some funding into health and education. 
 
I’m not sure if that’s what you’ve indicated, but it seems to me, 
Mr. Minister, a global fund gives districts and . . . giving them 
the autonomy to make the decisions that are important and need 
to be made in those districts. If you give them the autonomy 
you’ve talked about, if you gave them the global funding, you 
may find that the criticisms will help . . . (inaudible) . . . the 
feelings of anger that some people have towards the current 
health system may be offset by the fact that they have, if you 
will, some of the control that you’ve been telling us that they’ve 
been getting. 
 
And so I think, as I review it and look at the discussion we had 
this morning, if indeed districts do have that ability, if you’re 
not putting some strings attached to every little piece of 
funding, districts may be able to work with some of these 
groups to provide even a more cost-efficient and possibly even 
a better program in the area of addictions than we’ve seen and, 
in some cases, areas, don’t even have to day. 
 
So I would certainly encourage you to give districts the ability 
to have the autonomy to make the decisions that are important 
for their district. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other day I asked you for a breakdown of per 
day costs per patient in Whitespruce and Calder. Did you have a 
chance to put that together? I think I also indicated that the cost 
per patient in Whitespruce was $110 a day. I need to correct 
that because the call that came in was talking about St. Joseph’s 
facility down in Estevan. And that’s where the 110 came from. I 
found that out when I got back to my office and the note I had, 
which hadn’t been passed on to me. So I was given . . . the 
word that was used . . . or the reference to Whitespruce 
certainly wasn’t correct. 
 
But I would like to know . . . based on what Whitespruce has 
cost per day; Calder is costing per day, and to do some 
comparisons. As we see, St. Joseph’s certainly was a program 
that was offered outside of what you’re currently offering. And 
a program that, as I understand it, has been discontinued mostly 
because of the reduction in funding from the province of 
Alberta. 
 
Would you have those numbers for me today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes I do, and I’m going to ask the page to 
make a photocopy actually because I just have one copy. While 
that’s being done, I’ll say a few words about what the member 
was saying about the districts wanting to have complete 
freedom and flexibility to spend their money as they see fit. 
 
Because what I did, as a result of conversations I’ve had with 
the member and the members of the Liberal Party and some  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3027 

other people, was to, in a very open-minded way, go to the 
districts through the body that I talk to to find out what they’re 
thinking  which is the Health Districts Advisory Committee 
 which is a committee elected by the districts which meets 
with me approximately once every six weeks. 
 
And I said to them: okay, this suggestion has been made that 
there be complete freedom and flexibility in terms of spending. 
What do you think? And what came back to me from that 
committee was: no, we don’t want a change; we feel that there 
should be defined pools of spending. And the advice I got from 
the health districts themselves was not to make that kind of 
change. 
 
The page is bringing a document over which, first of all, breaks 
down the cost of renovations at the Calder Centre, which we 
were discussing last evening. And secondly, deals with the daily 
cost of treatment. As you can see, the cost per day for the 
current youth program at Whitespruce is $280 per day per 
person. At Calder it is estimated the cost will be about $180, as 
I read this. The adult program at Calder has historically been 
about $170 per day. 
 
So it does appear that the projections are that it will be cheaper, 
more cost-effective, to use the facility that exists at Calder. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information. 
That information that you’ve handed me still is somewhat 
higher than what St. Joseph’s was offering. But if districts do 
have the ability now to implement an addiction program within 
their district, they have that opportunity, they may be able to 
look at the programs like the AIA program and certainly 
implement it in their district to provide a service that may not be 
there. And then continue to use the fact that if a client that may 
come to them seeking some help is of a . . . needs a greater level 
service and then they could refer . . . act as a referral to the 
Calder centre. 
 
Mr. Minister, another concern that was raised, and I’d like to 
ask you about this, is the fact that affiliate health centres are 
members of SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), or . . . (inaudible) . . . to be . . . some members 
pay memberships to SAHO but as I understand today, are not 
given a vote or even allowed to be on the board of SAHO. Is 
that true? And if it is, why is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That question is not something that is 
determined by myself or the government or the Department of 
Health. It is a question that is determined internally within 
SAHO. 
 
SAHO, as the member will know, is a volunteer organization as 
opposed to a statutory organization. There used to be three 
organizations. I think the . . . Oh, there is a statutory basis for it. 
But there was a Saskatchewan hospitals association, a nursing 
home association, something else, a home care association, but 
they determine their own procedure in this regard. That is not 
determined as a result of any statute. 
 
And so the member may have a valid point. I wouldn’t 
comment one way or another because it’s a decision internal to  

SAHO. But if the member’s point is valid, then it should be 
taken up by some of the members of SAHO, within SAHO, and 
the rules would be changed at that level. They would not be 
changed as a result of anything that I would do. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. Basically 
what you’re saying then is for them to, because they are 
members, paying members, and are not allowed a voice or an 
ability to vote at SAHO, then what they need to do is go to 
SAHO. 
 
But if they’re not allowed a voice or a vote, how do they make 
their case to SAHO about the fact that here they’re being asked 
as members to pay a membership fee but they don’t have that 
ability to be elected to the board or to have representation and 
vote? What process would they follow to gather . . . or to gain 
that opportunity, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  My understanding is that the affiliates can 
be members of SAHO and they can vote at SAHO. What they 
cannot do is they cannot be members of the board of SAHO. 
 
I further understand that at the last annual meeting of SAHO, a 
motion came forward to change this, perhaps in the manner in 
which the member is suggesting. And that motion was defeated 
by the members of SAHO. I believe the motion was to allow 
them to be on the board, to create positions that they would 
occupy on the board. That motion was defeated, but this is . . . 
the way they would raise the matter is the way they have raised 
the matter, by taking it to the organization of SAHO and the 
matter would then be determined by democratic vote at that 
meeting. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well unfortunately, Mr. Minister, it almost 
appears that SAHO has become another arm of government. 
And the fact that they would choose to not allow . . . they would 
certainly encourage and welcome memberships and take the 
money but have made a decision not to allow these affiliate 
members to have a voice on the board. 
 
But you’re telling me they can vote. The individuals I talked to 
said they don’t have a vote. In fact Mr. Persson mentioned he 
was at SAHO, at the last annual meeting of SAHO, and really 
didn’t get an opportunity to get involved and just felt that he 
was on the outside looking in. And he was talking in regards to 
St. Paul’s and St. Peter’s and their affiliation with SAHO so I 
guess I’ll have to suggest to Mr. Persson that he certainly 
contact other affiliates and maybe they go there as one body to 
SAHO to indeed ask for and demand that if they are members, 
that they have equal opportunity on the board of SAHO and in 
regards to the input into the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations. 
 
Mr. Minister, unless you’ve got a response to that, I’m going to 
move on to another area of discussion and debate because 
certainly the argument, as we’ve been discussing, it is between 
the affiliates and SAHO, and I think it’s appropriate that they 
take that argument and as an organization and a group that they 
approach SAHO on that. 
 
Coming to the health centres here in the city of Regina and  



3028 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

certainly the Plains Health Centre is an issue that has been on 
the minds of people. In fact it’s interesting, Mr. Minister, just 
before we came back into the session this afternoon, I was 
talking to a couple from the Moosomin area, and a gentleman 
who ended up in hospital with a couple of operations as a result 
of a diagnosis of cancer. And I understand he’s come along 
very well and is actually doing quite well. 
 
His wife happens to be a nurse, and he had his operations in the 
Plains Health Centre and all her comment to me was: don’t talk 
to me about that has-been health centre. Health is a touchy 
subject on her mind as a professional within the system. 
 
What I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what has been spent to date 
in the city of Regina on health . . . on construction to the 
General and Pasqua hospitals to bring them up to speed to pick 
up the load that is going to be left to them once the Plains 
Health Centre is closed? And what will be the . . . or is 
anticipated as being the total cost of the construction? And is 
the construction to date on target as far as cost? Because the 
total cost, what you anticipate . . . maybe you can say, well it’s 
. . . we’re down the road a few years yet and we’re anticipating 
a certain amount of money. 
 
But if today the amount you’ve spent happens to be somewhat 
higher than what you anticipated, it’s just an indication that 
your project is going to come in well over budget. So I’d like to 
know what you’ve spent to date; what the anticipated cost is; 
whether the expenditures to date are within the expected budget 
or the planned budget that was laid out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The information I have is that the total cost 
to rationalize acute care services in Regina at the General and 
Pasqua will be $83.2 million. The provincial contribution will 
be that same amount. The estimated completion date will be 
December of 1999, and to date approximately $15.7 million has 
been paid. And I’m advised that this amount is on target in the 
sense that that’s what they would have expected to have done 
and to have paid as at the present time. 
 
And just . . . this wasn’t asked by the member, but just to avoid 
confusion, I should also indicate that there is a project at the 
Allan Blair cancer clinic which will eventually cost $9.5 
million, of which the province will pay $8.5 million. That is the 
Cancer Foundation as distinct from the Regina Health District, 
but I mention that just because I believe the Allan Blair cancer 
clinic is attached to the Pasqua Hospital so it is also within the 
city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, what happens to the Plains once it 
is closed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That is not known as of the present time. 
The Plains is not scheduled to close until 1998, so there is some 
time, probably around two years at least, to determine a use for 
the Plains. And I believe that the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, as with Whitespruce, will be 
assuming responsibility, as the owner of the facility, to find 
parties that may be interested in using it. 
 
I believe also there are some problems with the structure of the  

Plains, among them, fire code requirements and asbestos, to 
name two. And so any use of the Plains will have to take into 
account any problems there also are with the facility. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, is there any construction currently 
taking place at the Plains? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that there are no capital 
projects that have been undertaken at the Plains that the 
province would have funded, but that the Regina District Health 
Board may have done some renovations in the Plains in 
connection with consolidating some of their financial services. 
 
That would be something that the Regina district would pay for. 
We do not know the amount of money they have spent. Any 
relatively minor renovations they have done would have been 
done by them, not with provincial money and not with 
provincial approval. 
 
Mr. Toth:  The reason I raise that, Mr. Minister, is because I 
had the occasion of, about three months ago, going to visit a 
patient in the Plains. And I went up, I believe it was the 10th or 
11th floor; I don’t remember exactly now. It was on one of the 
floors where heart trauma cases are. And I was going down the 
hall and I believe it was CSU (cardiac surveillance unit) unit. 
Could be no. 10. 
 
But anyway I noticed that the two wings were kind of dark, and 
that’s the first time I’d seen that. And so I asked at the desk, 
what’s going on? Why are these wings . . . are these wings 
already closed? And the nurses were somewhat indignant and 
they said, well take a walk down the hall and see what you 
think. And there was a fair bit of work being going on. 
 
And I think I saw your deputy minister, Mr. Adams, talk about 
asbestos being a problem. I didn’t notice any asbestos being 
removed from the facility, but certainly some walls have been 
knocked out; they had been doing construction; they were 
upgrading. And like you say, it may be to do with some office 
. . . it sounded to me like they were doing some office space. 
 
So I think the concern by the staff there was, here we are, we’re 
told this place isn’t fit to live in, and we’ve got construction 
going on around us that’s probably going to provide office 
space, and so it just doesn’t jibe with some of the concerns that 
were raised. 
 
And it seems to me that when the discussion and the debate was 
being undertaken as far as the workability of the Plains Health 
Centre, the concerns for health care and health conditions was 
one of the top subjects that was most important. And certainly 
asbestos problems was a problem that was being associated 
with the reasons to shut down the Plains Health Centre. 
 
So I guess what I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is while on the one 
hand we talk about we need to shut this facility down because 
it’s costing us too much, it’s quite obvious, Mr. Minister  
whether or not your department is involved in any of the 
construction or any of the work  the facts are, if it’s the  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3029 

Regina District Health Board, they’re taking provincial funds to 
upgrade a facility that on one hand you say should be closed, 
and possibly they’re looking at ways of saying, well it’s sitting 
here, it’s still structurally sound, we may as well make some use 
of it, Mr. Minister. And those are the concerns. Those are the 
issues out there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to revise the answer I gave you a 
few moments ago because it may not be completely accurate. 
I’m advised that what may have happened, although we don’t 
seem to know exactly what happened, is that when you engage 
in the process of doing the reconstruction at the Pasqua and the 
General hospitals, the result of that reconstruction, which we 
are paying for, is that some of the people in those places have to 
be moved around to accommodate the construction at the 
Pasqua and the General. 
 
And one of the places they may use to accomplish that objective 
is the Plains Health Centre. So that it’s possible, contrary to 
what I said a few moments ago, that when we fund the general 
package, that is the construction project going on in Regina, the 
Towards 2000 project, that some of the money we use to fund 
that which goes to the district, may then be used to pay for 
renovations at the Plains and perhaps some other matters as a 
result of the construction going on at the Pasqua and the 
General. 
 
So it’s quite possible that while we would not have specifically 
approved, if you will, this renovation at the Plains, and while 
we may not have specifically funded it, it may be sort of a 
logical consequence of what we have approved, that is the 
construction project going on in Regina. And the construction 
we’ve approved and that we are funding may displace some 
people that are being put temporarily in the Plains, and 
provincial money may indirectly be going into that kind of work 
at the Plains. 
 
Mr. Toth:  It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that even if 
you have to move some patients around just to start knocking 
some walls out and rearrange or redo some rooms, one would 
have to ask why, especially if you’re not exactly sure what’s 
going to be done with that facility down the road . . . To spend 
any money in there if the rooms are adequate enough right now 
to house patients, maybe it would have been appropriate just to 
leave the rooms as they were. 
 
In some cases, I believe they were knocking walls out between 
rooms and making them a little larger where they could 
accommodate two or three individuals for observation, or 
certainly they could be turned into office space. And I think 
what I saw was more . . . looked like it could be more for the 
use of office space. 
 
So these are just some of the issues, some of the concerns that 
come to the forefront, as the whole debate regarding acute care 
beds and the closure of the Plains health care centre versus 
construction to the General and the Pasqua in Regina . . . 
 
Once everything is said and done, Mr. Minister, as we go to the 
year 2000, all the construction is complete, the Plains Health 
Centre is closed down, what are the anticipated available acute  

care beds in the city of Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The Regina district anticipates having 
about 730 beds. 
 
Mr. Toth:  What does the district have to date, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  As of right now, they are operating 735 
beds. 
 
Mr. Toth:  And what did they have in 1991? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Approximately 1,040. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I noticed at a meeting held in . . . it 
was the Saskatchewan Medical Association’s spring meeting. 
You had spoken to the doctors at that time. And a comment 
coming out of that meeting from the doctors was about 
waiting-lists being too long. The article goes  and this is the 
Star-Phoenix, but it doesn’t say exactly where the meeting was 
held. I think it was held in Saskatoon: 
 

While dollars for health care go down, waiting lists go up 
and patients’ health is getting worse, doctors told 
Saskatchewan’s minister of health Friday. 
 
Dr. Ron Ailsby of Regina said people’s health is 
deteriorating while they wait for surgery, particularly 
orthopedic surgery. 
 
“As the funding goes down and down, the waiting-list goes 
up.” 
 
But Cline said the wait for surgery has improved, except in 
certain areas, such as orthopedic and eye surgery. 
 
“And gynaecology”, shouted one doctor. 

 
Mr. Minister, that is one of the concerns we continually have in 
the province, is the waiting-lists. I think we’ve talked about it 
before. You’ve referred to it; you continually refer to the fact 
that they’re supposedly going down and going down in a 
number of areas or the waiting-lists aren’t quite as long. 
 
I guess the concern that I have, Mr. Minister, and the concern 
that people have across the province, is any waiting-list 
whatsoever is a major problem, especially if you happen to be 
facing the possibility of quite a serious disease or a disease that 
may be spreading on you that could be addressed by an earlier 
surgery, and the fact that you happen to be going into a surgery 
where there happens to be a longer waiting-list than others, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So it appears to me that while you tried to tell the doctors that 
waiting-lists had gone down, they weren’t quite believing you. 
And I think people across the province of Saskatchewan may 
tend to view physicians and the services they are able to provide 
with a little more credibility than the Minister of Health. 
 
And also, when I talk to people in my area  and I know a  



3030 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

couple of individuals right now who are on waiting-lists for 
surgery  the concern is, while they struggle with their disease 
or with the problem that they’re facing, every day that surgery is 
put off it just means one more day that they have to deal with 
either pain or the uncertainty of what their future may be. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what is your government presently doing to 
address the waiting-lists that are in place? And if the 
waiting-lists are as a result of a number of individuals leaving 
the profession, in some cases specialists leaving the province to 
go to other areas, what are you doing to try and encourage 
medical personnel to come to this province, to continue to 
practise or practise in the specialty that they have taken, or the 
courses and the education that they have taken to give them this 
specialty? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I want to correct some inaccuracies in 
what the member is saying. I agree with the member that 
waiting-lists are always a problem. They’ve been a problem for 
decades and they’re a problem in each province. We are not 
actually losing specialists in Saskatchewan. The number of 
specialists practising here has been relatively stable. We’re not 
losing physicians. The number of physicians practising here is 
relatively stable. 
 
We do have a problem in terms of the distribution of general 
practitioners sometimes in some areas in the province, always I 
think in rural Saskatchewan and smaller towns where we have 
pockets of problems in terms of retaining physicians. But 
overall the numbers are relatively constant. 
 
The member is not correct, that when I met with the doctors in 
Regina, not Saskatoon, that the doctors contradicted me when I 
said that the waiting-lists had improved. The doctors did not 
contradict me except in one particular. I said to the doctors that 
the waiting-lists had improved in Saskatchewan except in the 
area of orthopedic surgery and eye surgery. The doctors 
corrected me by saying that also they had not improved in the 
area of gynecology. But when the member says that the doctors, 
generally speaking disagreed with me, that’s not correct. The 
doctors did not disagree with me. 
 
The areas where we have longer waiting-lists than we would 
like, the orthopedic and the eye surgery, are also areas where 
there have been dramatic increases in the numbers of people 
who are getting those procedures. For example, over the last 10 
years there has been an 82 per cent increase in the number of 
joint replacements that are being done, so that almost twice as 
many people are undergoing joint replacements. 
 
(1445) 
 
It’s true that the waiting-list has not got shorter; on the other 
hand, almost twice as many people are being served. In the 
same period there has been a 315 per cent increase in 
ophthalmology, in other words people getting their cataracts 
removed and other services. 
 
We’re doing far more of those services in Saskatchewan now 
than we have ever done before by far, and as a result of the 
demand and the number of services that are being done, which  

has tripled in 10 years, the waiting-lists are a little longer. And 
we always have to constantly work to try to improve that 
situation. There’s no question about it. 
 
But I would say to the member, and I think the member knows, 
that if you went back to the Hansard, the proceedings of this 
legislature, to the 1960s or the 1970s or the 1980s, what you 
would find, and I can remember this, always reading the paper 
as a younger person, waiting-lists have always been a political 
football. 
 
In the 1970s the opposition would stand up and say that 
waiting-lists were a big problem. I suspect when my party was 
in opposition in the ‘80s and you were in government, the 
opposition would get up and say waiting-lists are a big problem. 
The fact is . . . And now today the opposition says waiting-lists 
are a big problem. As long as anybody waits any length of time 
at all for surgery, then it is a problem in fact. And I agree with 
the member in that regard and we constantly have to try to make 
it better and make the waiting-lists reasonable. 
 
I would say to the member that the waiting-lists we have in 
Saskatchewan are comparable with the rest of the country, and 
in many cases better. That has been borne out by independent 
studies including the annual review that the Fraser Institute 
does. 
 
We do have a few problem areas that we should try to work on. 
I know that when my wife had to get arthroscopic surgery on 
her knee a few years ago, which was elective surgery, she, you 
know, had to wait seven months to go into the hospital for her 
arthroscopic surgery. And that was just the way it was. 
 
But that is not a new situation. It is not unique to Saskatchewan. 
There are more surgeries being done than before. We can 
always do better and we in the health districts will strive to do 
better. But nevertheless we have a pretty good health system 
even with some waiting-lists in our province. And in many 
ways, we are the envy of the world. 
 
We complain a lot about what we have in Canada and 
Saskatchewan and we complain about the health care system. 
Everybody’s interested in the health care system, and in some 
ways we’re all experts in the health care system. But the fact is 
at the end of the day, when you really analyse the system 
reasonably and fairly, it’s a pretty darn good system which we 
should be very grateful to have. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, your reference to what was 
possibly there in the ’70s and certainly was there in the ‘80s, 
it’s maybe a little unfortunate that I don’t have the same 
abilities that Ms. Simard and some of the present members had 
when they were sitting on this side of the Assembly, to give you 
some of the venomous attack that we used to get. And I think 
some of your officials were even here at that time, had to sit and 
absorb some of that. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when we look at waiting-lists, certainly there 
are different fields where waiting-lists tend to be a little longer. 
And I agree with you. Maybe what I could ask, Mr. Minister,  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3031 

what is being done to provide services outside of say, the 
Regina, Saskatoon’s? Because I do know that when it comes to 
some of the orthopedic surgery, there are some of the smaller 
centres that actually have excellent service in that area . . . of 
providing excellent care. And is there . . . I don’t think the 
Health department wants to give the appearance that they’re 
giving preference. 
 
I know that a number of individuals I’ve talked to, certainly 
even in my communities, have suggested that to some of the 
individuals, while they were referred to specialists in Regina, 
they were on what were six- to nine-month waiting-lists. I 
suggested that they take a look at Yorkton with the quality 
service that was available for orthopedic surgery there. And I 
find that as individuals have done that, certainly they found that 
they’ve been basically referred, and actually had their surgery, 
in some cases within four to six weeks. 
 
So is there any movement within the department in addressing 
some of the waiting-lists that . . . on the basis of the fact that the 
waiting-list may be a little longer in one facility over another 
one. And maybe encouraging or letting people know that they 
could probably get this procedure a little quicker over here. 
That the service is available and they could certainly seek out 
the professional help at another facility such as the Yorkton’s. 
 
And I’m not sure what the, say the Moose Jaw’s and the North 
Battleford’s provide as far as elective surgeries, but is there any 
attempt being made to address some of the waiting-lists in that 
matter by having . . . I guess you’d probably have to work 
through some of the local clinics, letting them know that this 
waiting-list is quite long here, but here’s an avenue that may be 
pursued by you and by your patient. Are you doing that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The member raises a very good point and 
it’s a subject that I have a great deal of interest in. And in fact 
we are trying to, in cooperation with the health districts, 
encourage the notion that to the extent surgery could be done 
outside the major centres, that it should be. 
 
So that you get some of the cataract surgery done now for 
example in North Battleford, where they also so some 
orthopedic surgery. And that relieves some of the pressure in 
Saskatoon where the waiting-list is particularly long. 
 
We also have itinerant surgery. We have surgeons going to 
places like Tisdale and Nipawin and elsewhere, performing 
laparoscopic surgery. And we have speciality services in places 
like Yorkton and other centres where a variety of surgeries are 
carried out. 
 
And sometimes people think that it is the goal of the 
government, in changing the health care system, to centralize 
the surgeries in some of the larger centres. And actually that is 
not the goal of the government and it’s not something that 
either the government or the larger centres desire, because the 
problem in the larger centres . . . what they’re saying is they’ve 
got too many people coming in for their surgeries and what we 
would like to see is more surgery done in the smaller centres. 
So we want to reverse the trend. 

What I have done is I have asked the department to set up a 
working group of departmental people and medical people to 
look into the issue and try to examine ways that we could have 
more surgery done in some of the smaller centres. And I’ve also 
been talking to some of the surgeons and the faculty of the 
College of Medicine about how we might achieve this. I’ve 
been receiving some suggestions from some of the medical 
people and I’m hoping that sometime this year I’ll be receiving 
a report from a working group that we have which will perhaps 
shed some light on how we might do even more of what we’ve 
been trying to do, which is to increase the level of surgery in the 
smaller centres. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, another 
concern that’s been raised by the physicians is regarding the 
debate that is taking place right now or has been ongoing with 
regards to how physicians and medical professionals are paid, 
and the suggestion that there may be more of a move towards 
salaried positions. And SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) has indicated that they would certainly like to be 
involved and they feel they should be. They have an active, a 
very active, role to play within the delivery of health in our 
health system. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister  I raised this question a 
couple of weeks ago  if you can kind of bring us up to date 
whether or not the SMA has been included as an active partner, 
if you will, or group of individuals involved in the ongoing 
discussions as to how physician services are covered in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  There are no discussions occurring at the 
provincial level per se at the moment, in the sense that we 
haven’t set up any kind of process to look into this issue. 
 
The process that has been ongoing up till now has been a 
national process set up by the ministers of Health from across 
the country. And there has been a national forum meeting in 
Saskatoon fairly recently where certainly the SMA was 
represented by its executive director, Dr. Briane Scharfstein, 
and I believe the college of physicians and surgeons was 
represented by Dr. Dennis Kendel. 
 
I have certainly discussed with the board of the SMA, the issue 
of physician remuneration. And they have given me, in an 
informal way, the benefit of their views with respect to certain 
subjects like capitation as opposed to salary, as opposed to 
service contracts. But at the provincial level we don’t have any 
formal process going on at the present time. We’ve simply had 
informal discussions. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, have you been in contact with the 
Wilkie mayor regarding the future of the Wilkie Hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  My understanding is that a variety of 
services are going to continue to be provided in Wilkie; that the 
hospital is being converted into a health centre. 
 
Mr. Toth:  The question was, Mr. Minister, have you been in 
contact with the mayor of Wilkie regarding the future of the 
Wilkie Hospital? 



3032 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I’ve spoken by telephone with the 
mayor of Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Toth:  And what was discussed, Mr. Minister. And will 
you as well speak to the head of the health board about the 
decisions, or any decisions, that were reached? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The mayor telephoned me to see if I was 
aware of the decisions that had been made by the Greenhead 
Health District. And I advised the mayor that I was, and we 
discussed our respective understandings of what the health 
district had decided. 
 
I don’t intend to intervene in terms of arguing with the health 
board or the mayor one way or another with respect to what the 
configuration of health facilities in the district should be. I do 
think that is a district decision. 
 
I know the member feels that somehow when I say that I am 
evading responsibility. I say to the member, as I did last night, 
that I’m not evading responsibility and if it makes the member 
feel better to say that the decision is my fault, then the member 
may say that. 
 
But I do say that it is a decision taken by the district health 
board, admittedly as a result of the budgetary pressures that they 
are under. I accept the blame if the member wishes to assign it. 
I don’t intend to interfere in the process. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not my intentions to 
assess blame in this situation. There’s some questions that have 
been raised directly and that’s what I’m raising with you right 
now and a note that said, “Ask now.” So obviously somebody’s 
called about it. 
 
We’ve been told that the districts are planning to move 
everything from the long-term facility in Wilkie. Is that your 
understanding, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That is not my understanding. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, many of the services you listed 
during question period will not be available in Wilkie. Are you 
aware of this fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  My understanding is as I have been advised 
by the district health board, as is indicated in the press release 
that came out from the district health board and as I have 
indicated in the House. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you talk about a press release and 
maybe you could forward a copy of the press release . . . or I 
don’t remember seeing one on it. I don’t know if it was in the 
local papers here or the dailies here in the large centres. But 
maybe I would appreciate a copy of that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I have a copy of the press release and 
I will send it over to the member. As I indicated to the mayor 
when I spoke to him, as Minister of Health, I have to go on the 
basis of what the district health board has told me. And 
although the mayor indicated to me that he did not necessarily  

agree with what the district health board said in their press 
release, what the news release that I’ve been provided with 
says, and I’ll read it to you and you’ve got it so you can follow 
along: 
 

Services that will be provided in the health centre once 
conversion takes place are as follows (so I note that it says, 
services that will be provided in the health centre): 
emergency services, radiology, palliative care, observation, 
alcohol and drug services, public health, occupational 
therapy, wellness clinics for diabetes, heart health and 
cholesterol (among other things, I suppose), laboratory, 
out-patient services, dietician services, home care, mental 
health services, physiotherapy, and youth services. 
 

(1500) 
 
And when I was speaking to the mayor I indicated that this had 
been indicated to the public by the board, also indicated to me, 
and that I had to, on the basis of this release, accept what the 
board said  that they intended to have these services in their 
health centre. 
 
As I understood what the mayor of Wilkie said to me in our 
telephone conversation, he had difficulty believing that all of 
these services would be made available in the health centre. I 
explained to the mayor that this is what I had been told by the 
health district; that the health district had also publicly 
represented this in their news release and that I certainly had to 
go on the basis of what I was told. 
 
Some concern was also expressed that long-term care services 
would not be provided in Wilkie. I explained to the mayor that 
no such decision had been communicated to me and I had to go 
on the basis of the decisions that were actually made by the 
Greenhead Health District, and those decisions, as 
communicated to me, are as I am stating them to you now and 
as I have stated them in the House before. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, have you spoken to the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the health district or will you speak to the 
CEO of the health district in regards to your understanding of 
what their press release says and what will be available in the 
new health district . . . What do they call it here? Community 
services centre, I think is what it is  but I may be wrong. I just 
can’t quite pick it out right now  to ensure that, as you 
understand it and as you’ve talked to the mayor, that these 
services are indeed part of what the intentions of the health 
district are, to continue to provide services to the community 
once the hospital is officially closed in Wilkie? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t think I can usefully add to what I 
have said to the member, other than no, I don’t intend to talk to 
the CEO of the health district. I do intend to ask the Department 
of Health to ask the district to please clarify to the mayor of 
Wilkie what it is they intend to offer in Wilkie. Because there 
seems to be some confusion about that and I would like that to 
be clarified. 
 
I do not intend to do so personally but there are other people 
that can work with the people in Wilkie to clarify what is, I  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3033 

think, a relatively simple matter, and that is simply to let 
everybody know and understand what services will and will not 
be provided. 
 
But the information that I have received is quite clear. If there’s 
some confusion, I will ask the department to ask the health 
district to please attempt to clear that confusion up with 
whoever may be in doubt as to what services the district intends 
to provide. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last fall I 
was approached by an individual, and actually a couple of 
individuals afterwards, regarding immunization for, I believe it 
was measles and . . . rubella? Does that sound correct? I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, what has been done by the 
department? The concern that was raised was the fact that there 
are many individuals around this province who have only 
received the single immunization for rubella. And I think what 
had spurred on the debate is the fact that, I believe in Ontario 
there was an outbreak of measles. And the feeling that just a 
single immunization program may not meet all the needs and 
hold rubella in check, and Ontario had gone into a second 
immunization program. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, where we are in the province of 
Saskatchewan today regarding this program? Who will be able 
to . . . if you have implemented a program of immunization, 
who will be getting the immunization? And if that 
immunization may not cover older teens in the family, whether 
or not individuals can indeed apply for and purchase the drug 
and have immunization for their families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, in this budget the sum of $124,000 
has been allocated to this process starting in the fall of 1996, in 
other words, this fall. Grades 6 and 8 and school-entry students 
will receive a measles-rubella vaccine as a modified catch-up 
program. We are approaching the matter in a manner that will 
allow us to not only eliminate measles but also rubella and 
ultimately mumps as well. 
 
So what is being done by other provinces, while the programs 
vary from province to province, is going to be done here as 
well. And as a result of the vaccination program this fall, it’s 
thought that we will eliminate measles and rubella and mumps. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I understood or I heard you to say 
Grade 6 and Grade 8. What happens to Grade 7? Or did you 
mean Grade 6, 7, and 8, and then it just . . . and from then on in 
it would be say . . . every grade 6 would get the immunization 
program? Is that what you meant to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that is what I meant to say. The way 
the immunization is done, it is done with selected years. In this 
case, the 6 and 8, and the grade 7’s would get the vaccination 
next year when they’re in grade 8. And the grade 5’s next year 
when they’re in grade 6 and so on. And also the students as they 
enter school are vaccinated. And the advice I have is that this is 
the way vaccination programs work; that you select children of 
certain ages and each year the children of those ages are 
vaccinated and eventually the children are all vaccinated as they 
go through school. 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, what about the question of 
individuals who are, say, grade 9, 10, 11 right now; they’ve 
only had one immunization, the opportunity to be immunized 
once; is there a program to address the concern there? 
 
If not, Mr. Minister, as this individual has indicated, they had 
the ability to purchase a hepatitis B vaccine for their son and 
they’re wondering whether or not they could purchase now the 
vaccine that would address the concerns of mumps, measles, 
and rubella for their son as well so that that individual then has 
the double immunization program . . . has received that 
program. Is that available, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that, given the number of cases 
of measles we have in Saskatchewan, which is seven in 1995, 
that the experts in epidemiology feel that it’s not necessary to 
vaccinate the grades higher than grade 8; that the program that 
they’re undertaking  and of course our program has been 
developed on the basis of professional advice  is sufficient to 
eliminate measles. 
 
Certainly if someone feels that they want vaccination for an 
older child, that vaccination would be available, although I 
think there would be a fee for it. It is not felt necessary in 
Saskatchewan to have vaccination at other ages. 
 
Mr. Toth:  What about if a parent is concerned and feels that 
they would like to just take a preventative measure? Is it 
possible to purchase a vaccine, as this individual indicated they 
were able to purchase the vaccine for hepatitis B? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, they could purchase the vaccine. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Who would they go to, Mr. Minister? Would they 
just go to their local public health nurse? Is that the contact that 
would be made? Would they have the ability then to get the 
vaccine and provide it to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. The district health boards, 
through their public health programs, would provide the 
vaccine, and certainly the local public health nurse, if she or he 
could not provide the vaccine, would be able to tell them where 
to obtain the vaccine. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, an ongoing question that keeps 
coming up: number one, how much funding goes into Planned 
Parenthood, if any, from your department. I’d like to know what 
that number is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We do not fund Planned Parenthood 
directly. They do receive indirectly, public monies. We fund the 
Advisory Committee on Family Planning. And in 1995-96, and 
actually going back to ‘93-94 up to the present fiscal year, the 
funding to the Advisory Committee on Family Planning is 
$273,700. And they in turn, as I understand it, provide funding 
in the form of a grant to Planned Parenthood, although at the 
moment I don’t believe I have the number that goes to Planned 
Parenthood. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I guess the concern that is raised, Mr. Minister, is 
the fact that Planned Parenthood actually is getting some 



3034 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

funding and yet there are other organizations out there in the 
past that have provided information to young people and to 
families about alternatives to . . . especially in the area of sex 
education and healthy lifestyles. And as a result of changes in 
the government, they aren’t getting any funding. 
 
And I can remember the debate that took place in the ‘80s and 
the fact when the Pro-Life organization finally received some 
funding because Planned Parenthood had always . . . 
continually being funded, and then the removal totally of any 
funding to any of these organizations and allowing them to live 
on their own. And now we see Planned Parenthood has found a 
way to access funding again. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Minister, if we’re talking about equality and 
talking about treating everyone equally, that it would seem 
fitting, if the Advisory Committee on Family Planning feels that 
it’s appropriate to put some funding towards Planned 
Parenthood, why wouldn’t they, at the same time, fund the 
Pro-Life organizations, and if they don’t see that’s appropriate 
then why would they fund Planned Parenthood? Let Planned 
Parenthood make it on their own, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I said to the member, we do not fund 
Planned Parenthood. We fund the Advisory Committee on 
Family Planning. 
 
I’m not sure whether the Advisory Committee on Family 
Planning actually gives money to Planned Parenthood or not. 
I’m not going to say that they do not, because I’m saying I’m 
just not sure. We have not been advised of that, according to the 
departmental officials. 
 
The officials tell me that Planned Parenthood receives its 
money through fund-raising. I know the United Way in 
Saskatoon gives money to Planned Parenthood in Saskatoon. 
And perhaps there is a federal grant that they receive. 
 
I don’t want to say to the member that none of the money that 
the Advisory Committee on Family Planning gets, goes to 
Planned Parenthood because I’m not absolutely sure of that. 
But the advice I have is that we’re . . . at the same time, we’re 
not sure that any of that money ends up in the hands of Planned 
Parenthood. I’ll certainly look into this further and provide the 
member with a more definitive answer, but we don’t believe 
that we’re funding Planned Parenthood. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
would be pleased if you would undertake to just check and see 
how the $273,000 to the Advisory Committee on Family 
Planning is spent. 
 
And if indeed, Mr. Minister, as you’ve indicated, because 
you’re not sure today that Planned Parenthood doesn’t receive 
any public funds, then I would certainly concur with the fact 
that that, I believe, is appropriate. Because if . . . but however if 
they are then it’s a . . . We’re going to have groups like Pro-Life 
saying, well if Planned Parenthood gets on one side indirectly 
from government, then why don’t we have that opportunity? 

So I’d be pleased to see where the Advisory Committee on 
Family Planning puts their money  what it does with its 
money; who gets the funds. And I just, as I indicated earlier, 
Mr. Minister, would just suggest to you that most people have a 
strong feeling that if one organization should get any funds, 
whether directly or indirectly from government, then another 
organization that provides an alternate form of advice to 
individuals should have the same access to at least the same 
amount of funds. 
 
If there aren’t any funds going to one or the other, and they’re 
living off their ability to raise funds on their own, then people 
certainly agree with that and I can concur with that. So I’d be 
pleased, Mr. Minister, if you could get us that information. 
 
Mr. Minister, another concern that is being raised a fair bit 
lately, and I’m just . . . I don’t know how much funding goes 
into research in the province of Saskatchewan or from the 
Department of Health, whether there is any amounts of money 
goes into specific areas of research. 
 
And the reason I raise that, I was reading a couple of articles, 
and I think the concern and the suggestion is being made that 
we hear about the number of dollars going into AIDS (acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome) research and AIDS funding. And 
yet I read an article in the . . . out of a medicine magazine that 
talks about . . . and the headline says, “The AIDS funding 
disparity.” And it talks about government spending in millions. 
 
And in this case I’m going to be talking about federal dollars. 
The information I have here is federal dollars. And they talk 
about in 1993, the federal government, in spending, spent 3.8 
million in cardiovascular disease research, while at the same 
time there were 78,894 deaths. On breast cancer, $4 million was 
spent in research, while at that time there were 4,779 deaths as a 
result of breast cancer. And the staggering amount here is the 
amount spent by the federal government on AIDS research is 
$43.4 million, and there are 1,245 individuals who had died of 
the disease in 1993. And I’m sure those numbers have changed 
quite dramatically. 
 
I think what it shows, Mr. Minister, is that it certainly appears 
that the individuals or the groups that can lobby the hardest tend 
to get the largest sums of dollars. And when you look at the 
numbers of people that are affected by some of the other 
diseases, it certainly creates a question as to why. 
 
You would think that there would be at least some equality 
because heart disease is something that each and every one of 
us faces. Not everyone is going to face the problem of AIDS if 
they live appropriately, or provided they don’t happen to have 
to come and have a blood transfusion. If we’ve got all that 
cleared up with regards to the Red Cross and the way we collect 
blood, we may be protected in that way as well. 
 
But I think it’s important, Mr. Minister, that we look at . . . and 
dollars not be allocated simply because you’ve got a major 
lobby group on your hands lobbying and saying, well this is 
such a dreadful disease. Yes, it is. AIDS is a dreadful disease. 
No one wants to come in contact with or even have . . . contact 
AIDS. Just having observed and having talked to people who  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3035 

are living with it and observed what . . . read articles about what 
the AIDS does to a person, I wouldn’t wish it on anyone, even 
. . . I would say even my worst enemy, I guess. But it’s not 
something that you think . . . talk lightly of. 
 
But the thing is, Mr. Minister, in this province there are women 
. . . we’ve got a study going on right now trying to address how 
we can maybe combat breast cancer for women. And the 
majority of that is for women. And it’s a problem that people 
run into on a day-to-day basis versus say the AIDS problem or 
heart disease. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I don’t know if there’s any funding on the 
provincial level into any of this research but it would seem to 
me that we should certainly be getting to our federal 
counterparts and indicating that as we’re putting funding into 
research, the funding should at least be in association with the 
number of deaths or the percentage of cases or problems that 
we face in the country. And maybe this is something that you 
could pass on to your counterpart in Ottawa that would take a 
serious look at how we’re funding some of this research. 
 
And I guess one would argue that we’ve had research into 
cardiovascular disease for so many years, AIDS is such a new 
disease that that’s why it’s getting the majority of funding, but I 
think there’s certainly some disparities here that need to be 
corrected. And I would encourage you and your department at 
least to address some of the disparities with regards to the 
funding in relation to the number of cases that we have and 
certainly the deaths associated with the different diseases as 
I’ve listed them here. 
 
And I know there are many other diseases out there, like 
multiple sclerosis and some of these others, that are tragic 
diseases as well. But I think we need to take a look at how we 
fund these and I’ll give you an opportunity to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, first let me say that I’m advised that 
the Advisory Committee on Family Planning does not actually 
fund Planned Parenthood and I think what I have to get to the 
member in terms of more information is where the money from 
the Advisory Committee on Family Planning actually is spent. 
And so I’ll ask the officials to prepare something in that regard. 
 
In answer to the member’s question about provincial research 
spending from the Department of Health, it is a total of $4.056 
million. And it goes 2.1 million to the Health Services 
Utilization and Research Commission; $1.2 million to the 
Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine; $563,000 to 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation; and $200,000 to the 
Centre for Agricultural Medicine, College of Medicine. 
 
I should also say that there is some $13 million I think that goes 
to the faculty of the College of Medicine as clinical earnings. 
And while that is not research money it is . . . I mention it 
simply to say that those clinical earnings funds help us to have 
specialists at the College of Medicine, which is certainly an 
important component of research. But the research that we fund 
is $4.056 million in the areas that I’ve indicated. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your response. I  

would just like to reiterate one more time however, that when it 
comes to discussions with your counterparts across the country 
and certainly with the federal minister that some of the 
disparities with regards to funding be as well laid out so that 
there’s appropriate funding going into research based on the 
need in the different areas, as individuals more and more . . . 
more individuals face the problems of heart disease and cancer 
and some of these other problems than we do have to date with 
regards to AIDS, although I do know it is becoming a problem 
in some sectors and some areas and a major problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve had ongoing battles in the province of 
Saskatchewan regarding health care. I just talked about the 
Wilkie facility. I see by headlines, and we’re going back a little 
bit just . . . well actually only about a month and a half ago. The 
Eaglestone Lodge in Kamsack was going to lose their home and 
we were raising some questions at that time as to exactly what 
the community could do, what were some of the alternatives. I 
believe at that time as well we had also brought up the fact as to 
where the regulations were regarding private care homes. 
 
Because I know even looking at the Wilkie situation, I notice by 
the letter that it talked about 10 special care patients in Wilkie 
that are currently in the hospital. And while they may not have 
the number of spots available in the current care home that’s 
there, certainly a private care home may be something that the 
community may look at to address some of the special-needs 
patients that they’re dealing with. I don’t know. 
 
But I understand in the town of Kamsack, the town of Kamsack 
was certainly looking at a lot of alternatives and possibilities as 
to how they would address the closure of Eaglestone Lodge. 
And I’m wondering today, Mr. Minister, what your department 
has been doing as a result of the concerns that have been raised, 
whether it’s in the Kamsack area or whether it’s in Swift 
Current as we see with the Swift Current care centre, or even 
the Martin Luther housing corporation of Regina I think was 
making an offer to buy the 25-bed, light-care facility with 20 
seats . . . or suites, pardon me. 
 
These things that . . . the concerns that we have out there, Mr. 
Minister, and how is your department dealing with the issues, as 
I’m sure the department and you as minister on an ongoing 
basis receive phone calls, receive letters from the different 
communities, and even from families themselves with regard to 
the health care that they are losing, and the concerns that if they 
lose a facility . . . 
 
Like I can see what happens in Kamsack. I can see where 
people in Kamsack become very angry. If their facility is closed 
and there’s no alternative and there’s a number of heavy-care 
people in that facility who happen to be close to home  
Kamsack is home  and the only alternative is to move them 
out of the community, it puts them further away from family 
and friends, and as a result, can be a detriment in the healthy 
lifestyle, or even maintaining a healthier lifestyle. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I guess I’d like to know what your 
department is doing to address the concerns as they’re coming 
in. And I’m also wondering, Mr. Minister, if there have been a 
number of requests from different communities for some  



3036 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

information regarding private care homes and what they do to 
implement or provide a private care home, in view of the fact 
that they may be losing their heavy care home, or the facility 
that’s currently in the community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  There are several questions in there, of 
course. And I want to say to the member, first of all, that 
changes occur in the long-term care or nursing home care sector 
that sometimes don’t have all that much to do with funding. 
Sometimes they have to do just with the fact that the facilities 
are not what the district health board may want. 
 
And Kamsack, for example, is in the AssiniboineValley Health 
District. And that district is actually under-resourced in terms of 
long-term care. In other words, they need to increase the 
number of long-term care beds that they have, not decrease. So 
they’re not making a change at Kamsack because they’re trying 
to decrease the number of their nursing home beds. They’re 
making a change because they think a different mix of facilities 
would make more sense for them, and that the facility in 
Kamsack, in the long term, isn’t what they consider to be the 
best nursing home facility as they would like to have it. 
 
And sometimes you get into these situations. I know that 
criticism has been raised in the legislature about the closure of 
the lodge at Leroy. But as I’ve explained in the legislature, that 
lodge was closed because it is basically an old World War II 
military building that is no longer suitable for use as a nursing 
home facility. 
 
And the situation is, whether we like it or not, that it’s very 
expensive to keep people in nursing homes. It costs about . . . 
well, over $30,000 per person for each bed in a nursing home. 
And when you have a smaller home, as opposed to a larger one, 
the costs sometimes rise to 40 and $50,000 per person. And so 
you have to recognize that sometimes the health district boards 
will make a decision to consolidate some of their services while 
even providing the same number of nursing home beds because 
it is simply more cost-effective for them to do so. 
 
And I realize that people get very upset when changes occur. 
And sometimes people say, and they’ve said in this House, well 
when you have more seniors why would you be reducing the 
number of nursing home beds? 
 
The answer is that when you have more seniors, you’ve got to 
look after your seniors in the most effective way you can, and if 
you don’t do that, if you don’t pay attention to doing things in a 
sensible way, then eventually you’re not going to take care of 
the seniors at all because the system will not sustain itself. 
 
And I want to say, as the member knows, that it is not the intent 
to completely phase out nursing home care. It’s the intent to 
have a certain number of nursing home beds per senior 
population consistent with national standards that have been 
established, but to enhance seniors care by promoting certain 
programs like day programs we have for seniors now that we 
didn’t have before, respite care, and home care. 
 
And we believe that if we offer a broader range of services to 
seniors, we will indeed take care of seniors we think in a better  

way in the long run, because we’ll keep more people healthy 
and independent and living in their homes, which is in fact what 
many seniors want. 
 
At the same time, when people are already living in a nursing 
home, we know that they’re not very likely to go back to their 
own homes, which they’ve given up, and they’re not candidates 
for home care; they have to be cared for. It’s an unfortunate fact 
of political life that the opposition parties will occasionally say 
something like, you’re throwing seniors out onto the street. As 
I’ve said many, many times, nothing could be further from the 
truth  that has not happened and it will not happen. 
 
(1530) 
 
I want to say to the member that in so far as personal care 
homes go, they are not designed to deal with people with heavy 
care needs because they’re not financed to take care of people 
who are level 3 or level 4. Therefore a private care home would 
not be suitable for the 10 individuals the member refers to in 
Wilkie. Those individuals are people with multiple handicaps. 
Those individuals have to be provided with heavy care, which 
means they either have to stay in the hospital in Wilkie where 
they are presently institutionalized and have been for some 
time, or they would have to be cared for in the community. 
 
If they were cared for in the community, they would receive 
enhanced care. They would receive better care, not lesser care. 
And until such time as a plan can be brought about which 
would provide them with enhanced care, they will have to 
remain in the institution where they are. 
 
But I want to assure the member that there is certainly no plan 
that those individuals will be left with lesser care nor will they 
be put into some private facility. Those individuals have to be 
provided with a very heavy level of care. 
 
The question becomes sometimes whether a person should be 
institutionalized for their whole life, or whether sometimes 
there are people in the community who will care for individuals 
with multiple handicaps in their own homes or in a group home. 
 
And the trend of many, many people and organizations over the 
last number of years has been to promote the concept of 
community living. That isn’t necessarily to save money; it may 
in fact be a more expensive option than leaving those 
individuals in an institution. But I want to say, to remove any 
doubt, that those individuals are going to be provided with 
proper and compassionate care. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I certainly can 
concur with you that the fact that home care has been available 
for a fairly long time. I’ve been involved on a home care board 
and one of the concerns I always felt, that there was a time 
when we may have looked at institutionalizing people versus 
maintaining or keeping them in their home as long as is 
physically possible. And I think we need to continue to work 
that and encourage that because I do know many of our 
pioneers who worked so hard to build our communities and 
build our province would love to be as close to home as is 
possible. 



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3037 

Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could kind of inform me 
where the . . . There’s a cancer study that was implemented last 
year, and if you can inform me as to where that study is to date, 
whether it actually got off the ground. I remember receiving 
some information just in the last two weeks or so regarding this 
and I’m wondering if you can just fill the Assembly in as to 
what is taking place regarding this study  I think it may be a 
study that’s even taking place outside of the department  but 
a breast cancer study that is ongoing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m just awaiting some information about 
that last question, but in the meantime I’ll tell the member that 
the Family Planning Advisory Committee spends the money it 
receives in this fashion: $77,000 to the Facts of Life Line; 
$82,000, administrative staff; and $114,000, teen wellness 
centres. 
 
I’m advised that there’s a national breast cancer study going on 
but we don’t have any specific information about it at the 
moment and we’ll check into it and forward some information 
to the member. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you received a report . . . the 
Midwifery Advisory Committee report was received in your 
office I believe just in this past May. I’m just wondering, Mr. 
Minister, what have you done so far or are you just in the 
process of reviewing or what’s your intent . . . what do you 
intend to do with the report that’s been presented to you, and 
how does it apply to the health system and the health services 
that we will see in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m doing what the authors of the report 
asked me to do, namely they suggested that I take the report and 
send it out to all the groups and people in the province that are 
interested in midwifery. Of course I read the report myself. I 
sent it out to the various stakeholders and I’ve asked them to 
respond. When I get the responses then I intend to respond 
myself to the report by saying which of the recommendations 
we intend to implement. So at the present time I’m awaiting 
responses from the stakeholders which we hope to have by 
some time in August. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you said you hoped to have. I take 
it then you really didn’t give an outline as to a specific time 
period you were hoping to have those reports back in your 
possession so you could respond to them. Or if you did, can you 
give us some time period that you were kind of hoping or that 
you’re looking forward to these reports being available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Actually I asked the stakeholders to 
respond by the end of June and hopefully they will, but 
experience is that people often do not respond on time. And so 
we hope that . . . we still want them to respond by the end of 
June but we hope to be in a position by the end of August to 
assess their responses and come up with our response to the 
report. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I think, just having reviewed the report . . . some 
of my personal views, and unfortunately I realize that my 
personal views may not really mean a lot, I think it’s . . . the  

group that’s more interested are the individuals who do give 
birth in this province and I think I have had a fair bit of a 
positive feedback regarding midwifery and the fact that it 
certainly may have a place in our province within our health 
system. 
 
So I think the committee, from what I’ve seen, has done a 
commendable job in the discussions and in the paper they 
brought forward and I’m sure you’re going to receive a fair 
number of positive comments, and no doubt there’ll be some 
questions that will be raised as well that you can certainly bring 
forward, Mr. Minister. 
 
So as I did when the former minister of Health brought forward 
this plan, I suggested that it would be a good way and a good 
alternative and something worth looking into. I thank you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I’d like to get on in the area of some other questions, but maybe 
I should give you an opportunity to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, well I appreciate the comments that 
the member has made about the report and I am in basic 
agreement with what he says. I’m not going to respond myself 
until I review what the stakeholders have to say. But it’ll be a 
very interesting process and I thank the member for his interest 
in the matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Chair:  I’ll invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, before we open the 
working of the committee on Economic Development, I wonder 
if I would have leave to make a short statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Renewed Discussion on 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, it’s a little unusual 
to use this forum of committee to make this kind of a statement, 
but I thought it easier than bringing the Speaker back in. I think, 
at any rate, it has the same impact. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what I’m pleased to announce to the Assembly 
today and to the public of the province, that as a result of some 
negotiations that have gone on between the stakeholders to the 
CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) agreement, 
that with the assistance of a mediator, there will be new rounds 
of discussions that will begin in the very near future. I want to 
report that to the House because I know there has been concern 
and legitimate concern from members of the opposition on this  



3038 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

issue. They brought it to the House. 
 
And so in trying to make sure that we keep the House up to 
date, I had wanted to make that statement and hope that this 
helps bring about a situation in Saskatchewan that will improve 
the working condition of men and women in the province, and 
also work in the best interest of the contractors, both unionized 
and non-union. 
 
And so I just want to make that short, brief statement before we 
get on with the working of the committee. 
 
The Chair:  I presume the Leader of the Third Party wants to 
respond? 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Yes, with leave, to briefly respond. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we 
certainly appreciate what has taken place here. We are operating 
under the understanding that indeed a mediator has been 
appointed to resolve this situation between the various parties, 
the Saskatchewan Construction Association, the trade unions, 
as well as the government. And we believe that that is the right 
course of action to take place. 
 
We believe that this issue has been forced essentially by the 
filibuster that we have been putting forward. And we are 
pleased, very pleased, to hear that there has been a resolution to 
this long-standing problem that we see with the Crown 
construction tendering policy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1545) 
 
In light of those developments, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister, we feel that we are prepared now to end our filibuster 
and work to wrap up the legislative session, essentially as soon 
as possible. We believe that this has been a long session and we 
are prepared to see that the end come along very quickly. 
 
I think the parties involved in this should be congratulated — 
the Saskatchewan Construction Association. We also thank the 
independent MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
Greystone for her support during it. We regret that the Liberal 
caucus did not support the filibuster — and the Liberal House 
Leader referred to it as pointless, the filibuster surrounding it — 
because I don’t think this agreement would have been put 
together had it not been for the developments of the filibuster. 
 
So with that brief statement, we now believe that the session 
can wrap up as quickly as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
Item 1 

The Chair:  It’s been pointed out to me that the Economic 
Development has been here now four times. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Certainly, Mr. Minister, in compliance with an 
understanding that I have that you have arrived at, your 
government has worked at, and my colleague, the member from 
Kindersley has certainly spoken to, we have a few questions I’d 
like to raise. But really, in view of the proceedings, I don’t have 
a lot. 
 
But I just wanted to point out a couple of things, a couple of 
disparities that may have come forward the other evening when 
the Premier had spoken in the Assembly. And just a couple of 
comments regarding some of the observations that have been 
made regarding contracts in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
I raise this on the basis of the economic development of this 
province and how we need to work together to certainly build 
the province. 
 
And just a clarification of the fact that some information may 
not have been totally correct regarding the contracts. I note 
from the minister’s comments and certainly the Premier’s 
comments that the question we had raised with regards to the 
Department of Labour was the number of contracts that were 
approved under the CCTA and the number of contracts outside 
of the CCTA, how many were union and non-union. And while 
the minister stood up and suggested that 25 per cent of these 
contracts were union, and had suggested that 75 per cent 
weren’t, the unfortunate part was we didn’t have a breakdown 
of the 75 per cent, whether they were union or non-union. 
 
And I’m not expecting, Mr. Minister, that you’re going to have 
those figures available to you. But I think, as we’ve just seen in 
this Assembly, that the need to work together is certainly 
important. And therefore, I would be more than welcome to . . . 
or feel that it’s more than appropriate . . . I think we’ve raised a 
number of questions, we’ve got a number of answers, and it’s 
certainly important that we allow for the economy of this 
province to continue to grow. And therefore I don’t have any 
more questions to add to the committee at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I would just say to the members 
opposite that I appreciate the questioning that has come both 
from the members of the third party and the official opposition. 
I just urge that, at any time, if you have other questions  
estimates is a good time to ask questions — but know that at 
any time you can approach our department officials or myself in 
writing or verbally, and we’ll try to answer questions. I 
understand that this is the official time to ask questions, but just 
realize that if from your constituency, or a concern you’ve 
raised with business or otherwise, feel free to contact us. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development 
Vote 167 

 



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3039 

Vote 167 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Vote 154 

 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Economic Development 

Vote 45 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Items 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Items 1 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1600) 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 147 

Item 1  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 
Vote 161 

 
Items 1 and 2  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I would like to thank the members 
opposite for the questions and really appreciate the time the 
staff has spent with us answering . . . helping us answer 
questions this estimate. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, as well, 
thank the Minister of Agriculture and Food and his officials for 
participation and dialogue over the last number of months, and 
respect his abilities and his thoughts on some of the issues that 
we discussed. And I appreciate the time that him and his 
officials took to address those concerns. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Labour 
Vote 20 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8  authorized by law. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

 



3040 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 
Electoral Expenses 

Vote 34 
 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Just one quick word before we report progress, 
and that is to say a special thank-you. I saved it all to the last for 
the different committees we’ve had the privilege of meeting 
with this afternoon  the ministers for Social Services, Labour, 
Health, Ag and Food, Justice, and Executive Council. We 
certainly want to thank them for their input. And a special 
thank-you to all of the different members of these organizations 
that have been with us, to all the assistants that have joined us. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Vote 153 

 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Vote 143 

 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 
 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Vote 150 

 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly do not adjourn at 5 p.m. today but 
continue sitting until such time as a motion for 
adjournment is agreed to. 
 

Seconded by the member for Regina Centre. 
 

Leave not granted. 
 
(1615) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 76  An Act to 
amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union 
Hospital Act and The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948 and 
to make consequential amendments to other Acts be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the reasons 
that the official opposition delayed the sitting of this House last 
week was because of some of the health legislation that was 
being brought forward, and particular the Bill No. 76 was one 
of the reasons that we had some concern on it. 
 
The concern is of course with the way that things in the 
province have gone regarding health, and certainly Bill 76 we 
don’t see as addressing or solving many of the problems that we 
have in the health reform process that was started some number 
of years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can go back, I guess a number of years, to 
when the health reform started in this province, one of the basic 
premisses of the health reform itself was that it would provide 
for a number of health districts throughout this province, and 
certainly that is what has happened at this point in time to a 
number of 30 health districts which we have. 
 
The discussion that centred around the health districts at the 
time of their formation was certainly a controversial one and 
certainly one that many people were involved in, including 
myself in my role with the local health board in my own 
community of Imperial, and in particular with the health agency 
and the health facility that we have in that community, the Long 
Lake Valley Integrated Facility as it was called when it was 
built. And certainly we were concerned in that community as to 
what role that agency and that facility would play in the 
community and in the whole scheme of things, and where it 
would fit into within the health district somewhere in the 
province. 
 
Many discussions took place with neighbouring communities in 
the neighbourhood of Imperial, Liberty, Holdfast, and it spread 
to the communities of Watrous, and certainly across the line to 
the communities of Kenaston, and Hanley, Bladworth, and 
Davidson, Craik, Aylesbury, and Girvin, down to Chamberlain, 
and certainly across with the communities of Bethune, and 
Dilke, and Holdfast, and all those. 
 
As well, it went further than that, Mr. Minister, it went to the 
next line, to the communities of Central Butte, where in 
Riverhurst . . . where they’ve been served by a hospital and a  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3041 

special care home for many years in the community of Central 
Butte. 
 
So the discussions of the health reform and the districtification 
process were very wide and certainly, and certainly 
controversial, as I mentioned earlier. The problem and the fears 
that many people had were as to where the health district 
process would fit in with the communities of Imperial and the 
surrounding area. And those concerns were certainly justified, 
Mr. Speaker, and it did happen and did continue. 
 
As you will recall, back in the days before SAHO was formed 
. . . SAHO of course being the birth of a new organization with 
the amalgamation of the three major provincial associations 
before that, the long term care association, and the home care 
association, and the SHA (Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association) to form SAHO. But the SHA had put together a 
brief and presented it to the Murray Commission of the day, 
where it suggested such things as pilot projects and the 
formation of some large districts, actually regions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In those regions, they talked about having many communities 
coming together and much larger than what the districts have 
turned out in size. So we made a brief, SHA made a brief, to the 
Murray Commission presenting some of our ideas because we 
were representative of some close to 500 health agencies within 
the province. And we made representation on their behalf to the 
Murray Commission and came up with some solutions that we 
thought were very fitting and would help the reformation 
process within health care throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Of course we all know the discussions that centred around the 
Murray Commission and then what happened with that report 
as we moved into the new wellness model or the new health 
reform process. However we talked about where communities 
would fit into and where they would get their services from, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The whole discussion centring around health care, Mr. Speaker, 
in this province has been an ongoing one. And I think that even 
though some of our present-day politicians would rather not 
talk about health care these days, it’s something that we must 
continue to address and look after and ensure that the needs of 
the people of the province are met. 
 
So we talk about the districtification process, Mr. Speaker, back 
in 1993 and it was really a process that tore many communities 
apart, Mr. Speaker. It caused communities to argue and to fight 
amongst each other and caused agencies to do the same and the 
people in those communities as well. The unfortunate part of it 
was, is that amongst all this fighting and arguing and 
discussions that took place, that not necessarily the best for 
health care took place because of that process being forced. 
 
The people of course in the communities, the individual 
communities, had a concern about where health care was 
headed and how they would have their needs met for within 
their communities. And certainly expressed and explained that 
to their representatives, whether it was the local municipalities 
or whether it was the health agencies or their health boards and 
their representatives on it. 

And so the fight raged away. Communities arguing, trying to fit 
in, recognizing that a major change or a major loss of a health 
agency or health facility would certainly have serious economic 
effects upon their communities. 
 
And that is indeed a fact. We all know that the economic 
situation in the late ‘80s in Saskatchewan was extremely hard 
on the farmers in rural Saskatchewan and the people that lived 
there, and the small businesses included. Therefore they 
recognize the fact that if they were to lose a health agency, 
which meant jobs in the community and surrounding area, it 
would have a serious effect on their small towns and villages. 
 
And we’re not willing to let that happen. We all know that if 
you let one business die in the community, if you lost your 
health agency, your health facility, which meant jobs, you’re 
likely going to lose other things that domino on down through 
the . . . possibly the drugstore. If you lose your hospital or your 
health centre, what need do you have for a drugstore, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
So people recognize that. Most often in the small towns a 
drugstore is more than just a drugstore. It’s a liquor vendor. It 
might also be part of the grocery store. It provides many 
services and carries many goods that the communities need. So 
we lose the drugstore if they lost their health agency. 
 
The next thing to go . . . and many towns have a number of 
other businesses, including general merchandising stores that 
carry groceries and some dry goods; and a lot of towns, larger 
towns, have a couple of these stores. And of course a loss of 
jobs means a loss of people and therefore the most likely to lose 
one of their businesses. 
 
That’s not all that’s affected. If you don’t have the people to 
look after a storekeeper and keep his business viable, he’s going 
to move. And that means another loss of family, which would 
then in turn affects other businesses, whether they be the 
garages or whether they be confectioneries, whether it means 
the cafés or restaurants or whether it means a hotel. And 
certainly we know that the hotel industry in the province has 
been suffering over the last number of years from lack of 
business and struggling to keep open and keep viable. 
 
So all the discussions around the loss of a health service in a 
community is . . . had a major factor on the discussions that 
were taking place regarding the districtification process and the 
loss of a health facility. 
 
In a lot of communities, people were willing to go and lobby 
their representatives on their health boards, and rightfully so. 
Many of the communities had already come together in a 
system of a regional board with representation from all the 
communities affected and were coming together to discuss how 
they could provide the services in a region, in a large 
community, to ensure that the services were being met. 
 
These agencies, having been called  in our region in 
particular  a district coordinating committee, did come 
together, did bring communities together prior to 1991 in order 
to discuss the needs of a larger region. Of course some of the  



3042 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

communities that were coming together in our area certainly 
range from the communities of Central Butte, which had a 
representation by a surrounding area of a great number of 
people in small towns and small villages. 
 
And of course as we moved across towards the centre of that 
district, which is located between the two large bodies of water, 
Last Mountain Lake and Lake Diefenbaker, we crossed the 
paths of Craik and Davidson, who both at that time had 
hospitals and health agencies involved and were willing to sit 
down to negotiate to see who would best provide what service 
in a larger area and meet those needs. 
 
As we came across of course to the No. 11 roadway, the 
highway, and that group of communities, of course Craik 
represented a great number of small communities that have 
served for its health needs, including places like Girvin and 
Aylesbury and Chamberlain. And as you moved up the highway 
to Davidson it also served a great number of people in the 
surrounding area and smaller communities such as Bladworth 
and Kenaston and overlapped to Girvin, and probably even to 
some extent across to the west to Loreburn and Elbow and in 
through that area. 
 
As you moved up of course, it included Kenaston, and then 
we’re coming across to the east side of that region. Now you 
would come to Watrous, and certainly they were involved in the 
discussions, and being a major trading centre also fit into the 
scheme of things from our area where the traffic flow did 
follow that pattern up No. 2 Highway. 
 
So of course Watrous then did serve a great area in health needs 
down to the Amazon country and Simpson. And then we come 
to Imperial where there was an integrated facility and formerly a 
hospital as well. 
 
The area continued south, and Imperial did cover a large area 
too overlapping with Watrous in the Simpson area and heading 
south to the communities of Stalwart and Liberty and Penzance 
and Holdfast. There was also services provided to the 
communities of Dilke, and certainly Bethune and Findlater, and 
then overlapping again across to Chamberlain. 
 
(1630) 
 
So we felt that there was a need to have a group come together 
to recognize the individual areas and the needs that they had, 
and we tried to do that. I was a member of that group from the 
RM (rural municipality) of Big Arm, No. 251, in the 
Imperial-Liberty area and represented on that group. 
 
There was representation from all the health care areas, 
including acute care, long-term care, home care. Mr. Speaker, 
the home care district was called the Watrous and Davidson 
home care region and it did represent the community-based 
needs to the people in that area that needed them. It also went 
farther than that, Mr. Speaker, and overlapped down South, of 
where I’m from, with Wascana Home Care district as well as 
across from the Moose Jaw area. 
 
So there was a great area represented, and of course with the  

intricacies of the boundaries overlapping each other and what 
have you it proved to be a challenge to try and bring these 
people together, but I think we were. I think we did develop a 
sense of common goal, and we were trying to move toward that 
end result where we would ensure that people’s health needs 
were met and that we quit providing services and building 
health facilities for political reasons. 
 
So we were moving through that process, Mr. Speaker, prior to 
the election in 1991 and were making some great strides. We 
continued to lobby the government at that time to put some 
funding aside to fund these coordinating groups so that they 
could offset some of the costs that were involved with home 
care. 
 
In that region, Mr. Speaker, the home care . . . 
Watrous-Davidson home care group, through its coordinators, 
that was located in Watrous with a satellite office in Davidson 
did the assessing for that whole area for the needs of the people. 
That was a major job, and it was costly, and it was not fair that 
the home care district should have to fund the complete cost of 
the assessment for everyone involved whether it overlapped the 
Wascana district or the Moose Jaw district or the Central Butte 
area. 
 
So we recognized there was a problem and through the different 
agencies we provided some funding to the home care district to 
offset the cost of the assessments and the coordination. Of 
course there’s mileage and salaries involved, and that can, as 
you well know, can add up to a serious amount of economic 
problems for an agency that hadn’t budgeted for that. 
 
So we lobbied the provincial government to provide some of 
that funding to us, and it seemed to be . . . at that time have 
some, I guess, some sympathy from the department and we 
were lobbying quite heavily to try and get that done. However, 
that didn’t happen because after the election we moved into the 
wellness model and the district coordinating committees 
unfortunately were set aside and ignored and basically dropped. 
 
Now everyone realized that we had a problem in health care. 
And nobody recognized that any more than myself, being 
involved with the provincial association and representing some 
500 agencies, health agencies, across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
And so we knew that things had to change and we had to do 
things differently. We had to economize. And people in the 
health system, including the trustees and the workers, 
recognized that. 
 
Now the trustees had not a lot at stake other than a lot of 
volunteer time that they contributed to the health system in 
forms of attending health care meetings and ensuring that health 
care needs of the province were being met, whether it was 
through their own communities, through their own people that 
they represented. So these health trustees spent hours and hours, 
travelled miles and miles for very little more than some mileage 
 and in some cases not even that  and most often only to be 
criticized by many people because they felt they wanted them to 
do more. 
 
And that’s understandable. We all know that when you have a  



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3043 

volunteer board that people sometimes fail to recognize the 
value that you have committed to doing that job and ask you to 
do more and more and more and more to the point of many 
people getting disgusted and quitting. But most trustees at that 
time recognized there needed to be change in health care and 
were prepared to do it. 
 
Now when the districtification process started to be discussed, 
everyone was unsure exactly how many districts that the 
government had in mind to begin with, and also how many 
districts we would actually end up with. 
 
Now having said that, I don’t expect that the people that were 
involved in it in many local communities had any idea how 
many districts there’d be. All they were concerned about, Mr. 
Speaker, was that what would happen to our health agencies, 
our health facilities, and to the people that needed the service. 
 
So we started about the reform process. And we heard the 
former minister, as I’ve stated in this House many times, going 
around the province. And I actually did some travelling with the 
minister and her deputy, myself, on behalf of our provincial 
health association, and a number of other people to start to talk 
to people throughout the province as to what health reform 
really meant. 
 
And as I travelled around and as the minister appeared at 
actually district meetings that the Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association had set up and sponsored in regions, as we did 
every year, sometimes twice a year, we would get people of 
course  many people  out to listen to the discussions here. 
 
And because there was talk of reform and change in Health, 
there was a good turnout at a lot of the meetings. And many 
people came to hear what the minister had to say and what we 
as a provincial association had to say and where health reform 
was heading. And that was fair. 
 
The minister of the day talked about, you know, people working 
together and the government being prepared to work together 
with the communities. And people did buy into that to some 
extent. 
 
However, our association was pressured to be ensured that there 
was representation through us to the government on behalf of 
the health agencies and the people involved  whether it was 
the workers or the volunteers, the trustees, or what have you  
that their concerns were raised and brought forward and 
addressed. And that’s the way it should work. 
 
Now as we travelled around the province we heard the minister 
of the day saying things like: we’ll work together, this will not 
divide communities, we’ll ensure that communities come 
together, and we will also take into account all aspects of a 
community and of reform. 
 
Now reform means different things to different people, and so 
that was a pretty broadly used term. But all things taken into 
consideration, they thought well, yes, we can work with the 
government, and we will, through the association and 
individual lobbying and what have you, we will get what’s best  

for our communities. And that was good. Because when you 
educate people and convince them that there’s change to be 
made and they’re for the best and for the right reasons, people 
are most apt to get onside and help you make those changes. 
 
However, as the discussions went and we finished our tour and 
the minister talked about the different health sectors in the 
different areas of the province and how people’s needs were 
going to be met, whether it was acute care or whether it was 
long-term care or whether it was home care, community-based 
service, you can use whatever terms you want. And that they 
were listening and thinking, yes, we need to make some 
changes and we’re willing to do that considering that all aspects 
of reform as it relates to a community and to the people would 
be taken into consideration. So on the process went. 
 
And I recall one day over at our office on Park Street, the 
government had a change in Finance ministers about then, and 
the present Finance minister showed up for a meeting with our 
board. And we discussed many things and talked about health 
reform. We talked about of course, with the Finance minister, 
how health reform relates to economics. 
 
And at that point in time is when I think the wellness model and 
health reform took a turn for the worse, when the minister 
announced to us that we’re sorry but economics for a 
community do not come into this picture; we will be changing 
the way we do health in this province, and if it detrimentally 
affects the community economically, then that’s the problem of 
the community. 
 
Basically what the Minister of Finance said that day was that if 
a community dies as a result of the loss of a health agency or 
health facility, so be it  it doesn’t matter. And I think that’s 
when health reform took a major turn for the worse. 
 
Now as you know in a community if you lose your health 
facility, you lose a number of employees. And that can have a 
detrimental effect to a small community because what you have 
is many people are employed by a health agency that are 
married to people in a community most likely, and given that in 
rural Saskatchewan, we don’t have a great huge number of 
young people any more. 
 
You’ve got people that are established there, whether they’re 
the local businessman, whether it’s the local grocery store, 
whether it’s the café, whether it’s the hotel, whether it’s the 
garage, and most often it’s farmers, and the spouse is a farmer. 
Whether it’s the mother that does the farming and the husband 
works off, or whether vice versa, and most often it’s the 
husband that does the farming and it’s also . . . it’s the ladies, 
the wives that go to town to work in these health agencies as 
we’re talking about. 
 
So you can pretty much destroy a community by taking away a 
major employer of people, and that did happen to many of the 
communities. So you can see the anxiety that a community 
might have in relationship to losing a health centre which is the 
major employer in a community, which provided of course, as 
we all know, well paying jobs for the health sector for these 
people that were there, whether it be a nurse or whether it had  



3044 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

been a support worker or whether it be a cook or whether it was 
the maintenance man, the maintenance lady  all those that 
supplied the services. So it can be a major hardship for a 
community and for a group of people that are involved there. 
 
So we had some problems when the Minister of Finance 
announced that the economics did not play a role in it as it 
relates to a local community. It did however have a major . . . 
economics did have a major role to play in health reform and 
that enabled the government of the day to balance its budget 
and to at this point in time, get to where we’re at with the 
problems that the districts have got. It was a downloading 
exercise and we’ve proven that to date, and continues to 
happen. 
 
However the people, the people across the province certainly 
didn’t realize that some of these factors were now off the table 
and weren’t going to play a role in the health reform process 
and therefore continue to go about trying to decide where they 
would fit in as individuals, as communities, as health agencies, 
as health facilities. And so the process continued. Negotiations, 
discussions, the arguing, the lobbying continued both between 
the communities, between the people in those communities, 
between the health agency boards, the volunteer boards, as well 
as with the government of the day. 
 
And many communities, and probably a number of the 
members in the Assembly today had communities that tried to 
lobby the Minister of Health for whatever reasons, whether it 
was to retain their services, whether it was the Eston hospital, 
or whether it was one of the other 51 at the time that were 
trying to keep from being closed or from being converted. 
 
And part of the problem was, Mr. Speaker, that people didn’t 
understand. They didn’t understand what losing acute services 
meant, even though many of them hadn’t provided what the 
department recognized as acute services for a number of years. 
And so when you’re trying to change a system, a major 
overhaul of the system, people don’t understand. It’s pretty hard 
for you to expect them to voluntarily come onside and make a 
change that they don’t know, that they’re unfamiliar with, that 
they don’t know where it’s heading, and they don’t know what 
to expect. 
 
And so the battles actually raged on for a great deal of time. 
And in our area we’re certainly in the whole midst of things, 
right in the middle, as our community, in the region I described 
earlier, was kind of central. So our municipalities that were 
made up of our union hospital district were telling our board 
that, hey, you have to ensure that our health facility agency will 
survive and that the services in these municipalities that you 
were appointed to represent are looked after. 
 
(1645) 
 
And of course we all know how volunteer health boards were 
formed and certainly were appointed and certainly were 
accountable not only to the municipalities, whether it was urban 
or rural municipality that appointed them, responsible to them, 
but more appropriately were responsible to the people within 
those municipalities. 

The certain . . . the small hamlet, if I can, of Liberty is how I 
became to be a trustee on the local board and did represent 
them for a great number of years on that board and did at this 
time as well. However there is a surrounding municipality who, 
because of assessment, was able to have a couple of trustees 
appointed to the board, and they didn’t do that, but much larger 
RMs to the south that had representation again because of their 
larger assessment and sat on our board. 
 
There were also many small villages and hamlets and 
communities that centred around that also had representatives. 
And I know that there was a large number of resort villages on 
the south end of Last Mountain Lake that had representation on 
our board. And a number of them came together because of 
their small assessment and were entitled to have one 
representative and they did, and they did have one 
representative and the villages, resort villages, Wee-Too and 
Alice Beach and Sarnia, had one representative. 
 
And they faithfully came to the meetings. They travelled . . . 
most of the meetings were held in the community of Imperial in 
the health agency, the integrated facility. And they travelled 
there faithfully to board meetings, to health meetings on a 
volunteer basis and really only many times received some 
mileage and most often a very small per diem, if any. 
 
So we came together as a group and tried to decide the fate of 
the health agency facility in Imperial and also how it would be 
affected by health reform. The biggest concern that they had for 
the health facility was much the same as any community had 
that had a hospital or a special care home or what have you. 
And they realized that it was a valued service and, more 
importantly, a need of those communities to have that agency 
there. 
 
The agency itself provided many services. Of course it 
originally provided acute care services. And under the old 
scheme of things in the health care system, the acute care 
services have changed to mean different things. Now of course 
in the old Imperial hospital we didn’t provide what now is 
known as acute service for many years, but we did provide the 
services that were needed by those communities that 
surrounded the Imperial Union Hospital and then later the Long 
Lake Valley Integrated Facility. 
 
The Long Lake Valley did provide acute services and long-term 
care. Of course when it was built, it had a long-term care 
facility in it, and provided that service for the . . . basically for 
the seniors in the province and . . . or in the community that 
were involved. I think when it was built there was about 10 
beds built, designated long-term care for levels 3 and levels 4. 
And certainly the waiting-list for them at that time was 
extensive and it is to this day. 
 
As well in that institution they were able to provide lab and 
X-ray services to the people in the community, and that worked 
well as there’s been a resident doctor in Imperial for as long as I 
can remember and at most times there was a couple of them. To 
this day there is only one. At the time of the districtification 
process there was only one doctor, so it provided a service that 
we needed. 



June 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3045 

So the wellness model caused a great hardship and a lot of 
anxiety for many people. And I guess being part of that process 
I recognize a lot of that anxiety and it was taken out on many 
board members and many meetings that we had and long hours, 
whether it was through the dead of winter or when it was. 
 
But anyway this agency did provide the service that the 
community recognized was needed, and so they wanted to 
protect it. So the discussion raged on as did in many 
communities as to how would we best be able to ensure that 
Long Lake Valley did survive and continue to provide that 
service to the communities. 
 
The discussions, as did most community’s, centred around what 
district would we belong to. Who would make up this district. 
And certainly we had the discussions with many of the 
communities and through our representatives and through the 
people that we talk to day in and day out. And certainly the 
health workers were involved and certainly the doctor played a 
major role in this process. 
 
The questions that arose, as did in many communities, were 
simply where can we fit in? Where will be best be able to 
survive and continue to provide this service that our 
communities and residents of our communities so desperately 
need? 
 
So you start looking around and you say, well should we fit in? 
Are we better to be a small district? Are we better to be a large 
district? Should we be part of the large district or should we 
not? 
 
And all these decisions are pretty hard to decide as to where 
they would best fit in. And so the best that the trustees and the 
representatives of the municipalities could do would be to 
discuss and try and make deals and what have you. 
 
And as we all know that when you have local boards trying to 
make a deal with neighbouring communities, that’s fine and 
dandy. But the government and the Minister of Health in the 
final analysis had the final decision. 
 
So the discussions went on, and we talked about how would we 
decide where we should fit into. And as I mentioned earlier, we 
were involved in a region with Watrous and Central Butte and 
Davidson and Imperial and the surrounding area, a great many 
miles between the two large lakes, as to could that be a feasible 
region to set up a health district. 
 
And it appeared initially that we could meet the magic numbers 
that the government said  I think if I recall, somewhere 
around 12,000 population  to have a sustainable district, and 
maybe that was a good number to pick. There are many districts 
that lobby that could only come up with maybe 8 or 9,000. 
Some of those had substantially more but how do you know 
how many people it takes to sustain a district when you don’t 
know how many people it takes to sustain a district. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a tough decision. It’s one that I couldn’t 
get a handle on as to how many people it would take. And we 
tried to use all the reasoning and logic we could to try and  

decide how many people it takes to make up a district, a viable 
district. 
 
Well, before you can decide what a viable district is, is you 
have to decide what services you’re going to provide. And so 
we have to kind of wonder, what did the government have in 
mind for the districts? Where were they going to let certain 
services be provided? Would every district be able to do 
surgery, or would every district have to do surgery? 
 
Well certainly that would not be an option if you weren’t a 
member of a regional centre or a large city where the tertiary 
centres are. And certainly it became quite clear that that would 
be a major problem in determining what services. Certainly 
everyone recognized that you can’t just provide a service in an 
agency because a few people think you need it, and therefore 
you have to kind of think rationally and reasonably what 
services you might provide. 
 
Well most rural areas recognize that we do need acute services; 
and we do need long-term care; and we do need housing; and 
we do need home care — community-based services; some 
diabetic services; chiropody; you name it  what we need. 
Chiropractic services; it’s great to have an eye specialist come 
into a community and provide a service to keep the people from 
having to drive miles and miles and miles to get that service, in 
particular the elderly service. 
 
And so I think that the people recognize that they would not be 
able to provide all the services that they can . . . that they 
thought they might need, because if you surveyed 200 people in 
a community, you’d probably get 200 different answers as to 
the extent of services that you would need for that community. 
 
Well as I’ve stated, many people recognize what services you 
need, and certainly some of the basic ones that I mentioned 
would probably suffice. However, the government would have 
an idea as well as to what services a district might want to 
provide and that’s certainly part of the districts Act, and part of 
the amendment that we’re speaking about today. 
 
So you had to try and balance off, knowing what the people of 
the community felt they wanted or the communities involved, as 
well as maybe what the government Department of Health had 
in mind for the districts. So the discussions went on and went 
on and went on. 
 
And finally as the process was winding down and the 
government had placed some deadlines, as probably would be 
appropriate, that you have to do in order to bring this thing to a 
conclusion, the communities that were involved in the 
districtification process finally decided that, well we’ll have to 
make a decision. So with some last-round discussions with 
surrounding communities, in particular our own area with the 
neighbouring areas, the communities continue discussing and 
we’re trying to come up with a final decision as to what we 
would do. 
 
So if I recall rightly in our community, with the communities 
that were involved, had one last meeting to try and come up to a 
consensus that yes, we could form this district and it would be a  



3046 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 1996 

viable one. 
 
However, at the same time a number of the communities on the 
outlying corners, as I mentioned, particular Watrous and Central 
Butte on the other end, and certainly Nokomis, who I didn’t 
mention earlier, played a part in our role, health role. We’re 
having discussions with other districts. And so you’ve got us 
involved with the group. And certainly we were entertaining 
discussions with the Regina Health District at that time, which 
was already formed up. 
 
And certainly these folks were having discussions with people 
in the other areas. I know Nokomis was certainly entertaining 
discussions with Watrous and that ended up into being Living 
Sky. And certainly Central Butte was having discussions with 
Thunder Creek, and that grew to Moose Jaw, and they ended up 
being involved with Thunder Creek, as did Craik, whom we 
were also discussing. 
 
So we knew the pulling from all corners was taking place and 
we were feeling it as well. But it was awful hard to make a 
decision because we had those long, long ties with those other 
communities that we’d had, and it’s hard to break that. 
 
Trading patterns, as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, we had 
trading patterns certainly with the community of Watrous and 
certainly with Davidson because of the machinery dealers being 
only centred any more in the larger centres. And so we had ties 
there, back and forth. 
 
With the travel of today, we have many . . . any travelling that 
you do, you make friends, there’s marriages, people from 
different communities are getting married. And so there’s lots 
of ties. So it’s hard to break those ties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly it involves, even more so . . . is involved with 
health because, as you make those ties, you’ve got relatives and 
loved ones that are in special care homes in neighbouring 
towns. And it’s awful tough. And so it’s hard to break those 
ties. 
 
Now when you’re entertaining . . . with a larger district that 
would extend some 85 miles from the community of Imperial to 
Regina, and that district extends farther south and to the east 
and to the north-east, it’s hard for many people in the 
community to understand or fathom what you’re trying to do. 
So it’s a very tough decision and it was hard on many of the 
local taxpayers in these communities, and certainly was even 
harder on volunteer health executives that were on some of 
these boards. 
 
The problem being is that, unless you can go and talk to every 
one of the people, and individually, you can never get them to 
understand why you need to make a change. And so that 
compounded the problem that we had as a health board, as a 
health group in the region, to explain to these people what was 
going on. Maybe it would be better to look at a larger district to 
provide the services, their local agency could be . . . their local 
agency could be one that might provide those services that 
could help out a larger centre, even a tertiary centre such as 
Regina. 

And so that’s what our board did. Our board went and talked to 
some members of the Regina Health District Board that was at 
the time, and so those discussions took place and we did our 
best to explain to the people, local communities and the 
residents, that indeed that might be the best alternative. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, this is unusual, but I 
would ask for leave to allow the Liberal member to check with 
his House Leader, because we have an understanding between 
the Liberal House Leader and myself that we could return to do 
Health estimates, and I wondered if we could take a short recess 
so he could check that and allow us to move back to Health 
estimates. 
 
I understand he’s here by himself, which makes it very, very 
difficult for him to be able to even check with his own staff. 
And I wonder if we could take a short recess to allow that, by 
leave of the Assembly? 
 
The Speaker:  I’m sorry but the hon. member is not in order 
to request leave because he doesn’t have the floor and can’t do 
it, and can’t raise it, having requested a point of order. If the 
hon. member wishes to put a point of order, he may do so. 
Would the hon. member like to put a point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Point of order then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Well the point of order that the hon. member 
raises is whether he can request leave without having the floor. 
And the procedures of the House do not allow for him to 
request leave without having the floor. It has to . . . Order, 
order. In order to request leave to change the proceedings, an 
hon. member has to have the floor. And so the point of order is 
not well taken. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  In order to facilitate this and with 
the approval of the member, I wondered if he would entertain a 
question? 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member, the Deputy Premier, has 
asked the hon. member for Arm River if he would entertain a 
question. That is in order. Will the hon. member for Arm River 
entertain a question? 
 
Mr. McLane:  No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the hour, it is adjournment time. 
 
The Speaker:  It now being past the hour of 5 o’clock, it is 
adjournment time. And before the House stands adjourned, this 
being the first weekend of summer in Saskatchewan, I wish for 
all members an enjoyable weekend with your families and 
constituents. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2997 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2997 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2997 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2997 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2997 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................2997 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................2997 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Murray ...........................................................................................................................................................................2997, 3008 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................2997 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................3005 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3013 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3025 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Aboriginal Day 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2998 
  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................2998 
 Election Anniversary 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2998 
 Thunder Creek Constituency 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2998 
 Victims’ Services Program in Meadow Lake Opens 
  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................2999 
 50th Anniversary of St. Peter’s Catholic Women’s League 
  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2999 
 Canadian Red Cross Marks 100 Years of Service 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2999 
 Regina Folk Festival 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3000 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Funding for Providence Place 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3000 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3000 
 School Bus Communication Devices 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................3001 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................3001 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................3001 
 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................3002 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................3002 
 Nuclear Industry in Saskatchewan 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3002 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................3002 
 Sex Education Curriculum 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................3003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3003 
 Health Care Funding 
  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................3003 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3004 
 Rural Economic Development 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................3004 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................3004 
 Provincial Taxes 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................3004 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................3004 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 122  An Act requiring Union Certification, Decertification and Strike Action by Secret Ballot 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................3005 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Renewed Discussion on Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................3037 



 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................3038 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3005 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3005 
 Justice  Vote 3 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................3012 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................3012 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3021 
 Health  Vote 32 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3025 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................3025 
 Economic Development  Vote 45 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3038 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................3038 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Economic Development  Vote 167 ........................................................................................................................................3038 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation  Vote 154 .........................................................................................................3039 
 Economic Development  Vote 45 ..........................................................................................................................................3039 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 Economic Development  Vote 45 ..........................................................................................................................................3039 
 Justice  Vote 3 ........................................................................................................................................................................3039 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 Justice  Vote 3 ........................................................................................................................................................................3039 
 Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 ...............................................................................................................................................3039 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Agriculture and Food  Vote 146 ...........................................................................................................................................3039 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan  Vote 147 ...........................................................................................3039 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation  Vote 161 ......................................................................................................3039 
 Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 ...............................................................................................................................................3039 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Agriculture and Food  Vote 146 ...........................................................................................................................................3039 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................3039 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3039 
 Labour  Vote 20 .....................................................................................................................................................................3039 
 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
 Labour  Vote 20 .....................................................................................................................................................................3039 
 Executive Council  Vote 10 ...................................................................................................................................................3039 
 Executive Council 
 Electoral Expenses  Vote 34 ..................................................................................................................................................3040 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3040 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Saskatchewan Telecommunications  Vote 153 ....................................................................................................................3040 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Saskatchewan Housing Corporation  Vote 143 ...................................................................................................................3040 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 140 ......................................................................................................................3040 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 SaskEnergy Incorporated  Vote 150 ....................................................................................................................................3040 
 Loans, Advances and Investments 
 Saskatchewan Power Corporation ............................................................................................................................................3040 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................3040 
 
 


