













































June 17, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2665 

 June 17, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

PRIVILEGE 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To raise a question of privilege, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  The member may put his question of 

privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a matter of 

privilege, recognizing the provisions of rule 6(1). I rise today as 

a result of the comments made by the Leader of the Opposition, 

who called into question the ability of the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner to appropriately conduct his duty. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition said, and I’m quoting from 

Hansard: 

 

. . . clearly Mr. McLeod, our Conflict Commissioner, is in 

conflict himself; that he is heavily involved in a company 

that may have donated funds to the New Democratic Party 

which governs this province. 

 

Two things struck me when I heard the comment. One was that 

it seemed fairly clear that the charge was specious, that it was 

ludicrous. Secondly, it seemed equally clear that whether or not 

there was any substance to it, it was a breach of parliamentary 

privilege to impugn the integrity of a legislative officer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the comment demonstrates a contempt on the part 

of the member who raised it for a legislative officer. Scurrilous 

comments of this sort, made by the member from Melville, 

reflect badly on members of the Assembly who in the past and 

are now well served by officers of this Assembly. 

 

I may say it was the government’s hope that the Leader of the 

Opposition had misspoke himself in this line of questioning and 

would withdraw the comments in an unequivocal fashion 

without excuse. It does not appear to have happened; and, Mr. 

Speaker, we are therefore asking for a ruling to have the Leader 

of the Opposition rise immediately and unequivocally to 

withdraw his remarks and apologize to the House. 

 

We await your ruling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  The Government House Leader has raised a 

question of privilege which normally, under rule 6(1), requires 

two hours notice prior to the regular daily opening of the 

Assembly. However, rule 6(2) provides for the Speaker to have 

the right to waive notice. Under the circumstances, with the 

hours of the Assembly sitting as it is, the Speaker is willing to 

waive notice required, as permitted under rule 6(2). 

 

I will want to consider the remarks made by the Government 

House Leader and remarks made by any other members of the 

Assembly, if other members of the Assembly wish to have them  

made before the Speaker considers the matter. 

 

That there not being any members indicating a desire to do that, 

I will take notice of the question of privilege raised by the 

Government House Leader and will bring a ruling to the House. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 76  An Act to 

amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union 

Hospital Act and The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948 and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts be now 

read a second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 

to have this opportunity to address one of the very important 

health Bills that is before us in this House today. I feel very 

strongly that all of the health Bills before us will have a drastic 

impact on the health care system in this province, and they need 

to be discussed at length. 

 

The people of this province deserve a say in laws that affect 

them all to a great extent. Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents 

have been expressing grave concern over the quality of health 

care that is available to all people in rural Saskatchewan. It has 

become very clear that this government has very little concern 

for the people of rural Saskatchewan and it will do just about 

anything imaginable for the sole cause of saving money. 

 

As we have said time and time again, this Bill deals only with 

the legal aspects of the district health boards that are in 

operation in Saskatchewan. No concern or mention is ever 

made with regards to the concerns of the real people of this 

province; the concerns of the people who rely on the health care 

that is provided to them; the concerns of the families of people 

who desperately need quality and accessible health care on a 

daily basis. 

 

One of the major changes that will be implemented with the 

passage of this Bill will be adding new responsibilities to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board. Should the amendments tabled 

in this Bill become law, the Municipal Board will be 

responsible for the collection of outstanding debt of the former 

union hospitals boards. This gives the board the power to 

allocate these debts to municipalities that were once part of a 

union hospital board. 

 

Due to the fact that a number of municipalities have refused to 

pay off these debts in the past, this amendment is nothing but a 

control mechanism being put in place by an overzealous and 

arrogant government that is assuming that it will be in power 

for ever. 

 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, we have also received some comments from 

people from La Loche, who are very concerned over this piece 

of legislation. La Loche is not in the financial situation to be 

able to pay off old debts. La Loche is having a hard time 

keeping its modest hospital running on the meagre funds that 

are available to it, never mind being forced to pay an old debt. 

 

So many communities, small communities, all over 

Saskatchewan simply do not have the economic base that is 

needed to raise funds in order to keep their health care facilities 

running properly. Each time that this government closes a rural 

health care centre, this problem is magnified tenfold. The care 

centre closes, forcing many people who once worked there to 

leave the community. The doctors leave; the nurses leave. Even 

the custodial staff no longer have a source of income. 

 

So the health care centre, which at one time attracted people to 

a certain community, closes, forcing many people to leave, 

further reducing that town’s tax base, causing more problems 

than ever. When will this government open its eyes and take a 

look at what is going on in rural and northern Saskatchewan? 

 

As I stated earlier, this Bill deals mainly with the legal aspects 

of the functions of district health boards. For example, changes 

are made with regards to the election of board members. The 

nomination rules of these members, the terms of appointed 

members are being changed as well. 

 

The problem is this: this government is not taking into account 

what the impacts of these seemingly small changes will be. This 

Bill, like so many others that have been presented by this 

government throughout this session, gives the minister the 

utmost power to make decisions. If agreements cannot be 

reached, the minister will have the power to step in and set up 

an agreement himself. Ministerial approval also tends to be the 

end all and be all of most legislation that has been passed 

through this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have done some extensive consultation with 

regards to the impacts, both legal and social, of all these health 

Bills. In particular, The Health Districts Amendment Act has 

had some pretty strong opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again the people of La Loche have some 

grave concerns over the power of the minister. With regards to 

agreements between affiliates and the districts, the 

overwhelming power of the minister scares these people. 

 

As Violet Le Maigre said so well, St. Martin’s Hospital in La 

Loche is the only acute care centre in the proposed health 

district. If no agreement can be reached, it would close. Now 

where on earth will that leave the people of La Loche? I just 

don’t see how this government sees this type of legislation as a 

positive move towards the 21st century. Many rural 

municipalities as well as those in the North are feeling 

threatened by this pending health legislation. They will no 

longer have a say in decision making as the minister has the last 

call in every situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have raised these issues with this government 

time and time again and each time to no avail. The protests in  

Swift Current show that the people of this province feel ignored 

and left out in the cold by this government. The protest by 

nurses at the Weyburn hospital clearly show that health care 

professionals do not feel as though they have been consulted or 

listened to when it comes to the care that is needed in this 

province. What will it take for this government to listen to the 

concerns of people that it was elected to govern? 

 

The people of this province have told us what they want. They 

have told us what they need, and we are looking forward to 

expressing these concerns to this government in more detail as 

this Bill moves through this House. I therefore move that this 

Bill be passed on to Committee of the Whole. I look forward to 

discussing these amendments in greater detail at that time. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe this is 

an important piece of legislation before the Assembly and 

rightfully deserves to have some comments made on it and 

some of the inconsistencies in the Bill be pointed out to the 

government to allow them the opportunity, before it does reach 

Committee of the Whole, to consider making some changes to 

the Bill to make this better serve the people of Saskatchewan 

and not just simply serve the Minister of Health. 

 

I’d like to stand here today to reiterate some of the concerns 

that have been brought forward by my colleagues, the member 

from Cypress Hills and the member from Moosomin, when they 

brought forward some of their concerns as it relates to Bill 76. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is clearly an attack on local autonomy of 

the district health boards. Since 1993, our party has fought 

tooth and nail against this government’s attempt to destroy 

health care in Saskatchewan. The government and the minister 

opposite keep telling us on the opposition side that we have to 

move into the next century. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when 

you look at health care in this province, when you look at the 

infrastructure of this province, we are indeed moving into a new 

century, but the direction that this government is going, the new 

century is the 19th century, not the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Health care in this province was better at the turn of the century 

than it is today. Certainly we have a lot more technical, 

mechanical services available to health care, but the personal 

touch, the direct concern for patients, was much more evident at 

the turn of this century, Mr. Speaker, than it will be in 

Saskatchewan under the NDP (New Democratic Party) when 

we move into the 21st century. 

 

(1015) 

 

The sole mitigating factor in the government’s reform is their 

vain promise to let people control how their local health dollars 

are spent. Mr. Speaker, local control has been the touchstone of 

the minister’s defence of this radical surgery that he and his 

predecessors have carried out on health care in this province. 

 

Likewise, Mr. Speaker, we fought against the NDP’s attempt to 

thwart the parliamentary principle of ministerial responsibility. 

The whole basis, Mr. Speaker, for allowing elected health 

boards, was to allow the local board to direct their own dollars  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

and to assume the responsibility for that direction. But what the 

minister is trying to . . . has done . . . when his predecessor, the 

member from Regina Hillsdale while she sat in this Assembly, 

was to assume control of the process to appoint the health board 

members, allow them to take the responsibility for the 

minister’s decisions, and the government’s decisions, and the 

direction of health care that the Premier of this province 

wanted, demanded, and directed his ministers to fulfil. 

 

At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the changes to health care 

rest directly on the shoulders of the Premier. He is the man who 

is ultimately in charge and makes the final decisions for cabinet 

and the final decision for the NDP government as they sit there 

opposite. And every member of the public should hold the 

Premier responsible. 

 

The minister from Agriculture would like to share a little bit in 

that responsibility. But when it comes to the destruction of 

agriculture, he can take a good share of that blame, Mr. 

Speaker, but not when it comes to the destruction of health care. 

The current Minister of Health has to bear some of that 

responsibility. But his predecessors who set up the health 

district structure and the Premier have to bear the major part of 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In countless areas of this province the government has acted to 

set up outside agencies through which they can either hide their 

actions from the legislature or else use these agencies as 

scapegoats for the government’s destructive policies. And that’s 

exactly what the health district boards have become  simply 

the scapegoats for this government’s current direction in health. 

They have the responsibilities, they take the blame, while the 

minister pulls the strings. 

 

We have seen this particularly in the field of economic 

development, where the member from Regina Elphinstone has 

established a virtual fiefdom that is totally beyond the control of 

this Assembly. He is entitled to set up subsidiaries of various 

corporations. He’s allowed to put out loans. All without, Mr. 

Speaker, bringing it before the scrutiny of this House, without 

bringing it before the floor of this Assembly. 

 

He has set up a trade council so that we cannot question him on 

the performance of his trade missions. He has also set up a 

tourism board so that he cannot . . . shrug off responsibility for 

that sector of the province’s economy. 

 

But the Deputy Premier is not alone in these attempts. 

Beginning in 1993 the NDP tried to convince us that they don’t 

control health care any more. They tried to make us believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that they were simply the facilitators; they provided 

the funding to the local health districts and the local health 

districts made those decisions. And yet we have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, time and time again when that decision-making 

process has been directly influenced by the number of dollars 

and the formulas for the spending of those dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is one of the most crucial areas, is that formula system, 

Mr. Speaker, that says you can only have so many acute care 

beds per thousand people. You can only have so many 

long-term care beds per thousand people. You can have all the  

office space you want to have. You can have the best furniture 

in there, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter  because you can only 

spend so much money on beds. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people in the health districts don’t care 

whether the chairman of the board sits in an overstuffed leather 

chair or he sits on an ordinary kitchen table, providing they 

have health services. And that’s where the system is breaking 

down, Mr. Speaker. We have the overstuffed leather chairs but 

we don’t have the health care system for the patients when they 

need it. 

 

It’s unconscionable, Mr. Speaker, that under this government 

people go home from the hospitals still attached to their 

intravenous bags. Mr. Speaker, that should not be allowed to 

happen. If you live a block from the hospital, maybe somebody 

can get over there to rescue you if your intravenous needle 

comes out and you start to bleed. But if you live 20 miles from 

town, Mr. Speaker, 20 miles from the hospital  and that is not 

an unusual distance in rural Saskatchewan  you’re going to 

be in serious trouble. And it has happened, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

happened in the hospitals here, so why would it not happen 

when you’re at home  because it does, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s the kind of health care system that is being put in place in 

this province. 

 

We look at the long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, across 

this province, and people can’t get into them. Beds are being 

decreased, not increased. 

 

If you look at the demographics of Canada, and this province in 

particular, we’re an ageing population, Mr. Speaker. We will 

need more acute care . . . excuse me, not acute care beds, 

long-term care beds than fewer. And yet under the health plan 

of the Minister of Health and the Premier of this province we 

are decreasing the number of long-term care beds in most areas 

of this province. There is the odd location, Mr. Speaker, where 

they are increasing but that’s a very, very rare circumstance 

when that happens. 

 

It’s because the minister and his department have a formula in 

place that will direct the entire province’s health care system 

without regard to the needs of local people. The whole province 

will fit into his formula or else. And the “or else”, Mr. Speaker, 

is you won’t get funding unless you fit into the program. And 

that creates a great deal of hardship, Mr. Speaker, in a good 

many communities throughout this province. 

 

Every member of the province . . . every member of this 

Assembly, I’m sure, receives letters from across this province 

with people who have very serious concerns as to what are they 

going to do with their loved ones in cases where age is a major 

factor or where some other physical ailment or mental ailment 

causes them to be in need of long-term care, and yet we see 

fewer and fewer of the beds being made available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And fact is we hear that there is going to be some changes 

occurring that it’s going to decrease who can qualify for 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker; who is entitled for the 24-hour 

supervision that a good many people need, both seniors and 

people with physical ailments. Mr. Speaker, that’s totally  



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

unconscionable. Here we are, a province with significant 

resources, with significant opportunities, and yet we are turning 

the clock back on health care in this province, turning it back to 

the 19th century. Mr. Speaker, we’re not moving ahead as we 

enter the next millennium, we’re moving backwards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has tried to make the public 

believe that their local health boards are to blame for the 

deterioration of service that has been inflicted. They have given 

them the responsibilities without the decision-making process, 

and the minister stands in this House almost daily and says, it’s 

not my fault; it’s not my responsibility. It’s your local health 

district that did it. It’s the people that made the decision at that 

level that have caused your problems. 

 

Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, the people of the district 

health boards are limited by what the minister will allow them 

to do. They’re limited by their formulas and they’re limited by 

the funding. And it’s the minister who makes those decisions, 

not the local health board. The local health board simply has to 

fit their square peg into the round hole that he has allowed for 

them. And that creates a great deal of hardship. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the public is wiseing up to that. They 

understand, after they have had an opportunity to take a closer 

look at the health care system, that it’s not the local boards that 

are creating the difficulties for them. It’s not the local boards 

that isn’t providing them with the acute care that they need. It 

isn’t the local board that is denying them the long-term care; it’s 

the Minister of Health. And the public is all too well aware of 

who is pulling these puppet strings and the purse-strings for the 

district health boards. They’re very well aware that it’s the 

Minister of Health. 

 

And the Minister of Health and most of his colleagues, Mr. 

Speaker, are insulated. Insulated from the effects of the district 

health boards and the changes that Bill 76 will have on that very 

health system, because the vast majority of them reside in the 

major cities  be that Regina, Saskatoon, P.A. (Prince Albert), 

Moose Jaw, Estevan, Yorkton, North Battleford  areas of the 

province where their hospital is relatively secure. The member 

from Estevan shakes his head. Perhaps his hospital isn’t secure. 

Perhaps the people in Estevan should be afraid of what the 

Minister of Health is going to do to health care in south-eastern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because under the Minister of Health and his predecessor, the 

member from Regina Hillsdale, they eliminated a good, good 

many hospitals in south-east Saskatchewan. Gainsborough is 

gone; Oxbow is gone; Lampman is gone; Midale is gone, Mr. 

Speaker. All of these hospitals have ceased to exist as hospitals. 

Fillmore, Mr. Speaker, in the south-east district is not longer a 

hospital. Every hospital in the Southeast Health District has 

ceased to exist except for the one in Estevan. And now I hear 

that even that hospital is going to suffer more acute care bed 

cuts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was more hospital beds proposed . . . I 

wouldn’t want to say that they were actually there, because at 

the turn of the 19th century when it became the 20th century, 

there were not a lot of hospitals in south-east Saskatchewan, but  

there was within a few years thereafter. And probably by 1920 

we had more hospital beds in south-east Saskatchewan than we 

do today. 

 

And I wouldn’t want to say that we have more disease today, 

but I suspect that, Mr. Speaker, we have just as many accidents 

today if not more than we had in the 1920s. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all of this goes back to what the Department 

of Health and the Minister of Health, what their direction is and 

what they’re trying to do. It’s as if, Mr. Speaker, if the public 

needed further proof of this sham that we call the district health 

system and health in this province, we now have this Bill before 

us with the pretext of the charade to yet a more unbelievable 

degree. 

 

As we have stated before, Mr. Speaker, this Bill makes three 

distinct attacks on local autonomy. First, it further restricts the 

ability of the boards to acquire or dispose of property. 

 

Second, it extends the minister’s power to impose public 

administrators on health boards and their facilities. The boards 

will no longer even have the ability to choose whom they will 

employ to administer their facilities. The minister can assume 

that authority, and if the minister has the right to assume the 

authority, one would have to assume that he is going to exercise 

it or else why put it in the Bill at all. It’s simply another means 

by which the Minister of Health can take over the 

decision-making process of the district health boards while 

leaving the district health boards to face the responsibilities, to 

face the impact of those decisions. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, most seriously, it forces health boards 

to adopt policies that the minister has laid out for them. Well 

that’s nothing new, Mr. Speaker, because since the beginning, 

while it wasn’t articulated and it wasn’t written down, that is 

exactly what the Minister of Health has been doing with the 

health policy in this province, has been laying down to the 

health boards exactly what they will do, and there are financial 

consequences if the health boards fail to follow through on the 

minister’s desires. 

 

All of this from a minister who stands in this House day after 

day and claims to be the defender of local autonomy. Well he 

certainly puts all the blame on the local boards if not at least 

giving them the decision-making process. 

 

Well as the member from Cumberland might say, Mr. Speaker, 

the jig is up. With the introduction of this legislation, the 

minister is going to have to admit once and for all that no, local 

autonomy is not a priority of this government. Finally he’s 

going to have to admit that, Mr. Speaker, that local autonomy is 

not the priority of this government, which is what the member 

from Regina Hillsdale, while she was the minister of Health, 

was saying. It’s certainly what the current Minister of Health 

has been saying. It’s what the member from Moose Jaw, while 

he was the minister of Health, was saying. But this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, makes it plain that the Minister of Health is going to 

take control of health in this province while dumping the 

responsibility or consequences off on the district health boards. 

 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

(1030) 

 

Members will note that in my explanations of the amendments, 

I frequently used the words like further and extended. The truth 

of the matter is that The Health Districts Act already gives the 

minister vast powers over district boards. But that’s something, 

Mr. Speaker, that the government would like the public to 

forget. And if that was their plan, Mr. Speaker, perhaps they 

shouldn’t have added insult to injury by bringing in this Bill. 

 

This Bill serves as a wake-up call to health consumers and the 

tax-paying public about just what a farce this government’s 

policy of local autonomy are. Because they are a farce, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a black comedy however, when the minister makes 

the decisions and the people sitting on the local boards, some of 

them elected, some of them appointed, have to bear the 

consequences and accept the responsibility for the decisions 

that they did not have the right to make. The minister made the 

decisions, and they bear the consequences. Not only do the 

board members bear the consequences, Mr. Speaker, but the 

local consumers of health in each and every district across this 

province bear the consequences of those decisions. 

 

How many further miles are people going to have to drive to 

find a hospital, to find acute care beds in this province. The 

health centres, Mr. Speaker, across this province are good. But 

in a lot of cases, Mr. Speaker, it’s more than a band-aid station 

that’s needed. We need more and better service, Mr. Speaker, 

closer to home than what this minister is prepared to provide. 

 

Prior to the changes in health care, it was less than 10 miles that 

the average person travelled to a hospital in this province. That 

number has almost doubled, Mr. Speaker, almost doubled. And 

we now travel the furthest distance to a hospital of any province 

in this county. It used to be that in New Brunswick they had a 

greater distance to go, on average, to a hospital than we did. But 

that has turned around, Mr. Speaker. We now have the furthest 

distance to travel to get to a hospital. And while . . . as one 

person in Regina here told me, what’s your problem? You 

know, the hospital’s right here. The fact is there’s three 

hospitals right here, although that will soon be reduced to two. 

 

So within a few miles, within a few minutes, in Regina or 

Saskatoon, there’s a hospital available. But if you live in rural 

Saskatchewan  and health care professionals talk about that 

golden hour that’s needed, that golden hour from the time of an 

injury or onset of a disease attack, such as a heart attack, you 

have one hour, Mr. Speaker, to receive that critical treatment — 

in rural Saskatchewan too many people, Mr. Speaker, are 

outside of that golden hour. 

 

In too many cases it takes a half an hour just to get the 

ambulance there. So half an hour there and half an hour back, 

you used up the hour and you may have to spend some time 

treating this individual at the scene where the heart attack or the 

accident occurred, whatever the case may be. 

 

And we’re outside that golden hour, Mr. Speaker, outside of the 

golden hour. And that’s why the government didn’t want to 

release the numbers on how many people died in ambulances 

on the way to hospitals before the changes were made to health  

care. They released the numbers after. Yes, you can have a look 

at what happened in 1994. You can have a look when the 

numbers are available for 1995, but don’t ask us what the 

numbers were in 1991 or 1992 before the changes were made. 

 

I have to wonder why. Is there something to hide? Is there some 

reason why the Department of Health and the Minister of 

Health would not want the public to know how many people 

died en route in ambulances between the accident scene, the 

scene of the health attack, and the time they reached service, 

they reached treatment in a hospital. When you compare that to 

1991-92 to ‘93-94, ‘94-95, why would the government not 

provide that information? 

 

There must be some reason to it, Mr. Speaker. All we can say is 

that we’re suspicious. We have no proof because the minister’s 

department won’t provide the numbers. But we’re suspicious, 

Mr. Speaker, that there is a reason why those numbers are not 

available. And that reason being that the health care service in 

this province has not increased to the benefit of people, but 

rather, deteriorated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the choice that is facing the minister is a simple 

one. Either get off the backs of the district health boards and let 

them do their jobs as they were meant to do or, if he insists on 

imposing his will as a dictator over the health field, stand up, 

like the honourable man that he is, and let the public point the 

finger where the blame belongs. Let him shoulder the entire 

blame, or benefit, as the case may be, for the decisions being 

made in the health care system if he is going to assume the 

decision-making process within his own hands. 

 

If you make the decisions, Mr. Speaker, you should also be 

prepared to accept the consequences and the responsibility. 

Unfortunately though, the minister has designed a system in 

which he makes the decisions and somebody else has to accept 

the consequences and the responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issues that surround this Bill go to the heart of 

the government’s misguided approach to health care. We 

believe that all members should have time to consider fully 

where they stand. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I 

would move adjournment of this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 77 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 77  An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 82 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 82  An Act 

respecting Health Facilities be now read a second time. 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

several of my colleagues have spoken at length on this Bill, and 

they’ve raised what I believe are some very valid points. 

 

I realize that this will be the last time our caucus can speak to 

this Bill, so I’d like to add a few comments before it is passed 

to Committee of the Whole. At that time we’ll spend some time 

questioning the government about this Bill and about the 

impacts it will have on health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the legal opinions we have about The 

Health Facilities Licensing Act calls this a particularly 

dangerous piece of legislation because at the outset it appears 

innocuous. However because it is so loosely drafted and gives 

the minister both a surprising level of discretion in granting 

licences, and so little discretion removing licences once 

granted, it is one that must be subjected to significant scrutiny 

and debate. We agree with this, Mr. Speaker, and that is why we 

were so concerned about discussing this Bill in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that same legal opinion goes on to say, effectively 

the government is trying to, by regulation, remove services that 

are presently now insured to a second-tier system. This certainly 

should not be done outside the context of the legislature, public 

debate, and accountability the members of the government 

would have to face from defining in the statute what health 

services will be de-insured for the purpose of this statute. 

 

As the members opposite know, that is consistent with what we 

have been saying all along. This government needs to be 

accountable. To give them some credit, they know how to 

present a Bill that appears harmless or perhaps even beneficial 

to the people of this province. But this is deceptive, and the 

members opposite know it is deceptive. Instead of opening up 

the implications of this new legislation to the people they 

represent, they hide them behind broad philosophical 

statements. They start spouting off phrases like universal 

medical care and equality. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have already pointed out, 

this is a joke. There is no such thing as equal medical care in 

this province ever since the government decided to tear apart 

rural Saskatchewan. They sat in the cabinet offices and chose 

rural people as their victims. Then they started to methodically 

dismantle the entire health care infrastructure in the province. 

 

This was in 1991, Mr. Speaker, and it is still going on. Maybe 

people thought after the initial cuts there would be no more 

pain, but the pain has continued. And rural people are 

staggering under the cuts the NDP government chose to make 

five years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to go back to our legal analysis of this 

Bill. The lawyer’s summary statement of this Bill says, 

notwithstanding my strong wording, this is not a direct 

de-insurance statute. All it would do would be to create an 

alternative for certain services outside of the hospitals. 

 

The reality as demonstrated from the experiences in Alberta and  

in Britain would be a two-tiered system where the hospital is 

clogged with those who are unable to afford to pay for the 

services themselves, while those who have the money can 

obtain services much more quickly than those who do not. 

 

It certainly does not appear to be the type of framework 

envisioned by either Tommy Douglas and the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) or by the royal 

commission on medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over and over again we hear how this government 

is supposedly so adamantly opposed to two-tiered systems. But 

the reality is they have continued to create a two-tiered system 

with their slash-and-burn reform of health care. There’s one 

level for urban Saskatchewan and another for rural. 

 

Mr. Speaker, don’t get me wrong. I’m not saying the cities are 

getting off scot-free either. They are also struggling to deal with 

health cuts. But you will notice that Saskatoon and Regina, 

where so many of the cabinet ministers live, seem to be taking a 

lighter hit than the rural areas. The exception to this would be 

the Plains centre, but that facility was built to mainly serve rural 

people so it looks like another direct hit on rural residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some may call this discrepancy between urban and 

rural cuts a coincidence but I call it a blatant abuse of power by 

the Premier and his ministers. Mr. Speaker, we are still trying to 

figure out why the government felt the need to introduce this 

Bill this session. As my colleagues have pointed out, the 

Premier himself admitted that this Bill addresses no immediate 

problem and that it was a statement of principle and philosophy. 

 

What kind of government needs to legislate philosophy? Excuse 

me for being sceptical, Mr. Speaker, but shouldn’t the laws of 

our province have some practical reason for existing? That’s 

what I mean about this government hiding behind the feel-good, 

soft statements. They are trying to convince Saskatchewan 

people that this Bill would protect them from nasty, outside 

influences on our medical system. But the fact is that it’s not 

the outside influence that is threatening the people of this 

province. It is the government’s choice to decimate health care 

that we should be afraid of. 

 

So when the Premier calls this Bill a statement of philosophy, 

he is misleading the people It is their way of trying to hide the 

bad decisions this government is making. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know how much more we can say on this Bill. We could talk 

for ever about this government, what this government is doing 

to health care, but when push comes to shove this government 

will do what it wants anyway. 

 

I hope that when we discuss this Bill in Committee of the 

Whole we can come to some understanding of what this Bill 

will mean in the long run, because unlike the government, we 

are looking to the future and we do care what kind of health 

system we leave for our children and to future generations. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s time, Mr. 

Speaker, that we had a little bit of debate further on this Bill,  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

The Act respecting Health Facilities. The need for that debate 

arises of course from discussions that we have had with folks 

out in the province over the weekend. And it has come to our 

attention that an awful lot of folks out there really haven’t got 

an in-depth understanding of what the health Bills in this 

session are going to be doing to their personal, individual lives. 

 

So our caucus agrees with little about what the minister has 

said, or those things that he has proposed in relationship to this 

Bill. And that has come from our own thinking as we watched 

the Bill and listened to the debate. 

 

But now that we have further evidence from the general public 

that they want to know to know more about it, we feel that it is 

only prudent for us enter the debate a little further, to bring 

about the opportunity for the government, and specifically the 

minister, to know and understand the concerns of the general 

public so that he might consider possible amendments or 

changes to the Bill. 

 

There was an element of his second reading speech  and I’m 

referring to the minister  that I must wholeheartedly agree 

with. And there are always of course those times, Mr. Speaker, 

when we find that there are things that the government is doing 

and saying that are right. And when we  in accordance to our 

stated position before this session of the Assembly began  

when we see something that we agree with we are going to 

applaud that and we’re going to support it; when we see those 

things that we don’t agree with we are going to try as best we 

can to offer alternatives. 

 

(1045) 

 

Now the minister pointed out that this Bill goes to the heart of 

the differences in philosophy between our two parties. And this 

is absolutely true when it comes to other Bills of health care. 

We may suggest that the government has actually . . . or acted 

hypocritically, but on this one, they have been true to their own 

stated philosophy. Of course, we nonetheless believe that this 

philosophy is wrong even though we agree that it is there and 

we agree to disagree. 

 

The members opposite have spent their lives convincing 

themselves and convincing the public that only one big 

government can solve the people’s problems for them  big 

government — big government of course run by an NDP 

Premier and an NDP Party. 

 

Our party has always said and will always rely on things that are 

somewhat different than that. This is an insult of course to the 

enterprising nature and the spirit of Saskatchewan people, to 

think that nobody can think for themselves, that nobody can 

understand anything, that the only thing that can be done is to 

throw up our hands and allow the Minister of Heath and the 

Premier to do all of our thinking for us. 

 

And our party has always said that people are far, far better than 

that in Saskatchewan. If in fact people can think for themselves 

in the rest of the world, then the people of Saskatchewan can 

probably do better than that every time. 

 

The minister is quite proud to say in the press that this Bill 

prevents the emergence of a two-tiered health care system in the 

province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we tend to disagree with that. His stated 

intention in this Bill is obviously self-defeating as we consider 

some of the reality of the world around us. As the young people 

like to say these days, he says that as though it were a bad thing. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all very well aware of the financial 

pressures that exist on the public health system in today’s 

economic atmosphere. 

 

Allowing private health services does not affect the ability of 

government to continue to provide good quality, public health 

care, and in fact it can be enhanced. And we think that we can 

show the minister ways in which the private health care system 

could probably complement the present system, and that in fact 

it would take some of the pressure off of the economic situation 

in our province as a whole, not only just in health care. If we 

allow the private sector to become involved to some extent, 

most certainly we will see a situation where people can of 

course go to the private clinic and pay their own way. That frees 

up an awful lot of the availability of doctors and nurses and 

machinery within the structured health care system for those 

other people that are standing in line. 

 

And if we want to see some evidence of that, I think we need 

only to look at eye care. As you know, Mr. Speaker, a lot of 

people go over to Alberta to get their eyes fixed. These days 

there’s quite a common operation that people are very much 

aware of, to fix cataracts. And of course, if you go over to 

Alberta and pay 2,500 or $3,000 to the doctors in Calgary, they 

will remove your cataract and fix your eye. And in many, many 

cases people have improved their vision in a miraculous way. I 

think the success record on that type of operation is extremely 

high in percentages and people are very proud of that. 

 

Now allowing that process to go on has proven that we have 

taken an awful lot of pressure off of the Saskatchewan health 

system, and what could be wrong with that? What could be 

wrong with allowing people to get their eyes fixed immediately 

when they want to, simply by walking in and saying, I can 

afford this; this is something I choose to do for myself; this is 

something that I want to do for my health. 

 

Or it might even be that you might have a grandmother or a 

grandfather or some family member, and you might say, well 

for a birthday present, I’m going to pay that Bill for them and 

help them to restore their vision. I will take them to Alberta and 

buy them the right and the ability to be able to see once again 

clearly what is going on in the world. Although I suspect that in 

Saskatchewan it has been a necessary kind of thought pattern 

for the government to want people to see with clouded vision so 

as to not see through what socialism and the left-wing 

philosophy of the NDP has really done to our province over the 

last forty years. 

 

But realistically, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that 

health care can be greatly benefited by allowing some diversion 

from the present plans. And to simply pass a law now that says 

everybody is going to have to remain the same and be the same,  



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

that’s not going to work because not everybody’s needs are the 

same and not everybody’s wants are the same. Some people 

may want to have a bypass, other people may choose to have 

some other operation to fix their heart. And we’ve all heard 

about the little balloons that they put up your veins and fix your 

veins up without having to go through an open-heart surgery. 

People may have the idea that it would be better for them if they 

could choose that. 

 

Well if you had a little clinic that did just specifically that and 

those people that qualified because of their medical 

circumstance could pay for that and go and get that done, they 

might be able to pay a few dollars and put off the heart 

operation. That certainly would take an awful lot of pressure off 

the present system within our province. An awful lot of our 

doctors that do heart operations find themselves very busy. 

Obviously we can’t afford to have extra doctors to the point 

where they sit around doing nothing, but at the same time to be 

overworked and to have these long waiting-lists must put an 

awful lot of pressure on them individually as persons. To think 

that you have a good work schedule  it’s full, it’s great  but 

if you have a schedule where all of a sudden you find one of 

your patients that’s waiting succumbs and perhaps dies or 

becomes sicker, you must personally feel some responsibility 

and there must be an awful lot of stress involved in that for 

those doctors. 

 

So if they knew that there was a private place that some of those 

patients could go to buy a few months extra time while the 

waiting-lists get worked down, I’m sure they’d be quite happy 

to refer those folks that would qualify the best to those 

circumstances. 

 

So there are a lot of really good places where the two kinds of 

systems that we have in the world around us could complement 

one another. They don’t need to be at loggerheads, we don’t 

believe. We think that they should be allowed to work and 

coexist and that would bring about the best health care system I 

think for all of the people. You free up the system that is 

presently there, and you also allow those who have immediate 

needs to go on somewhere else to find a cure for their problems. 

 

Now the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, will say, ah but no, 

you see we can’t allow that to happen because we’ll get this 

two-tiered health care system within our province. The rich will 

be able to buy an operation and the poor won’t. Well that’s not 

the way it works you see, because the rich are not here to start 

with. They’ve already left Saskatchewan a long time ago 

because they know they can’t be rich if they stay here and pay 

the taxes and the utility bills and all of the things that are 

imposed by government on us. So most of the rich people have 

a base in Alberta or somewhere else in the world already, but 

the few that do have the potential to become better off already 

have seen the opportunities of better health care other places 

and they simply don’t stay here and wait within the system 

anyway. 

 

They go to Minot, North Dakota; or off to Rochester  well 

you name it, any place where you can buy a service that’s for 

sale. And some I dare say would even go to Europe and get the 

kind of medical attention they need. I’ve heard of cases where  

people have gone to Mexico. Now that struck me a little odd 

because I didn’t think that Mexico had anything to offer in 

medicine that we don’t have, but obviously I guess some people 

think they do so they go there, and I guess they have the right to 

do that and they do it. 

 

So those that can afford it are now jumping the system anyway. 

So if you provide those services at home then you are actually 

being intelligent enough to capture some of those dollars that 

are disappearing into the world around us, once again keeping 

things at home by simply loosening up your regulations and 

allowing people to have those systems here. 

 

Now take the eye thing, for example. We went through this a 

couple of years ago and I remember the great debate. And there 

were people that wanted to bring the eye services in private 

facilities into Saskatchewan similar to those in Alberta. 

Wouldn’t it have been better if we could have had those 

operations done here even if the private sector were doing it and 

charging for it? Then those people in that private service would 

be based as companies working in our province and they no 

doubt then would pay taxes. They would pay utility bills; they 

would pay all of those things that go into government at all 

three levels, all three levels of government; and they would help 

to pay for the infrastructure within our province. They would be 

contributing financially so that our highways could have more 

dollars to fix them. It spins off to every segment of the 

government and every segment of society. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this quite frankly is a Bill that will 

self-destruct because quite frankly you cannot legislate people 

to stay home in a free country and it’s just not going to happen. 

And that’s what is happening here. We have the minister, in a 

second reading speech, basically making false claims to things 

that are going to happen that are going to be great and 

wonderful. And they’re just not going to happen because those 

folks that have freedom of movement in a country, as we have 

fortunately still . . . maybe this government would rather that we 

had restrictions so that we couldn’t move, I don’t know  but 

as it stands now we’re not like Russia or some of those other 

countries where we are tied to our system and tied to our 

provinces. We don’t have to have a passport to go to Alberta yet 

but we may need one to get to Quebec before long; although I 

don’t know why we’d ever want to go there to begin with. 

 

But the reality is that we have freedom of movement in this 

country. I can go down to the border crossing south of home . . . 

probably we go into the states simply by asking a few questions 

and being honest with the man there and telling him where I’m 

going and what I’m going to do. He of course has the option to 

search my vehicle, myself, and question me; but it never 

happens because we look him straight in the eye and tell him 

the truth and we’re allowed to leave and go. And we can travel 

all over the United States to go and visit our children that are 

going to school down there or working over there at different 

things. 

 

And we have total freedom of movement. Nobody asked me if 

I’m going to stop off at the hospital in Minot and have my eyes 

operated on or have by heart checked. And in fact if I get sick, 

even the medicare system here will provide some assistance for  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

me to get the health care that I need. Now there are restrictions 

on that, and I quite agree with the government making those 

restrictions in most areas because we can’t simply have people 

running off to the states and then sending the bill back home. 

But if they’re willing to pay for it themselves, they most 

certainly can and do. And there is nothing stopping them from 

doing that, and there shouldn’t be. 

 

So reality is that this Bill is destined to self-destruct because it’s 

non-enforceable. People simply will go and leave the province 

to get the two-tiered health care that this minister is trying to 

stop. It’s a reality of our world. You’re out of tune with history; 

out of sync with the timing of the development of our nation. 

That’s the problem. 

 

This kind of a Bill was something that 25 years ago probably 

would have been passed and everybody would have said yes, 

most of us are going to have to do that because quite 

realistically most of us didn’t have fast cars, most of us didn’t 

have the ability to buy airplane tickets. Financially, we were a 

poorer province in those days. We all basically had the 

philosophy and the idea of thinking that we stayed more or less 

at home. 

 

I can remember as a young man thinking, that farm down south 

of Gull Lake, a trip to Swift Current was a major excursion that 

we would probably venture out on once a year. Dad would fire 

up the old 1 ton truck, which wasn’t probably really in today’s 

terms fit to drive 10 miles down the road to the neighbour’s, but 

we would jaunt on down at 40 fast miles an hour down that old 

rough road  and the Minister of Highways may want to pay 

attention to the fact that in those days the roads were even 

worse than they are now  and we once in awhile drove in the 

ditch just because it was smoother then too, just the same as 

we’re doing now. 

 

But the terms of reference that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, 

relating to this health Bill are simply this: that in those days we 

did stay at home more and we were content to be at home more 

and this kind of a Bill would have worked back in those days 

for most people because we simply didn’t travel. 

 

But now we have an affluent society that has learned how to get 

around. We have the technology of the computers and the 

Internet, I guess, is available showing people where you can get 

what fancy operation the best. And I suspect there’ll probably 

be even some instructions on how you can do it yourself before 

very long. All you need is probably a scalpel and some 

painkiller and away you go. 

 

But the reality being that that’s the kind of world we’re in  a 

technological, developed world where people know and 

understand what’s available and what they can get around them, 

and they’re not restricted to having to stay in Regina any more. 

They know what’s available. They know that you can go to 

Alberta to get your eyes fixed. They know that you can go to 

Minot to get surgeries of different kinds, and some that are even 

the type that we would rather not mention are performed 

outside of our province. 

 

But reality is that those things are there and we have to face  

those realities, so no use burying our heads in the sand and 

saying that we can legislate our people to stay home. You can 

legislate morality and you can legislate immorality and you can 

do all of those things, but people will live their lives as they 

please in a free country. And so reality here is that this Bill is a 

self-destruct kind of a Bill. 

 

So ensuring that everyone has access to exactly the same 

services, they are only ensuring that the services that everyone 

has are, at best, going to be mediocre. And another thought 

trend comes from that, Mr. Speaker, because that is true. When 

you try to serve everybody with exactly the same kind of 

medicine, then the whole system has to become mediocre 

because there is no room for the medical profession to sort of 

expand its horizons and to try new, experimental or better kinds 

of quality of stitching or kinds of operations that nowadays . . . 

They have gall-bladder operations, I understand, that will make 

my point the best. 

 

And I can recall that 30 years ago, a person I knew well went in 

for a gallstone operation, and it was a long, painful, and terrible 

type of risky operation. And the gallstones were removed and 

the patient was sick for 10 days of flat on their backs for a week 

in the hospital and another three or four days of recuperating, 

learning almost how to walk again. 

 

(1100) 

 

These days they take a little incision no bigger than a dime and 

put in a little tube in there and it goes in and does the work and 

they watch it on monitors. And the next day the person is out 

walking around the streets with a little bit of pain and a little 

discomfort. But it’s wonderful what people can do. 

 

And if we hadn’t allowed doctors to go ahead and use those 

kinds of things, to try it on one person while they were still 

using the old method on the other one, then we would never 

have developed this practice in our province. We might have 

heard about it in New York but never, ever had the will or the 

opportunity to go ahead and put these processes into place in 

our province. 

 

So by saying that everybody has got to have the same, are we 

saying, well you all got to have your gallstones taken out with a 

scalpel? Or do we now say no, we’re going to free up the 

system and we’re going to allow the medical professions to use 

those technologies that are available. And start to say well, on 

this one we’ll try a better approach or a different approach and 

see how it works. 

 

And the truth of the matter is it’s called, Mr. Speaker, the 

practice of medicine. It is not called the exact science of 

medicine; it’s called the practice of medicine. And that very 

simply means that every patient, when they’ve come under the 

care of a doctor, every patient becomes a human guinea pig. 

Because it is the practice of medicine. Nobody knows that what 

you tried on the other person will absolutely, 100 per cent work 

on this one. Most of the time it does, but sometimes it doesn’t. 

 

So it is a practice. They practise on everybody. And you could 

carry that to an extreme, but the reality is that it is something  



2674 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

that they are practising. There’s a little bit of experimentation 

with it because nobody knows how each metabolism will 

respond to different drugs or to different procedures that are 

done medically. And so if you’re trying to put a system together 

where everybody is treated equally, the whole system will 

become mundane, mediocre, and very, very poor in quality. 

You’re dragging people down to the lowest common 

denominator instead of pulling society up by its bootstraps 

collectively, together, into a more prosperous way of life. 

 

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I see an awful lot of this old 

philosophy starting to creep back into the legislation in this last 

session of the Assembly  the old idea where we go back to 

power mongering by the head of government. Unfortunately 

this has nothing to do with providing the best quality of services 

for the people that are involved. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we talked to people over the weekend out in 

the communities of Regina and Saskatoon and in rural 

Saskatchewan as well. Fortunately we were able to get around; 

it was a nice weekend. We talked to folks about what’s going 

on in their minds in terms of health care. “What do you think is 

happening?” sort of is the questions that I posed myself; “What 

is your impression of what is happening with the Bills that are 

coming into play that will affect your lives?” 

 

Quite frankly, most people don’t really understand what the 

legislation that we are passing is going to do to Saskatchewan 

and particularly to their individual lives. They don’t understand 

it because they really haven’t had it explained to them and they 

really haven’t in most cases taken the time, quite frankly, to 

worry about it. They’re busy doing their own thing. That’s the 

independent nature of a free people that have the freedom and 

the right of choice of movement. 

 

But it is our duty and our job as elected representatives to take 

up their cause for them because that’s why they elect us. And 

they look at us, quite frankly, straight in the eye and say: well, 

Jack, I hope you’re doing a good job down there. Well the truth 

of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that if we are going to be doing 

our good job down here, we have to challenge this legislation. 

 

Because the truth of the matter here again is that the folks out 

there have placed a faith and a trust in us, one which I think 

probably for the last few weeks we haven’t been taking 

seriously enough because we thought people knew and 

understand what was happening to them in this legislation. And 

we kind of took the position that we felt that maybe the grass 

roots, the sort of the people out there in the rest of the province, 

should be writing letters to the Minister of Health or should be 

phoning him up and telling him look, we don’t like this. 

 

But reality is that folks just don’t know about it. And that 

makes the responsibility fall on our shoulders very heavily now, 

as their representatives, to bring about debate so that we can 

present the opposite point of view  not only the opposite 

point of view but to deliver to the minister for consideration the 

concepts that are going to work and the ones that are going to 

fail and to try to propose some alternatives. 

 

So quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing today is  

taking some time to talk to the Minister of Health through you 

and to you to the Assembly, but more particularly directly to the 

Minister of Health. We want to talk to him about his Bill and 

the need for him to make some changes  changes I think 

basically in this Bill, in the general philosophy of the 

government. 

 

Now I know that’s hard; it won’t be easy. But in financial 

matters, this government has proven that they have been able to 

do a lot of that. There’s no question that we can give the 

government credit for having done some good things in terms 

of finances. 

 

Well if they can do good things in finances that are totally, 

completely against the fundamental philosophy of the left of the 

philosophical spectrum, if they can pull that up to the middle or 

even to the right of ideas in terms of how to finance and run a 

province, well we believe there’s a possibility there for the 

government to be able to do that in health care as well. 

 

Now we believe that universality in health care is a fundamental 

principle that this government will hang on to, and probably 

you should. But there’s no reason why you can’t allow that to 

bend and sway or to be manipulated a little bit here and there in 

order to experiment with some new ideas and some new 

concepts to make the system work better. 

 

And that’s what we’re really all about here, Mr. Speaker. We 

want the system of health care to work better. We don’t want 

necessarily just to destroy the government today, because 

they’re going to be elected for another three or four years, 

whatever they choose to stay. So that’s unrealistic; we’re not 

going to make the government fall on this Bill. So our intent 

here has to be very clearly one thing. And that is to try to 

provide the government with some time to think about an 

alternative. 

 

And I can see the Health minister has been scratching his head a 

little bit over there, and I believe that probably the reality of 

democratic debate, being what it is  a slow, painful process 

 does work. And we are getting through to him, I’m sure, as 

we stand here and discuss the reality that his Bill will not ever 

succeed to do anything that is good for him, and in fact it may 

even do some bad, but it will be circumvented and it simply will 

end up being a piece of paper filed in the archives. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we encourage the Minister of Health to go 

along with our ideas, to rethink this position, to experiment 

with some private clinic types of operation. There are several 

kinds that we can make suggestions of. But of course it gets 

later in the morning, and because of that we want to allow the 

minister to do some more thinking and deliberating. 

 

And I want him to take the time to phone some of the folks out 

in the country that are interested in health care things but are 

not necessarily tied to the system  some folks that are not on 

the health board, some folks that are not doctors and nurses 

necessarily, but some of the folks maybe that are in industry or 

business. The grocery store owner maybe down at Maple Creek, 

or perhaps the hardware man down at Estevan, or the guy that 

runs the machine shop over there  those people have  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2675 

some ideas. And if they’re told how the system is going to work 

and how it’s going to be changed by this legislation, I’m sure 

they can offer you some reasonable suggestions of areas in 

health care that you could allow the private sector to work on, 

just to put it to the test to see that it will work. 

 

And we believe that it will. It has worked in Alberta, and it’s 

working well especially, as I’ve pointed out, in eye care. So 

why not give it a try here? Let’s back off of this hard-nosed, 

philosophical idea that only Big Brother can think for us, only 

the government has the ability to do for us the things that we 

need to have done. Let’s give people some of that opportunity 

to think for themselves  some of that opportunity to make 

some choices for their own lives and how they will live them. 

And let them even have the choice of where they’re going to 

spend some of their money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, because we believe that the minister needs to 

take that time and think about it, I therefore move that debate 

on this Bill be now adjourned. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:10 a.m. until 11:16 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  20 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Lautermilch 

Upshall Kowalsky Renaud 

Koenker Trew Scott 

Nilson Cline Serby 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Flavel Thomson  

 

Nays  7 

 

Aldridge Bjornerud Krawetz 

Gantefoer Toth Heppner 

Goohsen   

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 114  An Act 

respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for 

District Health Boards and their Affiliates be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just want 

to add a few more comments regarding the Bill that is before 

us, Bill No. 114, I believe we’re discussing, the health 

foundations Act, and just reiterate the fact that we have a 

number of serious concerns regarding this Bill. It seems to me, 

as I indicated the other day, that some of the concerns we have 

is the way the Bill is being brought forward to this Assembly,  

and the fact that the Bill is . . . the minister is indicating that this 

is certainly a piece of legislation that is offering a real 

opportunity to the people of Saskatchewan to support their 

health facilities. And while that is true, Mr. Speaker, the 

problem we have with this piece of legislation is that it really 

doesn’t give or do what the minister was telling us or what the 

minister is leading us to believe. 

 

This piece of legislation, while it does give individuals the 

opportunity to indicate where they would like to send their 

funds  whether it’s through a bequeath, through a will, or 

whether it’s through a donation  where an individual would 

indicate that they would like those funds to go to specific 

service in their district or to a specific facility, yes they can do 

that, Mr. Speaker. The Bill also brings out the fact that the 

commission or the board of directors that will be installed to 

administer these funds do not have to follow the guidelines or 

the leading of those individuals. And that’s where we have a 

real problem. 

 

And as I indicated the other day, Mr. Speaker, the reason we 

have that problem is because people today, even under the 

present system, are questioning whether or not the funds or the 

donations they are making to a specific facility such as, for an 

example, the Kipling wellness clinic or the hospital in Kipling 

or the care home or the Moosomin facility . . . and those are just 

a few. Those are some in my constituency but we could go right 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, and we could point out time 

and time again where individuals have made donations directly 

to facilities because they have appreciated the work that that 

facility, and the individuals who work in those facilities, have 

done to serve the needs of the community. 

 

And I just raise that. And as I recall, just the other day attending 

a funeral and the family had indicated that it was the desire of 

the deceased that, in lieu of flowers, donations be made to the 

facility that had provided for that person’s needs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also had a letter just sent to me from an 

individual who is sending donations. And the feeling was that 

her donations were not being used in the way that she had 

directed; that they were now being sent to the district and then 

those donations were being lost and being utilized in other areas 

of the district rather than addressing the specific need that was 

being represented by that donation. 

 

And so, as I’ve indicated already, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that 

the individuals are quite concerned and feel that they should 

have the ability to direct their funds, that they should have the 

ability to direct how those funds are used and where they’re 

being used, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I stand up and that’s 

why I stand opposed to this piece of legislation. I can live with 

the legislation, our caucus can live with this piece of legislation, 

if indeed the Minister of Health does the honourable thing and 

indeed instructs his board of directors . . . although I would, 

number one, say forget about establishing another appointed 

board. 

 

Allow the process to operate whereby people can make  



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

donations to their specific health district right now, as we have 

it, and forget about putting in place another group of 

individuals where . . . a group of individuals that the 

government says it won’t cost them anything because they’re 

going to use the interest that is generated from the trust fund to 

pay their salaries. 

 

The realities are, Mr. Speaker, that is not what individuals want. 

When they make a donation for a facility, they make the 

donation on the understanding that that may not be the total 

amount of money that is needed for a particular project or a 

particular . . . a specific piece of equipment. But that that fund 

will . . . those monies will be put together with other monies. 

They will be invested. And then when the monies have 

accumulated to meet the need and to whatever the cost of a 

specific piece of equipment for that hospital is, they will be 

used appropriately. 

 

However if you’re paying a board of directors out of those 

interests that you’re making or the money that that trust is 

making, Mr. Speaker, that means that there’s that much less to 

be put towards the actual services, in our province, of health 

care delivery. And that was one of the reasons we opposed the 

Bill No. 82 about . . . well I can see why the government is 

bringing it in. The fact is the government is bringing it in 

because they are reducing the funding to the point that 

individuals across this province are starting to look at 

alternatives to providing services. 

 

And so it’s . . . I think it’s quite hypocritical of the government 

to tell us of how good our health care system is when people 

themselves are finding as I . . . even just before I came into the 

Assembly this morning, a call from the Swift Current area 

regarding their health facilities and the meeting that they’re 

planning. We’re seeing it all across this province, Mr. Speaker, 

where people are getting sick and tired of what the government 

has been doing, how the government has offloaded onto local 

people. And then while they’ve offloaded, they tell people but 

you can’t do this or you can’t do that or we’re going to control 

how you spend the money. 

 

And that’s the problem we have with the health foundations 

Act. Mr. Speaker, the government can make this Act, if you 

will, an Act that is workable and an Act that the people of 

Saskatchewan could certainly accept by doing two things. 

 

Number one, remove the appointment of a board of directors; 

allow the health districts to manage the funds that are 

designated within their district. And as well take out the word 

“not” and make sure that the directors, which would be the 

district boards, are bound by the directives of the individuals 

who would make that donation or make that bequest. And that’s 

all we ask, Mr. Speaker. And then this Act would certainly meet 

with all the requirements of individuals who have a desire in 

their heart to put funding towards health services and health 

care in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I have a feeling that this government 

isn’t going listen again. I have a feeling that this Minister of 

Health isn’t going to listen. I’m offering these suggestions. And 

to give the Minister of Health the opportunity to review my  

suggestions, review the suggestions of our caucus, I’m going to 

ask, Mr. Speaker, that the motion that we have before us: 

 

be amended by deleting all the words after “That” and 

substituting the following therefor: 

 

“Bill 114, An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown 

Foundation for District Health Boards and their Affiliates, 

be now read a second time but that it be read a second time 

this day six months hence.” 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington. 

 

The Speaker:  Not having seen the amendment before, the 

Chair would like to take just a moment to reflect on its 

admissibility. 

 

I have reviewed the precise wording of the amendment moved 

by the hon. member from Moosomin, which I would like to 

bring to the attention of the Assembly, the wording, and then 

bring the Assembly a ruling. 

 

The wording is that the motion: 

 

be amended by deleting all the words after the word “That” 

and substituting the following therefor: 

 

“Bill 114, An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown 

Foundation for District Health Boards and their Affiliates, 

be now read a second time but that it be read a second time 

this day six months hence.” 

 

The amendment in effect calls for the motion to be read a 

second time now and then read again a second time six months 

hence. As this is not a workable motion, amendment, I must 

find it not in order. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dealing with this 

particular Bill, our caucus has a number of serious concerns 

about this Bill. We voiced concerns this morning and over the 

past number of weeks on some of the other directions that this 

government is going when we’re talking about health. And I 

think this particular one is an area that really is going to slow 

down and it’s going to make people wonder why in the world 

they should support voluntarily the many ventures that 

Saskatchewan people have supported in the past about our 

health care. 

 

And I think it’s one of the strong things that Saskatchewan 

people have always shown, is the sense of being volunteers  a 

sense of helping, a sense of giving, a sense of supporting. And 

our health care systems throughout Saskatchewan have had 

numerous organizations over the past, and do at the present 

time, that support health care. 

 

I was at a meeting of recognition of health care supporters in 

my home town of Rosthern about three weeks ago where there 

were some 10, 15 people who have been long-time supporters 

of the hospital system who were recognized for the work that  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

they’ve done and the work that they are doing and the work that 

they plan on continuing to do. 

 

And I have no doubt that some of these people, in their wills 

and in their financial planning, do have the hospitals in mind. 

And I think when we look at Bill 114, we’re going to find that 

some of those plans may be changed substantially because of 

what this Bill does. 

 

On the surface this Bill seems entirely positive. And there are 

many good aspects of it. I think what it says basically, dealing 

with contributing to health care systems, that’s good. However 

there are some profound issues buried deep inside where 

probably the government had hoped we wouldn’t look. We did 

look and we saw a few things that I think the public needs to be 

made aware of, and the people that I’ve talked to have some 

very definite concerns about this. 

 

The government’s sloppy and cruel approach to health reform 

has left our rural areas with a truly second-class health care 

system. And it’s second class basically because of time. Many 

of our health care situations are emergency sorts of situations, 

and in those kinds of things, the closer you are to a hospital, the 

closer you are to all the best specialists in the country, the better 

health care system you get. And that is a particular aspect that 

rural Saskatchewan has lost. 

 

As we look at this particular Bill, we need to look at why 

people might consider contributing to hospitals, and then when 

we get into the Bill itself, what is there that may actually change 

that. 

 

People tend to give to organizations that they feel are 

productive and helpful organizations to their community and to 

the provinces. Health care is one of those. It’s one of those 

things that hardly anyone goes through a lifetime without 

having some exposure to and being thankful for. And as we’ve 

been exposed to the health care system and as it has done us 

good service, we become sympathetic, we become supporters of 

it. 

 

And so as we plan on what to do with our estates and where to 

leave the money, we obviously look at health care as one of 

those possibilities, because it has done something for us and we 

want to, in return, help it to do the same sorts of things for 

others. And that is what this Bill addresses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier loves to talk about how we should 

avoid a two-tier health system, but we have already created one 

 the one that I mentioned, the urban areas, and another one 

for rural areas that are vastly, vastly inferior. 

 

It may start off with something as simple as looking at what 

happens with the availability of the emergency vehicles to take 

you to the hospital  the ambulance services. There are parts 

of Saskatchewan where you will have to wait from 30 minutes 

to 45 minutes for an ambulance to arrive, and then to take you 

back. In many cases, that creates a situation where the time that 

has elapsed is so great that it may be too late to accomplish 

what the health care system could accomplish if they didn’t 

have to go as far. So that’s at the very beginning of the rural  

health care system. 

 

Then we’ve had in the past, we’ve seen many of the hospitals 

closing down, which means that the accessibility is further 

away. We add to that, with the decrease in the number of 

hospitals, what about the people that are working there? With 

the urban areas getting the facilities, getting the new hospitals, 

that’s where the best of our care-givers will want to go. That’s 

where our new care-givers coming out of our teaching facilities 

will be going as well. That has created a two-tier health system. 

It’s created a two-tier health system without any talk of 

charging people for services. It’s just done that by the way it’s 

been organized. 

 

We have now a situation not unlike the turn of the century 

where people’s access to health care is dependent on the charity 

of others in their community to ensure those services are there 

since the government has clearly abandoned the needs of the 

people. And that is exactly what this particular Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, addresses, and that is the aspect of the charity of 

others in the community, because when money is given to a 

facility, given to hospitals, that indeed is an act of charity. 

 

In spite of the many assaults by this government, the people of 

rural Saskatchewan have rallied behind their local health care 

services. And I just mentioned earlier the meeting that I had 

attended where there’d been recognition given of some of the 

volunteers in the health care systems. And that rallying behind 

our local health care services in rural Saskatchewan happens in 

every community. It happens in the way we take care 

specifically of our elderly. 

 

And I think rural Saskatchewan there  as all of Saskatchewan, 

I must say  has a very strong history in that area. But when 

some of those services tend to be decreased and tend to be 

limited more in rural Saskatchewan, then the people have 

rallied behind that to try and make up and close the gap. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, through bequests, donations, bake 

sales, fund-raisers of all kinds, the people of rural 

Saskatchewan have shown just how much they care about their 

health services. This is the kind of community spirit for which 

this province is justly famous, and I believe each one of us are 

justly proud. I think all of those people that over the past years 

and decades have moved from Saskatchewan to other parts of 

the world, that’s one of the key things I believe they’ve carried 

with them as they’ve gone throughout the world, is this spirit of 

community, this spirit of sharing and caring. 

 

However in this instance, as always, the NDP is clearly afraid 

of anything that resembles local independence. It’s shown in 

how the health cares have been set up with the appointment at 

the start of all the board members. Then we had the election of 

some of the board members and still some appointments. Local 

independence just wasn’t given in total. It was handed out on 

small, frail threads that were given to the communities, but not 

in total. 

 

It is truly ironic to hear the Health minister say, either you 

believe in local decision making or you do not. Well I think 

local Saskatchewan people, as most people in Saskatchewan do,  



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

believe in local decision making. But if we’re going to believe 

in local decision making, then the power has to be there to do 

that, and that is not there with the way the system has been set 

up. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, has never shown any belief in 

decision-making powers of local people. We saw it with the 

issue of health board elections. We’ve seen it with the 

government’s control over grants to the districts. And we see it 

again in this Bill. And I think it’s probably the most insidious in 

this Bill in any of the instances that we’ve talked about. 

 

The other ones are obvious and clear. And the government has 

stated what its direction is and the control it intends to maintain 

of the whole health system, and to ensure that local 

independence doesn’t take place. This one was such an effort 

through the back door to sneak in more government control. It 

was really quite amazing that it was ever dreamt up. 

 

But I guess this is the NDP way. We need a big government and 

if we have a big government, we need to control everything. We 

see that they want a big bureaucracy. Well big bureaucracy 

needs a reason to justify its existence. And so what we’ve done 

here is create another way to justify the existence of the 

bureaucracy. Why have local people make their own decisions 

when you can have a raft of experts and political hacks making 

it for them? 

 

And it’s unfortunate that here, when people are talking with 

their own wishes, their own bequests, that the government again 

has to step in place and say, we are going to tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, we are going to tell you where the money’s going to 

go. And the fact is we may even play with the money a little bit 

before we put it where we want it to go. 

 

We see this philosophy coming out strongly in this Bill. A 

board, Mr. Speaker, another board. A new board, Mr. Speaker, 

entirely appointed by the provincial government. Not done at all 

by the local boards, who could have elected their own boards; 

could have appointed people from their own communities to 

handle that money as it was seen fit to be spent in that 

community, but a board appointed entirely by the provincial 

government, centralizing all charitable donations  these are 

not tax dollars; these are not certain allotments taken by 

government as government often needs to, but these are 

charitable donations to health districts  and distributing the 

money as they see fit. 

 

“They” here, is the government, Mr. Speaker, not the people 

who earned the money, who worked for the money and who 

saw needs in their communities and wanted their money to meet 

those needs in their communities in the very special way, Mr. 

Speaker, that they had seen the needs arise and to take care of 

those. 

 

It is clear just how mortally afraid this government is of letting 

people think for themselves, or worse yet, donate their money 

as they see fit. It is quite fine I believe, for the government to 

decide how they’re going to handle the money they’ve taken in 

taxes, but when the government steps in and wants to control 

the money that is the bequest of individuals, I think we have a  

problem. 

 

Again there are no denying that there are some positive aspects 

to this Bill. One cannot argue with the reasoning that people 

who donate to health services should be entitled to tax credits 

 that is a good aspect of this Bill. We support that fully. This 

Bill will help do that. And so in that form and in that part of it, 

we support this Bill totally. 

 

However, there is a significant difference between this Bill and 

university foundation Bills. Each of the universities has their 

own foundation. If, Mr. Speaker, people give to the University 

of Saskatchewan, they can feel confident that that money will 

go as they wish toward the projects at that institution and will 

not be diverted to pay down the debt of the U of R (University 

of Regina). 

 

So for example, someone who’s spent his life in education, as I 

have, Mr. Speaker, might want to go ahead and leave some 

money to the department of education at a university and I 

know full well that those dollars will be spent on education at 

that university. Someone involved in agriculture might decide 

to go ahead and fund a university agricultural program. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan an excellent 

veterinarian college that combines the work from three different 

provinces, so that if someone from the cattle industry might 

want to bequeath money to that, all of those people, Mr. 

Speaker, know full well that those dollars are going to be spent 

fully on that particular area where they want that money spent. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is why they give, and that, Mr. Speaker, we 

support. 

 

This Bill gives no such assurances to the people who donate to 

health services, and that’s quite unique when we look at the fact 

that in almost every other area of our world where someone 

leaves the money, that’s where the money goes. 

 

In this particular situation, Mr. Speaker, all the money goes into 

one big pot and only Big Brother government can say where it 

will go. Now I know 1984 has been a while back, but I’m sure 

George Orwell must smile once in a while when he looks down 

from the battlements of heaven to see that, sure enough, his 

book was right on. And here in the province of Saskatchewan 

people who die cannot even leave their money where they want 

it to go but Big Brother gets his hand. The last move that’s 

made on a passing person is for the Big Brother in 

Saskatchewan to put the hand into the wallet of the dying 

person and take the money and say, we will tell you where it’s 

going to go. 

 

I find that truly offensive  that this Bill would presume to 

take away the right of individuals to donate money to, and only 

to, health institutions of their choice. 

 

That seems to be strange. It’s been one of the things we’ve 

always, I think, as people in a free enterprise system, 

appreciated  that if there’s some money left, we could leave it 

to those groups and organizations and people where we choose 

to. But no longer in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, can we leave it 

to the health care system. Because Big Brother in Saskatchewan  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2679 

is going to tell you where it’s going to go after they’ve gone 

through playing with it. 

 

Possibly the Minister of Health may even want to take it down 

to a local casino and see if he can make some more money for 

health. But knowing how the casinos work, I’m sure there’ll be 

less money left over after he comes out of the casino than when 

he went in. 

 

(1145) 

 

Instead, this Bill states that the new board appointed by the 

minister, fully appointed by the minister, will take into 

consideration the wishes of the donor. So they’ll listen to it, 

think about it, but they will not be bound by them. I find that 

completely unacceptable. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe when the people of Saskatchewan 

hear about this and learn to understand that when they want to 

leave money to the hospitals in their communities, to possibly a 

prenatal unit in their hospital, because possibly a prenatal unit 

has done something very special for their family and they’ve 

always been thankful for it, that now suddenly when they want 

to leave that money to the prenatal unit, along comes the 

Minister of Health and says no, I’m going to take this dollar and 

I’m going to put it where I wish to put it when I wish to put it 

there, after I’ve tampered with it a little bit. 

 

The minister has defended this, Mr. Speaker, by saying that 

sometimes people may make bequests that make no sense. Well 

isn’t that a telling statement. Thank you, Mr. Minister, for doing 

our thinking for us. I’m sure they appreciate it. But I would 

think that if it’s somebody’s own money, they can do with it 

pretty well what they want. And if they wish to give it 

somewheres, they should be allowed to give it there without our 

government in Saskatchewan deciding whether they can really 

do that. 

 

As my colleague, the hon. member from Moosomin, has 

pointed out, the easy and obvious and respectful solution to this 

is for the foundation to be referred to the executor of the estate 

on matters of confusion or dispute. We do that, Mr. Speaker, in 

all other areas of this sort of a situation. Why can we not do that 

in the area of health? 

 

Likewise, if the donater is not deceased, it would be just 

common courtesy to consult with him or her about where their 

money should go. However, given the past performance of this 

government, I guess even common courtesy has to be written 

into the Bills. 

 

Another point of contention, Mr. Speaker, is that of the pay for 

the board members. As I mentioned earlier, we’ve now created 

a brand-new board that has never existed. We haven’t used a 

board at the provincial government level; we haven’t used a 

board at the local level  appointed and elected as they are. 

We’re now going to create a brand-new board and we’re going 

to have to pay for them. So someone’s going to have to pay for 

this. 

 

Now marvel of marvels, this time it is not going to come out of  

tax dollars. The minister was happy to tell reporters that this 

creating won’t cost any government money. And I’m sure the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan must have just applauded loudly, 

that here’s a government program that isn’t going to cost tax 

dollars. However, Mr. Speaker, what needs to be said is that 

these board members  these new board members, positions 

that didn’t exist earlier on  will be paid out of interest gained 

in donations. 

 

I don’t think that’s much to be proud of. So here people have 

given money to our health care system, as a result of some of 

that Saskatchewan spirit that we talk about and that we’re proud 

of, and now we’re going to take some of that money and we’re 

going to pay for a government bureaucrat, is not what they had 

in mind I believe, Mr. Speaker. When people donate money to 

their local hospital, that means all the money, including the 

interest, should go straight to that facility, should go where they 

want it to go. 

 

It is free money as far as the health care system is concerned, so 

they should be able to use it where the people want it used. It 

may not be exactly where the minister would like to see it used. 

He may have other places where the minister may see that there 

are needs. But this happened to be the dollar that was given by a 

person in Saskatchewan for a particular area and that’s where it 

should go. The last place it should go is on paying unneeded 

and unnecessary bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would have no problem with this Bill if it set up 

separate district foundations or required the provincial 

foundations to respect the wishes of the donaters, something 

similar to the situation that I’ve discussed earlier that exists 

with university foundations and bequests to universities. 

 

As it stands, I repeat that I find this Bill offensive, and it seems 

to be a money grab, because the government has gone into 

places and into funds that they’ve never been in before. They’ve 

never taken money out of people’s wills before. But now, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re going to do that. As I mentioned earlier, 

George Orwell must smile and say, give me some more royalty 

on my money, on my books, because I was right again. 

 

I urge the government to give the people what they want and 

need. I urge the government to enhance tax credits for those 

who are donating. And in that aspect this Bill deserves full 

support. That was an excellent move and that part of the Bill is 

good  not the other part. But get rid of the new board this Bill 

creates and get rid of not listening to people where they want 

their money to go. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, barring any significant amendments to 

this Bill, I urge the Assembly to defeat this Bill and I would like 

to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker:  May I invite the member to move that motion, 

to formalize it. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I move adjournment of Bill 114. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:51 a.m. until 11:53 a.m. 

 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  4 

 

D’Autremont Toth Heppner 

Goohsen   

 

Nays  25 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Whitmore 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Crofford Renaud Koenker 

Bradley Scott Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Langford Kasperski 

Ward Flavel Thomson 

Osika Bjornerud Krawetz 

Gantefoer   

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I can’t 

say as I’m really pleased to rise today, but I’m glad that I do 

have the opportunity to point out some of the errors in this 

particular piece of legislation. I believe it would have been 

appropriate at this time to have adjourned and to allow the 

people of Saskatchewan to gain a little better knowledge and 

understanding of the true impact that this legislation will have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re dealing with today is we’re under the 

circumstances of huge funding cut-backs to health facilities 

throughout this province. These facilities  those that remain 

in place, that still exist as acute care facilities or as long-term 

care facilities  are hurting because of those cut-backs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Make no mistake about it, everyone knows that our waiting-lists 

are getting even longer. Health services are disappearing, 

especially in the rural areas, Mr. Speaker, where 51 rural 

hospitals have been shut down. Senior care homes are closing 

even though there continues to be a growing need. The 

prescription drug plan deductible which used to be $125, Mr. 

Speaker, and which the members opposite while they sat in 

opposition said that at $125 deductible for drugs, seniors were 

having to choose  having to choose between food and drugs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Osika:  To address a question of privilege raised by the 

Government House Leader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Is the member requesting leave? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Yes, I am requesting leave to address that 

motion. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

understand a point of privilege has been brought forward 

regarding statements that I made in this House on Friday last. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in reviewing my comments, I agree I did go 

beyond the normal bounds of what is acceptable in this House. I 

should not have called into question the integrity of an officer 

of the legislature. 

 

And for those comments, I unequivocally apologize to this 

House and the Conflict of Interest Commissioner and withdraw 

my remarks. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 114 

(continued) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to go back to the point of the $125. While the members 

opposite were sitting on this side of the House in opposition, 

again and again and again they brought forward their contention 

that $125 deductible for the drug plan was totally unacceptable 

 totally unacceptable because people were being forced to 

choose between food on their tables or clothing for their 

children and $125 for drugs. And that this was totally 

unacceptable. That’s what the people opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

particularly the member from Regina Hillsdale while she was 

the Health minister . . . while she was the critic for Health in the 

opposition, kept saying. And she brought forward seniors who 

would confirm her statements that they had to choose between 

drugs on one hand and food on the other. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine, can you possibly imagine 

just how many people must be making those very same difficult 

choices today? Because the drug deductible is now $1,750 

brought in by the NDP government opposite. If people had to 

choose between food and drugs at $125 deductible, can you 

imagine the sacrifices they must be forced to make, the 

deprivation that they must live in to meet the deductible put in 

place by the government opposite  $1,750, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s almost two months income for a lot of people on social 

services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s terrible, Mr. Speaker, what they face. Indeed my colleague 

says that for some farmers that would almost be an entire year’s 

net income. Mr. Speaker, this is the government that said they 

were the saviours of medicare  the only ones that could 

protect medicare, the only ones that believed in medicare. And 

yet, Mr. Speaker, $125 was a despicable number for a 

deductible, and yet they raised it to 1,750. And they sit there 

smiling, Mr. Speaker, they sit there smiling about it. 

 

The previous Bill . . . this Bill, Mr. Speaker, they wish to take 

money given by the generosity of the people of Saskatchewan, 

given to help health care while the members opposite sit there 

and smile while they take $1,750 from the hands, from the 

pockets and from the mouths of the people in this province that 

are in desperate need. 

 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

It’s not only the $1,750, Mr. Speaker, that they have taken away 

from the people of this province. They’ve take away 

chiropractic and optometric services which have been 

de-insured. The government did away with the children’s dental 

plan, at the same time providing the civil servants of this 

province with dental care for both themselves and their 

children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One rule  one rule, Mr. Speaker, if you work for the 

government; another rule, Mr. Speaker, if you’re a taxpayer. 

And the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, pays, no matter whether they 

pay directly themselves or whether they’re paying for the 

benefits of the civil servants, and indeed, the MLAs (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they took away insulin and diabetic supplies. 

These were taken off of the prescription drug plan and much, 

much more, Mr. Speaker. Much more. We often hear and get 

phone calls and letters from people who say, I need a particular 

drug, to exist. Not to have a great quality of life, Mr. Speaker, 

just to exist. And what do the government opposite offer? 

Nothing. Mr. Speaker, Betaseron is a drug that helps MS 

(multiple sclerosis) patients. But can the patients of this 

province receive it under the prescription drug plan? No, Mr. 

Speaker, they cannot. 

 

There’s no assistance for Vicki Lissel, Mr. Speaker, and her 

hepatitis C. No. No prescription for that. She has to pay herself 

because the government has denied her that opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. This particular government is very, very good at taking 

things away. 

 

They were very good in opposition at pointing out all the things 

government should be giving to the people; very good at that. 

But when it comes to governing, Mr. Speaker, what they’re 

good at is taking things away. They take your money in taxes, 

and they take away your benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the things that I have mentioned are just a partial 

list of the things that this government has taken away. And it’s 

funny that government members talk often of protecting health 

care in their system, of not allowing a two-tiered health system, 

yet at the same time they have closed hospitals, closed nursing 

homes, cut funding to the point where nurses cannot do their 

job properly any more. 

 

(1200) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about protecting health care 

in this province, I recall a by-election in 1987 in the Assiniboia 

constituency, where the members opposite went around the 

constituency telling the voters there, if you elect a member of 

the Grant Devine government, they would close every one of 

your hospitals. Every last one of your hospitals in the 

Assiniboia constituency will be closed. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Assiniboia didn’t believe 

them. They voted for Jack Wolfe and elected a PC (Progressive 

Conservative) member, a member of Grant Devine’s 

government. And you know what? They didn’t close a single 

hospital. 

A general election in 1991. They elected a member of the NDP 

Party to represent that seat. Well, Mr. Speaker, they started off 

with I believe five hospitals in that constituency; I believe 

they’re down to one now. Mr. Speaker, that’s the record of this 

government’s taking away. 

 

Certainly our taxes have not decreased in this province, but our 

access to health care certainly has. It certainly has, Mr. Speaker. 

That is, if we can get to the hospital, the few remaining 

hospitals there, because the Minister of Highways finds it 

inappropriate to fix highways. He finds a great deal of difficulty 

in arguing with the member responsible for the Department of 

Finance in giving him any money to build up the roads so that 

the people of this province can get to the few remaining health 

care facilities. 

 

The people in this province, Mr. Speaker, have always 

supported health  have always supported health, either 

directly through taxation or through donations to their health 

care facilities. I recall many, many fund-raising suppers, raffles, 

bake sales, lights for Christmas trees, any number of activities 

to raise money for the local health care facilities. And the 

people gave generously  very generously, Mr. Speaker, 

throughout my constituency to support their local health care 

facility. 

 

Indeed, they gave so generously, Mr. Speaker, that a number of 

these health care facilities prior to the member from Regina 

Hillsdale, when she was the minister of Health, taking away 

their autonomy, had significant reserves in place to do capital 

construction. Those reserves, Mr. Speaker, were turned over to 

foundations. They created foundations for every one of those 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker, that were closing. 

 

Those foundations still exist today. But the minister’s Bill, the 

Crown foundations Act, is going to make a great deal of change 

to that. What was previously given voluntarily to the 

foundations received a small tax credit. The local community 

people who administered the trust funds, the foundations, used 

those monies to provide services, facilities, wheelchairs, 

ambulance . . . not ambulance, paramedic little vans, Mr. 

Speaker, to go around and pick up people around the 

community  all sorts of those things to aid in health care in 

the communities. 

 

But under this current Act, any monies given to the Crown 

foundation will simply be swallowed by that larger pool, that 

province-wide pool administered by the government’s own 

appointees. 

 

How sensitive, Mr. Speaker, is the appointee from Saskatoon 

going to be to the needs of Redvers? How sensitive is the 

appointee from Prince Albert going to be to the needs of 

Climax? How sensitive is the appointee from Estevan going to 

be to the needs of Frenchman Butte? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder. Will they even know where those 

communities are? Will they know any of the people in those 

communities? Will they know the real needs that that 

community has and the needs and the reasons why the money 

from Frenchman Butte, from Climax, or from Redvers, was  



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

given to the foundation in the first place, and the reasons why 

that person wanted to support health care? 

 

It may have been because they were born in the hospital, or 

because a parent had resided in the long-term care facility, or 

because they themselves had suffered a traumatic incident and 

had been saved by that facility. Those are the reasons why the 

money is given, Mr. Speaker, but will the board members know 

those reasons? Will the board members even be sympathetic to 

those reasons? And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, this Bill needs 

some very serious reconsideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand that the health care dollars are very 

scarce, and so do the residents of the areas across the province. 

And that’s why it’s a step in the right direction, Mr. Speaker, to 

allow larger tax credits to individuals for donating funds 

towards the health care facilities and towards services. 

 

Under the current regime, Mr. Speaker, in health care, you can 

provide funding for facilities. You can provide community 

funding to buy a new hospital bed, but, Mr. Speaker, you can’t 

provide funding for services such as acute care. You can 

provide the physical room for somebody to be in; you can 

provide the physical equipment  a bed, a monitor, whatever it 

might be to furnish that room. But you cannot provide the acute 

care service to any patients over and above the minister’s 

miracle formula the formula that every one of us have to fit 

into, Mr. Speaker. And that is what’s wrong with the current 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after all, if the government can’t continue to fund 

our essential services and maintain the quality of health care 

Saskatchewan families have enjoyed for so many years, he 

could at least allow for private money to help out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s two ways that can be done. We have seen 

an attempt in this province to establish an eye clinic similar to 

what’s known as the Gimbel eye clinic in Calgary where private 

funds would be allowed to come into the province, invest in a 

health care facility, invest in providing health care services and 

charge accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that service was allowed it wouldn’t mean that 

the taxpayers of this province, the people in need of health care, 

would be directed by their physician to attend that clinic or take 

advantage of that service. It would mean they would have the 

option, Mr. Speaker, just as they have that option today. 

 

But unfortunately the options they have today are not in this 

province. You have to leave the province. So the money leaves 

the province, Mr. Speaker, and the taxes that that service 

generates, the job opportunities that service generates, are not 

being generated in Saskatchewan. Rather they are being 

generated in Alberta; they’re being generated in North Dakota; 

they’re being generated in Minnesota; they’re being generated 

elsewhere in this country, Mr. Speaker, but not in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a question of whether the work will 

be done, whether the eye surgery or whatever else it might be is 

going to be done. It’s the question of where will it be done and  

when will it be done. Under the current system you can receive 

cataract surgery in Saskatchewan if you’re prepared to wait  

if you’re prepared to wait six months, a year, whatever it might 

be. 

 

So let’s say we have a hundred people on the waiting-list, Mr. 

Speaker, and it takes six months. What if service was available 

privately in Saskatchewan and 50 people of those 100 took 

advantage of that circumstance and you decreased the waiting 

list by 50 per cent? Then the person on the bottom of the list 

should only have to wait three months, Mr. Speaker. 

Unfortunately under the current system I suspect the minister 

may very well cut funding by half to that facility and you’d still 

end up waiting six months, only now you have half as many 

people on the list waiting that six months. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to allow operations, to allow services such as 

the Gimbel eye clinic in this province would not diminish the 

health care of this province. In fact it would enhance it, Mr. 

Speaker, because it would take people out of the current system 

and allow those who remain in the system to move through it 

more quickly and more efficiently, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why this Bill is a step in the right direction, 

because it does allow for larger tax credits for individuals who 

wish to donate funds towards health care facilities and services. 

Unfortunately the minister continues to restrict what those 

services can provide. But, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

people, as I said earlier, who are more than prepared to 

contribute to health care in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

if opportunities were right for them, if facility opportunities 

were right, they would be investing even more. They would be 

donating even more, Mr. Speaker, than they are today. 

 

Their concern is, if I contribute today to a long-term care 

facility to provide more long-term care, will that facility be 

allowed to provide that service? And unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, they will not be allowed to provide that additional 

service. They can buy a new colour TV set, 52-inch screen, but 

heaven forbid that you should be allowed to put an extra bed in 

there, Mr. Speaker, so that some senior in your community who 

is in desperate need of getting into the facility would have that 

opportunity. And that’s where the minister’s Bill falls down, 

because it restricts what services are available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after all, if the government can’t continue to fund 

our essential services and maintain the quality of health care 

Saskatchewan families have enjoyed for many years, he should 

at least allow private money to help. And I believe that, Mr. 

Speaker, very much. 

 

(1215) 

 

I think we should allow a lot more than that, Mr. Speaker, such 

as the private eye clinics like the Gimbel clinic from Calgary, 

Mr. Speaker. But I think we’ve had these discussions in this 

House before and I’m sure we will again, most appropriately; 

and hopefully at some point in time, the minister might 

reconsider. 

 

He brought a Bill in, Mr. Speaker, but a Bill in which the public  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

system continues to be funded by taxpayers’ dollars. Then the 

physicians, the nurses, get the fee as outlined by medical care 

insurance for those procedures. He said yes, private clinics can 

carry out the function in Saskatchewan, but we will only fund 

them, fund the physicians, fund the nurses at the same level that 

we’re paying to the public system. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the public system isn’t prepared to 

provide a facility for the private doctor and the private nurse to 

work in. The taxpayer provides the tax money to fund the public 

facility and then that physician and his expenses are paid 

through medical care insurance, but the private system can only 

be paid through medical care insurance. And therefore there is 

no one, Mr. Speaker, to fund the facilities, the clinics, the 

equipment that is needed. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, you can go ahead and do it but 

you’re not going to get any money for it if you do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s imperative that some changes be 

made to this Act before it passes through this Assembly. I have 

no problem at all, Mr. Speaker, with the additional tax credits 

for donations. In fact, I applaud them. But there is one catch to 

these, Mr. Speaker, when you provide the additional tax credits 

to the Crown foundation donations. 

 

Under the current system, current foundation, funds are allowed 

to provide a small tax credit  I believe it’s 20 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. And as I mentioned, there are a number of these 

foundations around the province. The people who are interested 

in contributing to these foundations know that the funds 

donated to, say, the Arcola trust foundation for health care  

that money will stay in the Arcola system. Or if not in Arcola 

specifically, within the health district. 

 

But when you contribute money to the Crown foundations, that 

money can be spent any place  not in Arcola, but perhaps up 

at Preeceville. I know that some of the members here have a 

fond recollection of Preeceville, and they do have some very 

nice health care facilities up there. 

 

But the person who contributes a donation, Mr. Speaker, in 

Arcola believes that that money should be used in his area to 

provide for the needs within that area. And while the people in 

Preeceville may be very needy and need additional funding, it’s 

up to the people then, Mr. Speaker, in the Preeceville area to 

contribute, to find it in their heart to provide that additional 

funding. 

 

Because otherwise it becomes a case of triage, Mr. Speaker, 

triage being administered by political appointees. Whether you 

provide it, the funding, to Arcola, and meet the need that is 

there or you provide the funding some place else in the 

province, that determination is not made by the people making 

the contribution; rather, Mr. Speaker, it’s being made by the 

political appointees of the Minister of Health. And that’s 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That comes to one of my points, Mr. Speaker, that I have a great 

deal of concern with, and that is how the board is established. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, this is an appointed board.  

The people, the health districts, the donors, don’t have a choice, 

Mr. Speaker, on who will make those contributions . . . not the 

contributions, excuse me, who will make the decisions on the 

contributions being made to them. Where will that money go 

to? What services will it provide? Will it go to provide 

long-term care, additional long-term care services in Moose 

Jaw, or will it go for additional long-term care in Esterhazy? 

 

It has to . . . Mr. Speaker, we have to take a very serious look at 

that, because there is a large number of people, mainly from 

urban Saskatchewan, represented in the government benches. 

When it comes to naming the people on the board, will they 

name people from rural Saskatchewan or will they name people 

from urban Saskatchewan? 

 

As I said earlier in the debate, when it comes to appointing 

people, what kind of concerns will the people from Regina and 

Saskatoon and P.A. and Moose Jaw and Swift Current and 

Yorkton have for the people in the very small communities, Mr. 

Speaker. We have seen what it has already meant when it comes 

to closing health care facilities across this province. It has 

meant that the larger the urban centre, the more likely you are 

not to be affected by the changes in health care. 

 

Again I go back to the Southeast Health District, which every 

hospital in the district closed except for the hospital in Estevan. 

And there are a number of those examples across this province, 

Mr. Speaker, a large number of those examples. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned about the boards, as I said, that this 

Bill will establish, not that other entities such as this that don’t 

have boards overseeing them when the money comes in. In fact 

as the minister has talked of, using the U of R and the U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan) as examples of similar 

foundations, and as my colleague from Rosthern has pointed 

out, there are only two universities in this province. And indeed 

each one of those two universities has its own foundation. So 

the money given to the foundation can be directed to the use of 

that particular entity. 

 

There’s no reason why the Minister of Health in this particular 

Bill couldn’t have done the same thing, Mr. Speaker. He could 

have created district health foundations. He could have even 

created individual facility foundations had he so desired. 

 

But let’s say he stayed with the district health foundations. 

Then a contribution to the district health foundation would have 

at least stayed within the health district that the person was 

donating it to and the local people would have been much more 

concerned, much more sensitive, to the direction being given by 

those providing the donation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague says, the members opposite 

seem very intent on getting their hands into dead men’s pockets. 

And I believe that’s a wrong, a very sad, way of looking at it, 

Mr. Speaker  that they would want to reach into dead men’s 

pockets simply to fund the health care system in Saskatchewan 

that they as government members are not prepared to do as a 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem to be disbelieving the  



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

things that I’m saying. They don’t seem to understand that the 

people opposite . . . that the people of the province don’t agree 

with the government members on this, that the people across 

Saskatchewan understand this issue much better than the people 

opposite do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m trying to use as small of words as I can so that the members 

opposite can understand it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are fundamental differences. As we have 

said, that there are only two universities in this province; that 

the university foundations have been created and they’re. . . 

let’s use an example, Mr. Speaker. The University of Brandon 

provides a great deal of service down into the south-east corner 

of the province. A great many of the students from south-east 

Saskatchewan attend Brandon University. 

 

So we have the university Crown foundations. What if the 

university Crown foundation was to contribute to programing, 

to development, to facility construction, at the university of 

Brandon? How happy, Mr. Speaker, would the alumni of the 

University of Regina or the alumni of the University of 

Saskatchewan be to know that their donations, their 

contributions to a foundation, to a trust, for the development . . . 

that they gave for the development of their universities are 

going to the university of Brandon? The university of Brandon 

is a very nice university, does a good job, but the people who 

contributed the money to the Crown foundations for 

universities did not intend that money to go to the university of 

Brandon; they meant for it to be used within this jurisdiction, 

within their own area, within their own local. 

 

But if the same rules were applied to the university foundations 

as the Minister of Health wishes to apply to the health 

foundations, then the money, if the board so desired, would go 

to the university of Brandon. 

 

Well let’s carry it a little further, Mr. Speaker. What if the 

Saskatchewan universities’ foundations, the appointees to those 

boards, came from Manitoba, Alberta, British Columbia, and 

Ontario, and Saskatchewan had one appointee out of a number, 

and the money was distributed to Alberta, or was distributed to 

Manitoba  the teachers are starting to get involved here, Mr. 

Speaker  if the money was spread around the other provinces 

and not to Saskatchewan, there would be a great deal of 

acrimony, Mr. Speaker, by those people who donated the 

money for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the students in my area would certainly benefit if 

Saskatchewan’s university foundations were to contribute 

money to the university at Brandon. After all we’re taxpayers 

here, Mr. Speaker, why shouldn’t some of that money go to 

Brandon University where our students are involved and take an 

advantage of the educational opportunities there. But the 

people, Mr. Speaker, who donated the money, who donated the 

funds to the foundations for the U of R or the U of S, that 

wasn’t their intention. No, Mr. Speaker, they were allowed to 

designate what university they were giving their money to, and 

it wasn’t the university of Brandon. 

 

But because the health boards, the health foundations, Mr. 

Speaker, are going to have a province-wide board appointed by  

the minister, they are not going to be able to designate where 

the money goes to. The board will make that determination. 

And when you say, I would like to contribute $10,000 for, Mr. 

Speaker, to the health foundations, he can’t say, I want this to 

go to foundation X or program Y. It simply goes into the large 

black hole and the board distributes it to wherever they wish it 

to go. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a major flaw, a major flaw in this Bill, 

because it’s wrong that the board should have the power to 

redirect the money to wherever it sees fit. And there is no need 

for this whatsoever except that the provincial government 

wishes to exercise its muscles and dictate from the top down 

which districts will receive what funding. 

 

Now when we brought this up previously, the minister said the 

money will go where the donor wants it to go. Well if that’s the 

case, Mr. Speaker, why even include section 14 in this 

particular Bill? 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 14 makes it very clear that the board 

created does not have to follow the directions of the donor. 

They can make their own choices. And those choices, Mr. 

Speaker, do not include directing what the donater wanted. 

They may, they may if they wish to, follow the direction that the 

donor may wish, but they don’t have to if they don’t want to. So 

if someone left a hefty sum of money to the Oxbow health 

centre, the Galloway centre, but if the board thinks that the 

health district has already received more than its share of 

money, the board, the foundation board can then redirect the 

money elsewhere. 

 

I know the minister’s excuse is that sometimes people donate to 

a facility that isn’t in existence any more, or it’s an impossible 

request. Well, Mr. Speaker, under the current Act if someone 

was to donate money to let’s say the Gainsborough hospital, 

well that particular facility no longer exists, but the district 

health board would simply take possession of that money and 

use it within their district, Mr. Speaker. It would be used 

locally, not spread throughout the province for the use outside 

of the area which was outside of the direction given by the 

donor. And if its an impossible request then, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that there are other avenues available to dealing with 

such requests. 

 

I would just have to ask how many times has a person donated 

to a facility that no longer exists or made an impossible 

request? I mean, just how many times does someone donate to a 

facility that doesn’t exist any more? Most people understand 

that if a facility’s doors are closed, that there’s no point in 

giving them money any more. You’re never going to resurrect 

them. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, I find it difficult to buy the argument 

that this is one of the reasons why a provincial board is needed. 

After all, what happens right now if someone dies and wills 

money to a facility that doesn’t exist? I would imagine, Mr. 

Speaker, what would happen is that the executor would redirect 

the funds to another local facility or would seek redirection 

from family members before the money is sent anywhere. I 

mean, that is the job of a responsible executor to ensure that as  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

close as possible the requests by the deceased are honoured. 

That’s the duty of the executor, to fulfil the legal mandates . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. It now being 12:30 p.m., the House 

stands recessed until 1:30 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 

 

 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2687 

 June 17, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

mostly from the town of Alameda. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Maryfield, 

Saskatchewan; from Moosomin, from Regina, and from Grand 

Coulee, Sask. There are other centres represented on this 

petition also. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 

petitions of names from people in Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the city of Regina, from Moose Jaw, from Milestone, and from 

Lang. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are mostly from 

the city of Regina, but also from communities in the South. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions are from Regina, 

Sedley, Richardson, and Weyburn. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens throughout 

southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by many concerned 

citizens from the communities of Elbow, Strongfield, Loreburn, 

Outlook, Tugaske, Pense, Central Butte, and Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the communities of Lestock, Craven, and then the vast majority 

of people being from the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

we present a new initiative to an old problem, and I will read 

the prayer on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 

and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

programs towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather 

than allocating these funds towards capital construction 

projects in the province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are from mostly the Shaunavon, Vanguard, Simmie area 

of the province, and I’m happy to present them today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I too would like to present a 

petition on a similar behalf, and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than  



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

allocating these funds toward capital construction projects 

in the province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And these come from Shaunavon, Eastend, Frontier, Admiral, 

of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 

petitions to present to this Assembly. And I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 

allocating these funds toward capital construction projects 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions I have are signed by individuals 

from the Ponteix, Shaunavon, Consul, Climax, areas of the 

province; Gull Lake, and also Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order, petitions respecting the closure 

of the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and pursuant to 

rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce to you and through you to the legislature, my 

wife’s parents, Stan Lee and Betty Hatlen Lee, who are in the 

west gallery. They’re visiting here from Everett, Washington 

which is just north of Seattle, Washington. It’s a very famous 

place in our family since my wife grew up there, but it’s also 

probably well known to members of the Assembly as the place 

where Boeing 747 jets are made. Let’s have a big welcome for 

the Lees from Everett. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Congratulations to Graduates 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

a momentous time for grade 12 students across the province. 

After spending the majority of their young lives in school, they 

have finally reached a very important milestone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, graduation signifies accomplishment and 

opportunity. Not only have these young people developed a 

broad base of knowledge, they have learned to become 

independent adults who will contribute to society. 

 

But before they can don their caps and gowns, there’s one 

obstacle they still have to face  final exams. In the next two 

weeks you’ll see students trying to cram one year’s worth of 

studies into a few days of studying. But as we all know, it can 

be done and these students will soon have their diplomas under 

their belts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this House to join with me in 

wishing them the best of luck on their finals, and in 

congratulating all of the graduates throughout Saskatchewan. I 

wish them safe celebrations and the best of luck as they move 

ahead. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sale of Gas and Oil Rights 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

some good economic news from my constituency, and also 

from the rest of the province. 

 

The most recent sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas rights 

resulted in 18.9 million in revenue for the province. It is the 

highest revenue from a single sale since December of ’94. The 

previous sale held in April realized 13.4 million. A total of 510 

parcels were sold in June, compared to 289 in April. 

 

In addition to the sale of parcels, two special exploratory 

permits were awarded on the basis of work commitment bids. 

Rockwell Resources was the successful bidder on one parcel 

with a work commitment of $2.9 million, and Windfall 

Resources was the successful bidder on the other, with a work 

commitment of $2.8 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both of these dispositions are located south-west 

of Moose Jaw in the Thunder Creek constituency. They can be 

added to the list of good economic news for that region 

mentioned by the member of Regina Wascana Plains on Friday. 

 

The Weyburn-Estevan area received the most bonus bid activity 

with 11.4 million. The Kindersley-Kerrobert area was second 

with 5.3; and the Swift Current and Lloydminster areas 

followed with 1.7 million and 600,000 respectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this demonstrates that many areas of the province, 

including the Lloydminster area, are benefiting from this 

activity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gord Kluzak Inducted into Sports Hall of Fame 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame held its annual induction 

ceremony over the weekend. A number of people were 

recognized both for their athletic accomplishments and as 

builders. One of those honoured was Gord Kluzak who was 

born in Climax and played all of his minor hockey in 

south-west Saskatchewan before moving on to star with 

Billings of the Western Hockey League. 

 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

From there Gord moved on to the national junior program 

where he was instrumental with Canada in winning the 1982 

World Junior Hockey Championship. Later that year he was 

selected first overall by the Boston Bruins. In spite of the fact 

that Gord’s NHL (National Hockey League) career was cut 

short because of a chronic knee problem, he played eight 

seasons with the Bruins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most positive aspects of seeing 

someone like Gord inducted into the Saskatchewan Sports Hall 

of Fame is the fact that he does not forget where he came from. 

He speaks openly and honestly about how much his family and 

his friends in this province mean to him. 

 

I would like members of the Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating Gord Kluzak on his induction into the 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame Induction Awards 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the weekend I 

also was in attendance at the 30th annual induction dinner held 

by the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame as the government 

representative. 

 

To the four athletes, Gordon Kluzak, Irene Lacy, Joanne 

McTaggart, and Richard Schell; the four builders, Eugene 

Hearn, Diane Lemon, Lloyd Saunders, and Don Steponchev; 

and the two teams honoured, the Sundown Optimist Buffalo 

Gals and the Gary Thode curling rink, I would ask that we all 

extend our congratulations on their outstanding 

accomplishments and thanks for their dedication and their 

contributions to their home towns and to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations are also in order to Hall of Fame 

president, Don McDonald, and the board of directors and the 

staff of the museum, and to this year’s dinner chairman, Bernie 

Goplen, all who made the dinner a very memorable event. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, thanks should go to all those in attendance 

for their ongoing support of the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of 

Fame Museum and the annual induction dinner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Seager Wheeler Farm Site Opening 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I had 

the privilege of attending the opening of the Seager Wheeler 

farm site at Rosthern. It was a rather exciting time because it 

features a very prominent person in Saskatchewan agriculture, a 

very innovative person, an individual that took Saskatchewan in 

its tough times and said we can fight our way through that. 

 

And I think it’s that spirit of Saskatchewan as typified by that 

particular farm, and it was good to see the turnout that was 

there; the directions and innovations that have taken place there 

as well as the seeding demonstration. So I wish them well in  

their future endeavours. 

 

Clearwater Forest Products Partnership Agreement 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, a recent partnership agreement 

between the province and Clearwater Forest Products will 

benefit my constituency and areas of northern Saskatchewan. 

This agreement will allow the company to reduce log trucking 

costs by using more efficient, overweight vehicles. As a result, 

Clearwater is using the first nine-axle B-train to haul logs to 

northern Saskatchewan. This vehicle has technology that gives 

it excellent safety characteristics, while at the same time 

minimize road damage. 

 

The agreement also means that it is more economically viable 

for Clearwater Forest Products to haul burnt logs to its sawmill 

in Meadow Lake. The trailers that are being used are being 

manufactured by BeeLine Welding in my constituency. BeeLine 

Welding produces a quality product and provides excellent 

services, and the agreement could lead to additional sales for 

the company. Under the term of the 10-year agreement, 

Clearwater will pay half of the savings to Saskatchewan 

Highways and Transportation for northern road improvement 

projects. 

 

I would like to congratulate all the partners in this agreement, 

which is good for our northern roads and for all our companies 

involved. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Alameda Agricultural Society Fair 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

inform the members of an event that occurred in my 

constituency over the weekend  the annual Alameda 

Agricultural Society fair. This is a very well-attended fair and it 

features mainly 4-H people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a 4-H cattle show and sale where the 

4-H animals were sold by open auction. And I have to report 

that I’m sure all of the farmers in the province wished they 

received the prices that these cattle received. I saw animals go 

for a price of as high as $125 a hundredweight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also had horses as part of this fair, which 

included dressage events, and that was very interesting to 

watch, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s important that we not forget 

that there was also sheep and lambs that were demonstrated, 

shown by the 4-H, and the lambs were auctioned off. 

 

But I think the pièce de résistance, Mr. Speaker, was the annual 

goat-milking contest which yours truly had the opportunity to 

participate. There was eight contestants in the goat milking, Mr. 

Speaker, and I have to report that I improved my standings from 

last year. I moved up to second. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  They keep bringing in a ringer every 

year, Mr. Speaker. But the goat milking raised over $900 for  



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

the ag society, and I would like to congratulate the entire 

committee for the work they did in organizing the agriculture ag 

society fair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Fringe and Comedy Festivals 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, festivals run in Saskatoon 

all summer long, and festivals happen in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Nutana. And the Fringe has been a special part of the 

festival scene for seven years this summer. 

 

This year it will be back on Broadway from August 2 to 11. The 

Fringe spent two years downtown, but in the end decided to 

move back home to Broadway where it was born. The Fringe is 

a wonderful, funky alternative to traditional theatre. It’s also 

lively, always innovative, and always a lot of fun. 

 

There must be something in the air along Broadway because it’s 

also home to the comedy festival which happened this past 

weekend and it was a lively, entertaining, and definitely 

rib-tickling event. The headliners were Nancy White and John 

Byner, but there was also an improv venue, a belly-laughs and 

blues venue, ventriloquists, and a female comedy venue. There 

were buskers in the streets and music everywhere. 

 

These special events, Mr. Speaker, depend on community 

support. Thousands of people come to enjoy the entertainment, 

but it’s the hundreds of volunteers who contribute time, energy, 

and enthusiasm that makes them such a success. The merchants 

on Broadway, Mr. Speaker, are long-time supporters of the arts 

in Saskatoon, as are the residents of Saskatoon Nutana and 

Broadway who have enthusiastically supported the arts. 

 

These are just two examples, Mr. Speaker, of what makes 

Saskatoon Nutana such a great place to live and a great place to 

visit. So come this summer to the Fringe. The merchants will 

welcome you and so will the people that live there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Agreement With Rural Health Coalition 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 

52 communities signed the Rural Health Coalition Agreement 

in 1994, they did so in good faith. St. Walburg was among these 

communities which sought assurances that 24-hour acute care 

and emergency services would be maintained and was 

guaranteed that this government, and I quote: “commits to 

sustain the funding for 24-hour emergency services after April 

1, 1994 and beyond through budget amounts provided to the 

district boards”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have learned that the hours of operation for 

hospital services in St. Walburg are being reduced to 9 a.m. to 5 

p.m., another victim of this government’s two-bit health care 

reform. Does the minister deny that his government is in clear 

violation of the Rural Health Coalition Agreement? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that the intent and 

the spirit of the Rural Health Coalition Agreement is being met 

by the Department of Health and by the Twin Rivers Health 

District. This agreement, Mr. Speaker, was intended to ensure 

collaboration and cooperation in a process that promotes 

effective discussion, problem solving, and consensus building. 

It is not about adversarial relationships, Mr. Speaker. It is not 

about political tactics. It is not about negotiation tactics. It is 

about ensuring the health needs of Saskatchewan people. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Twin Rivers Health District is 

meeting with municipalities in the district to discuss tentative 

plans for health service delivery in the area, and I have every 

confidence that those plans, once arrived at, will comply with 

the agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  I surely hope those people in those 

communities only get sick between 9 and 5 because that’s the 

services that you’re providing up there, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, when rural communities 

signed an agreement with this government they fully expected 

that the NDP (New Democratic Party) would live up to its end 

of the deal. They expected that a government above all else 

would demonstrate some honour in its dealings with those they 

are supposed to represent. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it has become very obvious that this 

government has very little honour and this issue serves as yet 

one more example. What makes this matter all the more 

disturbing is the fact that the people who suffer as a result are 

the sick and the elderly, the most vulnerable people in our 

society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a result of this government’s actions, a number of 

communities are considering legal action to try and bring the 

minister and his government back on track. Will the minister 

explain, Mr. Speaker, if this is what it will take, another legal 

battle? We’ve had three or more; we’ve had GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program); we’ve had many others; we’re 

going to see more. Here’s another one. Is this what it’s going to 

take, Mr. Speaker, to bring this government back on track  

legal action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that any 

of those legal actions that the member refers to have found the 

government to be in the wrong or have resulted in anything 

good for the communities. I think that what people have to do is 

sit down and talk about things, Mr. Speaker, and come up with 

solutions that work best for communities. 

 

And I also think, Mr. Speaker, that the tactics of the Liberal 

Party that we hear today are the same tactics that they always 

pursue, and that is fearmongering. Every time there’s change in 

the health care system, the Liberal Party says you’re not going 

to be able to get care, the doctors are going to leave the  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

province, and so on and so on. They’ve been doing it for 30 

years, Mr. Speaker. They started out when medicare was 

introduced by this party in this province and, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

sorry to say that they’re using the same old tactics today that 

they’ve used for 30 years. 

 

People in St. Walburg are going to have access to health 

services. People all over the province are going to have proper 

access, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, this government’s devastating 

attack on the rural health care system does not end in St. 

Walburg. In fact a public meeting will be held this evening in 

Big River where residents will attempt to prevent the possible 

closure of their hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the local board is proposing to close the hospital 

and then convert a nursing home, adding nine hospital beds and 

eliminating nine long-term care beds. Will the minister explain 

how this will in any way result in better health care for the sick 

and the elderly in the Big River area? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence that 

the district health board will make an appropriate decision with 

respect to the configuration of long-term care beds, nursing 

home beds, and hospital beds. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that despite all the moaning and 

groaning by the members of the Liberal Party, Saskatchewan 

has a higher number of nursing home beds per capita for 

seniors, Mr. Speaker, than most provinces do, and we have an 

above-average number of hospital beds than most provinces. 

 

What they want to do, Mr. Speaker. is they want to frighten 

people by saying that nursing home beds are not going to be 

available and hospital beds are not going to be available. And I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that nothing could be further from the truth 

and we’re going to do in this province what we’ve always done. 

We’re going to have the appropriate number of nursing home 

beds and we’re going to have the appropriate number of 

hospital beds  no thanks to the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, the possible loss of nine 

long-term care beds signals another in the long line of 

short-sighted decisions forced on local boards because of 

funding cuts by this government. And who are the people who 

suffer? Again it’s the sick and the elderly. If left with only 21 

long-term care beds, 9 current residents of this facility will be 

forced to find a home elsewhere. Where? Who knows. And 

what about the more than 400 people in the region who are 

more than 65 years of age or older? Will the minister explain 

where these people should turn to when they require long-term 

care in the future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, if the Liberal Party is 

returning to their old tactic of saying that seniors are going to be 

thrown out on the street, then I return to my statement, which is, 

that means the Liberal Party has no argument. Because if that’s 

the only argument they have, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

is going to throw people on the street, they have no argument 

because they know that’s not true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I say to the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party that 

another vision is possible when it comes to meeting long-term 

care needs. One vision is that when everybody gets old and they 

need a bit of care, you put them into a nursing home; you 

warehouse them in a nursing home. The other vision is you 

have nursing home beds available for people when they really 

need them, Mr. Speaker, and until that time you try to keep 

people healthy, independent in their own homes. That’s the 

other vision. 

 

And what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is not to shut down all the 

nursing home beds. What we’re doing is right-sizing the system 

and providing more care in the community and that’s a system 

that can work. But it’s progressive, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 

the Liberals are opposed to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, the one thing that makes what is 

going on in St. Walburg, Big River, and so many other 

communities so frightening is the fact that this is merely the 

beginning  merely the beginning, Mr. Speaker. As much as 

Saskatchewan residents would like to believe that their health 

care system has endured as many cuts as it can sustain, more is 

yet to come. 

 

Last year, rural boards were forced to make major cuts because 

of funding cuts by this government. This year, we’re seeing 

more of the same as rural districts attempt to cope with a further 

reduction of $5 million. On top of that, district boards have yet 

to try and absorb wage increases for health sector employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health explain how boards 

can possibly meet this added financial burden, and will he 

guarantee funding for these wage increases that his government 

has offered? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member well knows, 

the only government that has cut health care spending in this 

province in this budget year is the federal Liberal government in 

Ottawa. It has cut health care spending, Mr. Speaker, by close 

to $50 million, which this government replaced that money 

dollar for dollar, Mr. Speaker. And next year, as of April 1, 

1997, the federal Liberal cut to health care will be $100 million 

over and above what they funded health care last year. And that 

money will have to be put in dollar for dollar by the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the member talks about commitment to health care, I 

suggest that that member join with us in saying to the federal  



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Liberals that they ought not to gut the health care system by 

taking more and more money out of it, Mr. Speaker. And while 

the Liberals do that, while they take money out of the health 

care system, Mr. Speaker, the rest of us in this government and 

communities and health boards are doing the very best we can 

to maintain a very good health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the minister responsible for CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) or his 

designate. 

 

Mr. Minister, this morning talks broke off between the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association and the building trades. 

The unions have absolutely no interest in changing the CCTA 

(Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) hiring sequence 

which guarantees 75 per cent of the Crown construction sites to 

unionized workers even though there are only about 20 per cent 

of construction workers in this province are unionized. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Construction Association is 

now calling on the elected officials to show some leadership 

and to fix this thing. That means you and your government, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, now that the talks have fallen apart, what are you 

going to do next? What are you going to do to show some 

leadership and fix this badly broken policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I find it very interesting that the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, would ask questions about 

things being broken, because where this actually broke was in 

the days of the Devine administration when they refused, when 

they refused to let unionized companies do any work in 

Saskatchewan. They’re the ones who messed up the apple cart. 

We’re trying to straighten it out by putting good public policy 

into place so that unionized firms and non-unionized firms have 

an equal chance at access to work by the Crown corporations 

within Saskatchewan. 

 

We don’t abide by the scorched-earth policy of the former 

Devine administration and those that are left to try and chastise 

our government when in reality our government is trying to 

correct the position in Saskatchewan so all construction 

companies have equal access to work in this province, so that 

men and women in this province have a chance at good-paying 

jobs in good communities for good projects within 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, your union tendering policy isn’t 

working, and you know it and so does everyone else. It’s 

costing taxpayers millions of dollars. It’s preventing  

non-unionized contractors from bidding on Crown projects. 

And worst of all, it’s discriminating against non-unionized 

workers and prevents them from getting jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, this policy is a disaster and you know it. And 

since the unions have no intention of agreeing to any changes at 

all, it’s up to you and your government to step in and fix it. 

 

Mr. Minister, why don’t you just scrap the current policy and 

start over so this time the construction association is on a level 

playing-field with everyone else? Will you give that 

commitment today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting, 

what’s coming out of the members opposite. They would have 

done that. They would have scrapped the policy where you have 

three different parties in agreement with it. We’re not the only 

party to the agreement. And they’re calling on us to scrap an 

agreement that has been signed by at least three parties and five 

or six commercial Crowns in Saskatchewan. 

 

We as a government have no intention of unilaterally scrapping 

anything when we do believe that the outlandish protests made 

by the members of the Conservative Party are a complete 

exaggeration of the reality in this situation. 

 

The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement is what we’re 

talking about. There’s not a union policy involved. There’s a 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement that we think 

corrects the situation that the members opposite destroyed with 

the construction labour relations Act, when they changed 

section 18 to allow companies to be union, to be non-union, to 

float all over the place, so they could have the largesse of the 

government of that day. 

 

We’re stopping that and we’re putting into place good public 

policy to serve the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, when you 

talk about unilaterally scrapping things, you scrapped GRIP 

without any problem for the farmers of this province and it 

didn’t bother you one little bit. 

 

Your entire strategy this session has been to just stall this thing 

until the session is over so that anyone can no longer question 

you about your policy. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order! Now the 

Speaker is finding it increasingly difficult to hear the answers 

being put . . . the questions being put and the answers being 

provided. And I will ask for the cooperation of all members 

including those from the same caucus as the ones who were 

asking the questions and providing the answers. Order, order. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, your 

review of this policy was completed last December. It was 

originally supposed to be released in March. Then it was 

supposed to be released by the end of May. Then you said you 

were going to release it while . . . not until negotiations were  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

completed by the two sides because they were ongoing. 

 

Mr. Minister, these negotiations have now broken down and so 

you really have no more excuses. Will you release the results of 

your review today, Mr. Minister? And will you give us a 

commitment that before . . . making changes to your union 

preference policy before the session ends, so that we can 

continue to question you about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, what most of the 

public are saying is scrap the Tories, not to the scrap the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement. That’s what they’re saying. 

 

There has been a review. The intent of the review was to look at 

how well the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement had 

worked. 

 

I personally think the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement has worked quite well, thank you. It certainly 

worked better, Mr. Speaker, than the job that was done by the 

former administration in this province . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now the Speaker has . . . Order. The 

Speaker is having just as difficult a time hearing the answer 

being put as he was hearing the question being put just a 

moment ago. I’ll ask for the cooperation of all members to 

allow the minister to put his . . . to provide his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I had such a good answer 

developing, Mr. Speaker, I wish they would just be quiet and 

listen to it because it really is a good answer. 

 

But we don’t intend to take unilateral action on anything 

without the broadest of consultation. We’re not about going 

back into the days of the scorched-earth policy where the 

former administration of Grant Devine and his Tory band across 

the way scorched the province of Saskatchewan. We’re trying 

to rebuild that province, to prepare for the 21st century. That’s 

what we’re doing; that’s what we’ll continue to do, so people in 

Saskatchewan have good public policy for everyone in the 

province not just the select few that that party represents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Occupational Health and Safety Regulations 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are to the outgoing Minister of Labour as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have now received a copy of the KPMG report 

on your new occupational health and safety regulations. These 

regulations are going to cost nearly $10 million in the first year. 

And a lot of this money is going to be spent on areas that will 

probably do nothing to improve workers’ safety. 

 

For example, we have money going to 25 new areas where 

consultation with the occupation health and safety committee is 

required. At least a cost of $3.1 million is indicated for these 

consultation processes. There are going to be 11 new  

bookkeeping requirements at a cost of $715,000. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you really think that additional meetings, 

bookkeeping, and red tape are going to help the safety of 

workers in our province? Be realistic; answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, does it ever end  does it 

ever end that Tories attack the working men and women in this 

province, the Conservatives attack the working men and women 

in this province? Do I think that the new regulations for 

occupational health and safety are going to help make safer 

workplaces? Yes, they will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  It won’t only make it better for the 

working men and women in this province, Mr. Speaker, by 

having safer workplaces where people will not get injured as 

often, where fatalities will not occur — and we should not rest 

until there is not one fatality in the workplace in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, it’s also a benefit to the 

businesses in Saskatchewan because if the labour critic opposite 

would have taken the time to read the KPMG report, it shows 

that the social benefit in there many times exceeds the initial 

cost. It saves it in the well-skilled and trained employees who 

are still on the job. It saves it in workers’ compensation costs, it 

saves it in a number of regards, and it’s a net benefit is what the 

KPMG report says, not the indications the members give 

opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a supplemental to 

the same minister who obviously had too much sun over the 

weekend. Because, Mr. Minister, you talk about all kinds of 

rhetoric and political antidotes but . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Now the Speaker is 

entirely unable order  entirely unable to hear the question 

being put by the hon. member from Cypress Hills and I’ll ask 

all hon. members, I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the hon. 

member from Cypress Hills to put his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question for the 

minister . . . is for the Minister of Labour. The KPMG, Mr. 

Minister, talks about the social benefits that will be achieved if 

the workplace facilities and injuries are reduced. Certainly this 

is a very worthwhile goal. But there is nothing in this report that 

explains exactly how these regulations will reduce the 

workplace accidents. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government has committed to a sunset 

clause on all new government regulations. How long will it be 

until the sunset clause on this policy takes effect? When will we 

see a review of these new regulations so we can see whether or 

not they actually did reduce the number of workplace injuries or 

not, Mr. Minister? 

 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, no matter where you 

go, there you are. We should expect, we should expect the 

members opposite to take that kind of approach. 

 

The workers and the businesses of this province for years have 

reviewed the occupational health and safety regulations. And do 

you know when the review will happen? It will always happen 

because workers and businesses and governments in 

Saskatchewan will continue to review safe workplaces. 

 

I mean it’s necessary to do that. We’ve seen, when Ross 

Thatcher was here, the most anti-worker government in the 

history of the province. But then what happened? Grant Devine 

came along and we saw even the . . . (inaudible) . . . worst 

anti-labour, anti-worker premier in the province. 

 

Now in direct relationship to the member’s question, how will 

this help  better training in the workplace, education of 

workers, workers and management working together to care 

about safer workers — because it’s to the social benefit and the 

economic benefit of both, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highway No. 5 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. I’m going to ask 

again for the cooperation of all members of the House and I’m 

asking for the cooperation of the members of the government 

caucus and the caucus of the third party to allow the hon. 

member for Kelvington-Wadena to be heard in putting her 

question. Order. And the members of the official opposition 

caucus as well. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, all 

weekend long I was answering phone calls from constituents 

who are furious about the condition of Highway No. 5 between 

Wadena and Clair. I drove this highway myself, and I counted 

69 flagged potholes in a 12-mile stretch. These orange flag 

signs not only represent danger, but they also represent the 

colours of your party. And you can take ownership of the 

potholes. 

 

The people of this area deserve much better and tourists who 

come into the area deserve much better. Mr. Minister, why is 

the public paying so much money for services it doesn’t 

receive? And where exactly is the money going? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you very much for that 

question, Mr. Speaker, and certainly we have some problems on 

our roads this spring. It’s normal spring in Saskatchewan and 

highways break up and we go and fix them. And the crews are 

on the job and they’re doing a very good job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the hon. member says, where is the money going? I wonder 

if she told the people that phoned her that the federal  

government indeed took some money away from the province 

this year in transition funding. I wonder if she said that they 

took $50 million away from the province in health care. Did she 

tell them that they took a lot of money away from the province 

in the social programs? Or did she tell the people that phoned 

her that they in fact, the federal Liberals, took more money 

away from the province, from education, and that the province 

had to back-fill those offloads from the federal government. 

And it in fact it affects Highways as well as other departments. 

So I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, if she was real honest with the 

people that phoned her and told her exactly where the money 

went. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Resignation of Minister of Labour 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, last week the Minister of Labour 

announced he would be resigning his cabinet post. This gives 

you the perfect opportunity to cut the cabinet size and to save 

taxpayers’ dollars. Even more importantly, it gives the Deputy 

Premier the opportunity to unite the camps of business and 

employees. 

 

Mr. Premier, business is people, and they need each other. 

Having two different departments leads to the perception that 

we are poised one against the other. Mr. Premier, will you take 

the opportunity to join the departments of Economic 

Development and the Department of Labour and make 

economic growth a priority by encouraging people to work 

together in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I know that the . . . yes, I know the 

members opposite find it very surprising I’m Acting Premier 

today, but he’s gone so I’ll answer the question. There’s a very 

different role between the two departments. And I just want to 

explain to the members opposite that it’s been always very 

important  since the early 1900s  of having a Department 

of Labour in Saskatchewan with the Department of Labour and 

the Department of Economic Development having separate 

portfolios. 

 

I do not think it’s in the best interests to combine the two 

portfolios. I think it’s worked very well. The ministers should 

work closely together, as the Minister of Economic 

Development and myself do, very closely. We don’t always 

agree in every situation. We sometimes have disagreements. 

But most often, we can work out a resolve that’s good for 

public policy and the province of Saskatchewan. We should be 

building for the 21st century, not breaking down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

Talks Break Down 

 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

pursuant to rule 46 to move a motion of urgent and pressing 

necessity. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member has requested leave to 

introduce a motion under rule 46. I’ll ask the Leader of the 

Third Party to briefly describe why he wishes to have it 

considered as an order, as a priority of debate, and to advise the 

Assembly of the motion he wishes to introduce. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

today talks between the Saskatchewan Construction Association 

and unionized contractors and construction workers broke off. 

These talks were aimed at making some much needed changes 

to the government’s flawed union tendering policy. 

 

For several weeks now the government has said that these 

negotiations would be the solution to the problem. However it 

is now clear that these negotiations have failed because the 

unions refuse to budge on the issue of union hiring quotas. It’s 

now up to the government to show some leadership on this 

issue. The government has also used these talks as an excuse 

not to release the CIC internal review of the union preference 

policy. This policy is no longer valid. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, the government has dragged its feet 

for far too long. This matter must be resolved before the end of 

this session. Therefore I move, seconded by the member for 

Cypress Hills: 

 

That this Assembly demand that the minister responsible 

for Crown Investments Corporation release the CIC 

internal review of the union preference tendering policy 

immediately, and further that the minister responsible for 

CIC immediately commit to implementing meaningful 

changes to this flawed policy before the end of this current 

legislative session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. All hon. members 

. . . Order, order. Now the Speaker was unable to hear the order 

of business being called by the Clerk, and I will ask for the 

cooperation of all members of the House. Order. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 114  An Act 

respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for  

District Health Boards and their Affiliates be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I was saying earlier, we do have a number of problems with 

this particular Bill and indeed, Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with 

the health boards and the establishment of Crown foundations. 

Actually my notes are on the floor right back here beside me. I 

wasn’t expecting it to come up quite so soon. So it’s probably 

good that I don’t have my notes because, Mr. Speaker, we could 

go on for a fair piece of time with the notes . . . and these aren’t 

the right ones. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that as I said before dinner that there 

was a number of problems with this particular Bill dealing with 

the establishment of the Crown foundations and the means by 

which it’s going to happen. 

 

The boards will be developed, Mr. Speaker, by appointments by 

the minister from across the entire province to distribute the 

monies that are donated by people to the Crown foundations. 

These donations, Mr. Speaker, should be used within the areas 

in which they’re donated, but they’re not going to be used that 

way. They’re going to be distributed throughout the province, 

Mr. Speaker. And so we have some concerns with it. 

 

Now as I pointed out earlier, with the possibility of . . . using 

the Brandon university as an example. We have used already 

the example of the university Crown foundations, Mr. Speaker, 

because those individual ones are designated, whereas this 

Crown foundation policy is not in that manner. It’s spread out 

throughout the province. This doesn’t allow for the individual 

needs to be met in each and every community where the funds 

are being donated from. 

 

I look at people in my area, Mr. Speaker, such as Mr. Orville 

Block, who donates a considerable amount of money, Mr. 

Speaker, for health care in the communities. He has donated in 

the past, I am sure, to the foundations down there. I know that 

he has contributed directly to the hospital in Gainsborough 

when it was there. He contributed $15,000 I believe to purchase 

a neonatal monitor, I believe it was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those kind of donations now, Mr. Speaker, would not serve 

that community. They would go into a larger sum, larger pool. 

If the board in charge of the Crown foundations believed that 

Gainsborough should have such a monitor, then perhaps they 

would buy it for them. But if they believed, for some other 

purpose, that someone else should receive this, then 

Gainsborough loses to somebody else’s gain. 

 

One of the things that I believe that is a great problem with this 

particular piece of legislation, Mr. Minister, is because the 

board will be appointed by the minister it allows the board the 

opportunity to play politics. Because these are patronage 

appointments, Mr. Speaker; they owe their appointments to the 

minister. 

 

Now let’s say we’re into an election campaign, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s a tight race some place. And health care I’m sure, Mr. 

Speaker, is always an issue in Saskatchewan and will be an  



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

issue in the next election. It’s a tight race some place. The 

people in the area believe that their health care is not being 

serviced properly. If all of a sudden the Crown foundations was 

to push some money into that area, into those communities, and 

provide some service, the local government candidate could 

say, well see, look, this is what the government has done for 

you. We have provided a mechanism which will provide extra 

money into your area, into your communities, into your 

constituency. My government did that. I have the opportunity to 

influence them to make sure that this money continues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in tight races, those kind of donations could 

potentially influence enough votes to buy the election. And I 

believe that’s absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 

the appointments should not be  should not be  made by 

the government; that the donations should be directed as per the 

wishes of the donor. If the donor says, I want it to go into that 

constituency to buy a fetal heart monitor, well then that’s what 

it should be used for. 

 

But when it’s the board’s decision to do something like that, to 

put it into a community when perhaps there is an election on, I 

think we verge, Mr. Speaker, at the edge of stepping over the 

precipice and influencing the election through the use of 

government money, or through money that the government 

controls. And that’s absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The monies that are donated should be going to the use of 

health care within the province. Under the minister’s proposal, 

he says no money will be used out of the health care budgets to 

pay for these appointees. And he’s correct. Unfortunately, 

monies in the foundation, the interest off of that money will be 

used to pay for these patronage appointees. 

 

So what it does is it diminishes the amount of money that is 

available to health care in this province; it diminishes the 

amount of money that the donations will contribute to health 

care in this province. After all, the longer you leave money in a 

program, it builds up interest and the larger your capital pool is. 

 

But there’s no limits set on what the board members can be 

paid. They can set their own rates perhaps. Or the minister can 

set the rate for whatever he wants for his own appointees. And I 

believe that is open to significant abuse, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we should minimize that abuse where we can by not 

allowing the minister to make the appointments, and indeed, 

Mr. Speaker, by not allowing the Crown foundation Bill to 

proceed as it is. But rather change it, amend it, so that as the 

money is directed by the donors, by the contributors, it will be 

used in the funds. The interest accumulating from that should 

be used in a similar fashion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While I’m prepared to say that there should be perhaps more 

flexibility in the terms of interest, if the board members that are 

the trustees of the foundation are properly dealing with the 

wishes of the donor, then that money should flow through fairly 

quickly. If Orville Block says I want to contribute $20,000 and I 

want it go to the health centre or the long-term care facility in 

Gainsborough to purchase two new beds, well then that’s what 

it should be used for, Mr. Speaker. 

And so it should flow through fairly quickly through the 

foundation and service the people. This would also allow . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well if Orville wants to contribute 

money so that the people in Maple Creek can have a new stove 

in their long-term care centre, then that would be appropriate. 

 

But I would think perhaps the member from Cypress Hills 

could find someone in his constituency who also has cattle, 

who would be prepared to make a sizeable donation to purchase 

a new stove for that long-term care facility. And they should 

have that right, Mr. Speaker, to indeed do so. And that money 

that is contributed to buy the stove at Maple Creek doesn’t have 

to go, Mr. Speaker, or indeed shouldn’t go to buy a new stove at 

the nursing home in Sturgis. Mr. Speaker, the people in Sturgis 

should be the ones who look after buying the stove at Sturgis. 

 

And that’s where, Mr. Speaker, where the problem lies in some 

of this, is when it can be directed by the minister to other 

purposes, other than that which the original donor intended. 

 

I asked the question earlier, Mr. Speaker, how many people had 

contributed to facilities which no longer existed. Now I didn’t 

hear any . . . well we have one minister who sticks his hand up 

and says that he’s prepared to donate to a facility that no longer 

exists. Now I’m not sure what the facility is. Perhaps it’s his 

bank account. If it’s after seeding this year, we all have minus 

bank accounts, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that not 

many people would do that. Very few in fact. 

 

So it’s a question of really what is the need within this Bill to 

correct or to legislate against that possibility, Mr. Speaker. And 

I suspect that that possibility rarely ever exists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when that would happen, the executor of the 

estate would deal with it in a proper manner by asking the 

family members how they would like to redirect this, or failing 

that, he would make the . . . the executor, he/she would make 

that decision and direct it in a proper manner, Mr. Speaker. And 

I don’t believe we need an entire provincial board to administer 

that. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s wrong that the board that the 

NDP opposite might appoint would ignore the wishes of the 

donors. So I think that section 14 should be done away with, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are other concerns too, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have discussed time and time again how health care dollars are 

scarce; how we would have to be extremely careful on how 

they’re spent; and at the time, this Bill sets another level of 

bureaucracy. And we’ve seen that already happen, Mr. Speaker, 

in the entire health care reforms that this government has 

brought forward. 

 

(1430) 

 

Initially, Mr. Speaker, we had the Minister of Health, we had 

the department, and then we had the local union hospital boards 

who had one administrator. And those union hospital boards, 

Mr. Speaker, represented the communities within which they  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

served. They represented the town council. They represented 

the RM (rural municipality) councils. And those people served 

free or gratis, Mr. Speaker, as far as expenses or costs were 

concerned to the union hospital board. While they may have 

received a small remuneration from their own town council or 

their own RM council, it was very minimal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now with this change, we have gone to administrators at the 

local facility. We have administrators now at the district level 

which is an entirely new position, Mr. Speaker. And instead of 

just one administrator at the district level, we have three or four 

dealing with the various sectors such as home care and 

ambulance, Mr. Speaker. Then again we have the CEO (chief 

executive officer) above that again, Mr. Speaker, because well 

when you get a bureaucracy, the only way a bureaucracy 

survives is by growing. 

 

And they continue to build one level, one layer on top of 

another until we reach the district board level, Mr. Speaker, at 

which point the board members are remunerated at a sizeable 

fund, Mr. Speaker  approximately, I believe $150 a day, $250 

a day for the chairman of the board. 

 

And I don’t begrudge the board members their pay, Mr. 

Speaker, because they work hard to earn that. Unfortunately 

under the previous system, that cost didn’t exist. There were no 

such comparable positions, no such comparable costs, and the 

little bit of cost that was there was borne by the town or the RM 

in paying their own members whatever they would normally 

pay them to attend a meeting. Not the health districts, Mr. 

Speaker, not the health districts. 

 

Now we still have, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health is in 

there and the minister is still there. The member from Estevan is 

saying that no, no, no, town council didn’t pay him. Well 

perhaps when he sat on town council, the town council didn’t 

give them any remuneration for going to a union hospital 

meeting. But in that particular case, Mr. Speaker, in his 

community, the hospital was run by the Catholic nuns so 

perhaps there was no representatives from town council, I don’t 

know  St. Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, but I know that in my areas the town council 

or the RM paid a small remuneration to the board members 

when they attended a union hospital meeting. But it was very, 

very minimal, Mr. Speaker. Now when we look at the cost for 

administration for the boards, it is a substantial amount of 

money. In fact, as I believe, the chairmans of the board last year 

received in some areas a $5,000 bonus for the work they had 

done, Mr. Speaker, just because they were the chairman  not 

because they had attended a whole bunch of meetings, because 

the other board members had attended the meetings also. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to how the money is being 

spent on health care, we have a great deal of concern when the 

government proposes a Bill such as 114 that would put another 

board in place to again deal with the money that people wish to 

donate to build health care in this province and then turn 

around, that same board take as wages the interest that the 

donations would accrue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister should be 

ashamed of that fact that he would be prepared to take money 

out of the health care donations to pay for his partisan political 

board. But he’s pushing this through a Bill that would allow the 

boards of directors to ignore the wishes of the donors when the 

donors, Mr. Speaker, as it turns out, are actually going to be the 

people who are paying the board. The minister appoints them. 

The people who donate the money pay the board, but the board 

doesn’t listen to them. 

 

Now can you imagine that happening, Mr. Speaker, with let’s 

say CIC or SaskPower or any of the Crown entities, if the board 

of directors didn’t listen to the people that were paying their 

salaries? I think you would quickly see a change. Very quickly, 

Mr. Speaker, you’d see a change in the board. 

 

Well in this particular case the people who are paying the bills 

get no part of the decision-making process, and in fact the 

board of directors don’t even have to listen to the people paying 

the bills. Mr. Speaker, it’s unethical; it’s unreasonable to expect 

people to donate money when they’re not sure where the money 

is going to go or if they want it to go there. There are no 

assurances, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 114 that this will indeed not 

happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to provide further tax credits to those 

who have extra money to donate to help fund important health 

care services, but we don’t need the NDP to run and to control 

those funds. We don’t need an extra level of bureaucracy. We 

don’t need to take interest from the fund for another patronage 

board appointed by the government members opposite. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s simply not fair, it’s not needed, and it’s not 

acceptable. 

 

We have spoken to health care facilities who welcome the tax 

credits available under Bill 114 but who fear the rest, Mr. 

Speaker  who greatly fear the impact that this will have on 

their own foundations that are currently in place. They fear that 

the money will dry up, that the donations will no longer be 

available from people who wish to contribute to health care 

within the communities because obviously 100 per cent tax 

credit has significantly more value than a 20 per cent tax credit. 

Or a contribution of $20 here for a ticket or $20 there or a 

sponsorship, whatever it may be, Mr. Speaker, that adds up to 1, 

2, 3, or $400 over the course of a year. People are going to look 

at that and say yes, I will contribute. I may even give $500 a 

year but I want to access the tax credit. 

 

If they access the tax credit, Mr. Speaker, their local 

communities lose control, lose the ability to direct where that 

fund will be spent, where the money will be used in their local 

areas. And it will simply disappear into that large black hole for 

use around the province, sort of like the Consolidated Fund that 

our tax money goes into, never to be seen again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be the case with everyone we 

speak to about this legislation, and I don’t believe it’s time to 

allow . . . time has allowed us to properly examine Bill 114. Mr. 

Speaker, it is because of these concerns that I move the 

following motion. I would like to move, seconded by the 

member from Moosomin . . . the member from Cypress Hills,  



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

sorry, the member from Cypress Hills: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 

the word “That” and substituting the following therefore: 

 

“Bill 114, An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown 

Foundation for District Health Boards and their Affiliates, 

be not read a second time but that it be read a second time 

this day six months hence.” 

 

I so move. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:40 p.m. until 2:47 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  10 

 

McLane Draude Bjornerud 

Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 

Boyd D’Autremont Toth 

Heppner   

 

Nays  27 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 

Tchorzewski Whitmore Lautermilch 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Koenker Trew 

Bradley Lorje Scott 

Teichrob Nilson Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Kasperski Ward 

Sonntag Flavel Thomson 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to enter the debate with respect to Bill No. 114. It 

certainly is a piece of legislation that we believe is headed in 

the wrong direction, that there are a number of changes that 

need to be made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I understand it, this Bill will result in another appointed 

board in this province, in Saskatchewan, being presented by the 

government to the people of this province. We don’t think that 

that is a very appropriate thing at all in a free and democratic 

society, democratic as the government always likes to present 

itself as. These boards should be appointed . . . not be appointed 

but should be elected if they’re going to be in place at all, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’m not quite sure I understand what the government’s intention 

is here, Mr. Speaker. What is wrong with the way it has always 

worked? Or when someone decides that they want to leave 

something to a hospital or a special care facility, a home care 

facility, something of that nature, Mr. Speaker, that they aren’t 

allowed to just donate it to that facility. 

 

You often see if you go into hospitals all across Saskatchewan, 

you walk into a ward and you’ll see this certain thing been 

donated, a bed been donated by a family, or a television, or a 

number of the appliances, things of that nature that are donated  

to that hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, what it really amounts to is 

it’s a small thank-you from the person or from their family for 

the care that they were given while they were in hospital. It’s 

their way of showing appreciation for the care that they were 

given rather just through their tax dollars, as has been the case. 

 

Health care facilities are pleased to hear about tax credits, but 

not about another board. And I’m not surprised, Mr. Speaker, 

because this whole health care debate has opened up as a result 

of the wellness plan that the government came forward with a 

couple of years ago. What it resulted in, Mr. Speaker, was a 

promise from the government at the time to bring in health care 

boards, elected boards. 

 

It took probably  I don’t recall  something in the magnitude 

of about two years, year and a half, of real strong opposition 

and strong pressure from the Conservative opposition of the day 

to finally get this government to committing to elections. They 

were right from the outset . . . as a carrot in all of this health 

care wellness plan, was the thought that they would bring in 

elected boards. We think, Mr. Speaker, that they should have 

did that right from the very outset. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the people that are planning on 

donating to this type of operation really have no assurances as 

to where the money will go that they may be donating. And I 

think that that is the critical point in all of this argument, is that 

you want the assurance that the dollars that you are giving  in 

some cases, Mr. Speaker, bequeathing to the facility  will go 

directly to the benefit of the people in your immediate area. 

And I really see nothing wrong with that, Mr. Speaker. What is 

wrong with someone in their final days of their life just 

determining that they want to give a little bit of what they’ve 

built up in an estate for the health care facility in their 

community? 

 

I think that sometimes I am of the opinion that the members 

from the cities here in Saskatchewan don’t really understand 

that as well as a lot of the rural members of Saskatchewan 

understand that. Because it’s a normal occurrence, Mr. Speaker, 

when someone passes on in a rural community, to give to their 

hospital facility, the long-term care facility, or other facilities 

within the community. 

 

And I don’t think  I don’t think it is their intention to hand 

over those monies to an appointed board and then have it be 

spent in another community, or maybe not even spent for a 

period of time. Because as I understand it, there’s no restriction 

or no requirement on the government-appointed board to 

provide any direction as to when this money has to be used, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that that’s a very serious concern that has 

to be looked at in this piece of legislation as well. 

 

You can envision all kinds of scenarios developing, Mr. 

Speaker, where we see people in the community giving, 

donating to the board from their . . . We see that the problem 

develops where the people do not have any assurance from that 

non-elected board, that appointed board, that the money is 

going to be spent in their community. 

 

And I think the net result of it all will be, is that people may not  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

give, Mr. Speaker, the way they have in the past. And that 

would be a, I think, a tragedy in Saskatchewan to see that type 

of thing happening. Because this has always been a charitable 

type of thing, Mr. Speaker; this has not been something that 

they felt was a tax or anything of that nature. This has been a 

charitable thing that they have done to provide some support for 

their community. 

 

And in rural Saskatchewan it’s very important when we see the 

continued pressure on health care boards in Saskatchewan, the 

continued reduction in services, the continued reduction in 

home care, home care for people, special care facilities, and 

most certainly hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I recall, thinking back now on the health care debate when it 

was all started, the wellness plan. If you recall at the time, Mr. 

Speaker, there was huge rallies around the province of 

Saskatchewan. And my community where I’m from in Eston, 

they held a very large one. There was something in the 

magnitude of . . . well, I don’t recall, 1,000 to 1,500 people, I 

think, was reported at the time were at that meeting. And the 

former minister of Health and the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose were in attendance on behalf of the 

government at the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I recall, Mr. Speaker, what happened just prior to the 

meeting. It was proposed by someone that the people in that 

community get together and try with their own resources, with 

their own dollars, after-tax dollars, Mr. Speaker, to try and save 

the hospital in that community. And they raised in the course of 

that evening  which was really only a few hours, Mr. 

Speaker, from about 7 o’clock until 10 o’clock  they raised 

something in the magnitude of about $30,000 just out of 

people’s . . . the generosity of their heart, Mr. Speaker, over the 

course of a few hours. 

 

I think that indicates the level of concern. I think it indicates the 

level of commitment that they have to health care facilities in 

their community, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think that that . . . 

and I fear, Mr. Speaker, that that commitment may not be there 

any longer if they know that the money that they are going to be 

donating, or leaving from their estate to an appointed board, 

may go to another community. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, in small town 

Saskatchewan, people are very, very committed, very, very 

supportive of their communities, and as they see them continue 

to erode, Mr. Speaker, I think that commitment gets even 

stronger. They want to work even harder to ensure that their 

community stays alive, stays in place, stays there for their 

families. Because after all, Mr. Speaker, often it is the case 

where the people have friends, family, granddaughters, 

grandsons, sons, and daughters, all of those kinds of things, in 

rural communities, and they want those facilities to stay in place 

for them. 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, thinking back on one of the . . . in the 

election, the last election, as we were travelling the province 

and we heard from many people about health care in this 

province and how important it was to them. I can’t help but 

think back about the people that we met in the small rural  

hospitals that were closed or were in the process of closing 

down. We were in Bengough, I remember, Mr. Speaker, one 

day, very hot day in June during the election campaign, and I’ll 

never forget it. No one’s ever really been able to explain it to 

me, but I’m hoping some day the member that represents that 

constituency will tell us what the reason for this was. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they had a special . . . I believe it was a 

special care facility, and then they had . . . It was a relatively 

new facility, something I would guess was built in the ‘80s, 

somewhere around in there. And then they had a hospital, and it 

was probably built in the ‘40s or ‘50s, something like that, 

although it was in very good repair. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, something, as I say, that I don’t understand 

to this day, but while we were visiting that facility, they were 

also at the time saying — the government of the day — the 

NDP government was saying that they were going to close that 

hospital in Bengough and they were going to transfer the 

facilities, the acute care facilities and special emergency 

facilities, into that home care . . . or into that special care 

facility. And no one really understood in that community what 

the reasons for that were. I don’t think to this day they 

understand what the reasons for that were. 

 

Because they had a special care facility, fine, yes. They also had 

a hospital, and it was less than 100 yards between the two 

buildings. And no one understood why you would want to close 

the building and add onto that special care facility, exactly what 

you had 100 yards away. And I don’t know why the government 

would want to do that, Mr. Speaker, but that is exactly what the 

plan is in that community. 

 

And while we were there, the most fascinating thing happened, 

Mr. Speaker. They were talking . . . they had a big sign out front 

of the Bengough special care facility, and on that sign it said 

that they were adding onto this facility to provide acute care and 

emergency services in that community. 

 

And while we were there speaking about the reasons why this 

was not necessary, the Health people there must have instructed 

someone to go out and nail a piece of plywood up over that sign 

out front so that no one from the media would realize what was 

going on. Because it was a little bit difficult to understand or 

appreciate unless you were right there. 

 

(1500) 

 

And that member knows that it is true. I saw it with my own 

eyes. The CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) reporters 

that were there I think it was Art Jones from the CBC was 

with us  they recorded it for everyone to see. And I would 

bet, Mr. Speaker, that the member knows exactly what I’m 

talking about. And I’d bet that the member also is aware that 

that happened out there. 

 

But no one really has been able to explain it. I hope the member 

would care to enter the debate here and explain why that was 

happening that day. I haven’t been able to understand it and I 

don’t think the media understood it that day. But it seemed like 

quite a coincidence, Mr. Speaker, that there would be plywood  



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

being nailed up on the sign out front of that facility at the same 

time one of the political leaders of the province was in town 

talking about health care and the problems associated with 

health care. 

 

I think what it points to, Mr. Speaker, is the sensitive nature that 

this government has with respect to health care here in this 

province — the concern that they have, the concern that they 

have that they are losing touch with the average person out 

there when it comes to health care and the provision of health 

care in this province. 

 

They don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that this government has that 

commitment that they’ve always so proudly announced at every 

election or every time that they stood in this legislature. And I 

always . . . you just have to sit here and listen to the debates 

every once in awhile in question period when the minister 

responsible for Health or the Premier will get up and defend 

health care to the limit, Mr. Speaker. And at the same time, all 

across Saskatchewan, closing facilities, doing all kinds of 

things that will hurt the delivery of health care services in this 

province. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it shows the degree of arrogance that 

this government has developed in such a very short period of 

time. 

 

Further arrogance is evidenced, Mr. Speaker, by the NDP’s 

interest . . . in noting that the interest from donaters of money to 

these types of boards will be paid to board members. And I 

think that that’s something that is not right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you think back on health care in this province, always what 

happened in Saskatchewan was people had given of their time, 

in most cases, given of their time to provide health care 

facilities in this province, Mr. Speaker. They’ve given of their 

time to be on health care boards. I can think of people in my 

community, and I’m sure people all over this Assembly can do 

the same, when they look at health care facilities in 

Saskatchewan. They know members that gave freely of their 

time for 10, and 15, 20, 30 years in some cases, to be on health 

care boards. 

 

And I remember talking to a fellow in our constituency who had 

been on the board for something like 32 years or something of 

that magnitude, Mr. Speaker, had never taken a dime of 

compensation other than expenses for his whole period of time 

that he had served that board. And I asked him, I said, you must 

have a tremendous commitment to health care in this 

constituency and this area. He said, yes, he certainly does, but 

he views it as his public responsibility. 

 

And I think that’s what a lot of people in Saskatchewan do — a 

public responsibility to provide health care, not only for 

themselves and for their families, but the whole community. 

And that’s being lost I think, Mr. Speaker, in legislation like 

this. 

 

This legislation removes that local control that the minister 

often talks about in this legislature. He talks about health care 

boards and allowing them the power to make the decisions in  

that community and in that immediate area, in that health board, 

Mr. Speaker. And that is being lost when we set up another 

board, a province-wide board in this case, Mr. Speaker, to 

administer the donations  the donations of people all across 

Saskatchewan that they would like to see go to health care 

facilities in this province. 

 

And I think that that is something that this government has lost, 

this government has lost in terms of its commitment to health 

care. And I’m surprised that rural members on the government 

side don’t recognize that, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I know in the 

cities, where people are a little seemingly indifferent to each 

other, Mr. Speaker, it may not be as serious an issue. But it 

certainly is in a lot of places in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But of course this government, Mr. Speaker, is so used to taking 

taxpayers’ money and doing with it whatever they choose, that I 

suppose this doesn’t make any difference to them at all. I 

suppose they simply don’t care. They view it as just their sort of 

God-given right to govern in this province. 

 

They believe, Mr. Speaker, that money earmarked for a certain 

facility doesn’t necessarily have to go to that facility, that they 

have this sort of higher authority, the higher moral authority, to 

decide for people how their money is going to be spent. And 

that has been always the concern I think, with the socialist 

government in this province  that they are all-knowing, 

all-caring; no one has responsibility for doing anything in 

Saskatchewan except the NDP. They have this high moral plane 

that they believe that they sit on that no one else does, Mr. 

Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . even higher than that, 

yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They believe that they sit on this moral plane, singularly 

occupying it, Mr. Speaker, where no one has the right in 

Saskatchewan to question what this government or what the 

NDP do in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I think what’s happening, Mr. Speaker, is, is that moral 

authority that they seem to claim is being chipped away 

gradually more and more all the time. And I think it’s beginning 

to crumble, Mr. Speaker, because people don’t believe that the 

NDP has that commitment to health care any longer in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I recall during the election campaign going around this province 

 that was the single biggest issue, Mr. Speaker, the concern 

that people had about the erosion of health care facilities in this 

province. And you just had to drive into communities, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, you just had to drive into 

communities, Mr. Speaker, where they had lost their facilities 

and count the number of NDP signs around. People were 

ashamed to admit that they supported this government over the 

years in those communities. 

 

I recall talking to people and they were saying they supported 

the NDP/CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) since 

its inception and they’d never do it again, Mr. Speaker, because 

of that one single betrayal of this government  amongst many 

mind you  but that one single betrayal stood out in their 

mind, that they would not support the NDP ever again. 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it. Everyone knows that 

waiting-lists in this province are getting longer. Health care 

services are continuing to disappear, especially in rural 

communities  52 hospitals closed, senior care facilities 

closing down, even though there is a need and we all know that 

in Saskatchewan the population is ageing even more all of the 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In one of the municipalities, Mr. Speaker, I’d like you to know, 

in the municipality to the west of where I’m from, on the west 

side of my constituency, the RM (rural municipality) of 

Chesterfield, the RM administrator told me not too long ago, 

about six months ago or more, that the average age in that 

constituency now, the average age in that area, I mean that 

municipality, is 71  71 years of age, Mr. Speaker. I think that 

is an incredible testament to the need for special care, long-term 

care facilities in places like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet they see the continual erosion of things like the 

prescription drug plan, which used to be a deductible of $125 

per year. The members opposite have raised it to $1,700. When 

that prescription drug deductible was first introduced I 

remember all the members when they were on the opposition 

benches at the time, screaming, Mr. Speaker, about how people 

would have to choose between groceries and drugs. But when it 

gets to be $1,700 deductible, what are they choosing between? 

Housing and health care facilities? Are they choosing between 

housing and health care facilities now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Chiropractic and optometric services have been de-insured. The 

government did away with the children’s dental plan, took 

insulin and diabetic supplies off the prescription drug plan, and 

much, much more. And this are the same people . . . these are 

the same people that like to stand on the platforms around this 

province and say they are the only protectors of medicare in 

Saskatchewan. It isn’t true, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t true. And 

everyone in this province, I think, is beginning to understand 

that. 

 

It isn’t funny any more that these government members talk 

about protecting health care in this province and of not allowing 

a two-tiered health care system, yet at the same time it closes 

hospitals, closes nursing facilities, cuts funding to the point 

where nurses cannot properly do their jobs, and more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand that health care dollars are scarce and 

some residents do not have equal access across this province. 

But that is not justification for what is going on here. That’s 

why it’s a step in the right direction to allow for a larger tax 

credit for individuals donating funds towards health care 

services and facilities here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why this government can’t continue to fund 

our essential services and maintain the quality of health care for 

Saskatchewan families and not allow for private money to help 

out. I think they should allow for a lot more than that, Mr. 

Speaker, such as private eye clinics like the Gimbel clinic in 

Calgary which is basically a whole other topic. There is a 

Gimbel clinic in Saskatoon, but I understand that they don’t 

provide the same kinds of services that are available in Alberta, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of optometric care. 

It’s imperative that some changes be made in this Act before it 

is passed in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I have no problem 

with the additional tax credit for donaters. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

we applaud them. There are, however, a few other points of this 

legislation that concern us a great deal more. The board is one, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Bill establishes. 

 

Not that other entities don’t have boards overseeing them. In 

fact, Mr. Minister, the U of R (University of Regina) and the U 

of S (University of Saskatchewan) are examples of similar 

foundations. There are fundamental differences, however. And 

all of my colleagues have outlined them. 

 

In the case of people donating to their local hospital, health care 

facility, there’s no need for a board to review that kind of 

transaction. In addition, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is not . . . 

fundamentally wrong for the board to have the power to redirect 

money to wherever they see fit. There’s no need for this 

whatsoever, except for the provincial government to exercise its 

muscles and dictate from the top down which districts receive 

funding. 

 

And I think that that’s the concern, Mr. Speaker. As we 

continue to see the erosion of health care facilities in this 

province, people don’t believe it’s being done fairly or 

equitably, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the concern. You go into the 

rural communities that have lost their health care facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, and they don’t believe that this has been done fairly at 

all. They believe that they have been singled out in their 

communities for the reductions in health care services. 

 

Now when we brought this up previously, the minister said the 

money will go where the donater wants the money to go. If 

that’s the case, why even include section 14 in this Bill at all. 

Mr. Speaker, section 14 makes it very clear that the board 

created does not have to follow the direction of the people who 

donate to the board. So if someone can donate a hefty sum to a 

facility in Kindersley, Saskatchewan, but the board thinks that 

the health district has already received enough money to fund 

health care services in that area, the board can simply redirect 

that money elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, I have a very serious concern and fear, Mr. Speaker, 

that people under those circumstances will just simply look at it 

and say, I’m not donating, period. If it’s not going to go to the 

health care facility where I’ve spent my final days, I’m not 

donating, period. 

 

I know the minister’s excuse is that sometimes people donate to 

a facility that isn’t in existence or is an impossible request, but I 

don’t think that that’s very realistic, Mr. Speaker. And I think at 

that time you could probably ask family members to step in and 

make a decision about where that money would be better spent. 

I would just have to ask how many times that other type of 

scenario would even really happen. How many times does 

someone donate to a facility that doesn’t exist any more and the 

minister’s argument I think is very weak in that area. I imagine 

that certainly that that issue can be dealt with anyway. An 

executor would redirect the money, family members would 

become involved in the decision. I think it’s possible to easily 

deal with that. 

 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

I think it’s wrong, Mr. Speaker, as well that the board is being 

appointed by the NDP, and is able to ignore the wishes of 

people who donate to it. I think section 14 should be done away 

with for good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are other concerns too. Mr. Speaker, we have discussed 

time and time again how health care dollars are scarce, how we 

have to be extremely careful where they’re spent. But at the 

same time, this Bill sets up another level of senseless 

bureaucracy. The Health minister was proud to say that this new 

board won’t be paid out of health care dollars because they are 

going to be paid through the interest earned on the money 

donated. 

 

So in other words, Mr. Speaker, this money’s going to be put 

into a bank account, draw interest on it, who knows how long 

this money will sit in these accounts before the boards 

determine that the money is going to be spent on any kind of 

health care facility at all, or where it’s going to be spent. 

 

Well I should say that drawing interest on money set aside for 

the health care facility or nursing home should be not touched 

by government. If there’s any interest to be earned, it should go 

to the recipient of the money . . . where the money was 

supposed to go in the first place. 

 

I think the minister should be basically ashamed of suggesting 

such a thing. He’s pushing through a Bill that would allow a 

board of directors to ignore the wishes of a donater when 

donaters are the people who are actually paying the board. I 

think that’s pretty ironic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s unethical and it’s unreasonable to expect 

people to donate money when they aren’t sure what it’s going to 

be used for, or where it’s going to be spent. And there are no 

such assurances in this piece of legislation that that will not 

indeed happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, we need to provide further tax 

credits so that those who have extra money to donate, to help 

fund important health care services can do it, and can do it for 

the benefit of their community. We don’t need any kind of . . . 

more bureaucracy or any kind of another level of bureaucracy 

set up in this province. We don’t need to take the interest to 

fund another patronage board appointed by this government. 

It’s simply not fair, it’s not needed, and it’s unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spoken to people in health care facilities 

who welcome the tax credit portion of Bill 114, but fear the 

rest. That seems to be the case with everyone we speak to about 

this legislation, and I believe that it’s time we allow for proper 

examination of Bill 114. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s for those reasons that I believe that we need to 

have more time to consult with people across this province, and 

for that reason I move adjournment on this piece of legislation. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:17 p.m. until 3:27 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  4 

 

Boyd D’Autremont Heppner 

Goohsen   

 

Nays  30 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Lingenfelter 

Shillington Whitmore Lautermilch 

Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 

Koenker Trew Bradley 

Lorje Scott Teichrob 

Nilson Cline Serby 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Langford Ward Sonntag 

Flavel Thomson McLane 

Bjornerud Krawetz Gantefoer 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

understand the government’s reluctance to allow people to have 

time to consult with people across this province with regard to 

this piece of legislation. The people that we’ve talked to in 

Saskatchewan do not agree that this legislation is necessary, and 

all the provisions within. 

 

They support the idea of certain aspects of it, Mr. Speaker. The 

tax credit portion of it; they support that part of it. But most 

other parts of the legislation, the part dealing with setting up of 

this new board, this super-board, to oversee the donations and 

where they go across this province, they don’t support that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And they certainly don’t support the view that the donaters’ 

money goes into a single pool of money to be meted out by this 

government-appointed board to wherever and whenever they 

decide that they want that to be done, Mr. Speaker. And they 

certainly, I do believe, Mr. Speaker, do not agree with the 

interest that would be earned on these monies collected being 

used to pay the board members. 

 

(1530) 

 

I think it’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this 

province believe that health care is important  very, very 

important, Mr. Speaker. But they also believe that they want to 

have some sort of local autonomy, local decision making, with 

respect to all of these kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this piece of legislation, 

basically speaking, it isn’t that bad a legislation. But I don’t 

understand the government and the minister’s reluctance to look 

at these kinds of changes. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, if he consulted with health boards from 

across this province, he would find that there is some serious 

concern about this type of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that they 

don’t believe that the government is headed in the right 

direction by creating another board. And I wonder at some point 

whether the minister would look at some changes with  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

respect to it, or amendments to deal with those types of the . . . 

those concerns within the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, it is our firm belief that this 

legislation needs further time to be debated. It needs further 

time to be looked at. It needs further consultation with health 

care providers and health care people across this province, as 

well as the general population of Saskatchewan, to determine 

whether or not they’re headed in the right direction. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 

for Cypress: 

 

That Bill 114 be not now read a second time, and that the 

subject matter be referred to a special committee on Health 

to be established by this legislature. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 

some time to discuss this particular motion and some of the 

reasons why I think it’s a very valid motion, why we need to 

consider it and support it to its fullest intent, and why we need 

this opportunity to get full public opinion and feedback from 

the public on that to make sure that as we check with the will 

and the view of the residents of Saskatchewan, that we know 

what they want and that we carry out the wishes of the people. 

Because in the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re here 

for and that’s what we’re all about. 

 

One of the concerns that I have . . . and I think the public input 

into this would help clear this up and would also make sure we 

get the information back from the public that we feel from our 

research and our checking with the public and the people on the 

street, the feeling that it is there. What we are doing with this 

particular piece of legislation, we would be creating another 

level of bureaucracy. And I don’t think at this time in the 

history of probably the world, in the history of democracy for 

sure, is there a need and a desire by the public for another level 

of bureaucracy. 

 

There is always a need for some bureaucracy, but I think it 

needs to be limited as much as possible. It tends to get out of 

hand, it tends to get out of control, and it tends to cost a lot of 

money. And so when we looked at that particular piece of 

legislation it does create another brand-new level of 

bureaucracy. It does not use the bureaucrats that are there. It 

does not use any of the things that have been put in place, to 

work through those. And I think that that should have been able 

to have been accomplished without this new thing being put in 

place. 

 

And I guess the other thing that is there is, when we look at the 

make-up of this new board, this new level of bureaucracy, there 

is nothing there to sort of ensure that the make-up is a make-up 

that is representative of all of Saskatchewan and a cross-section 

of Saskatchewan, representing its people from various walks of 

life, from various vocations, from various locations. 

 

Those are things that need to be looked at carefully when we’re 

going to put something into place that is in fact going to take 

donated money and decide where it’s going to go, in those 

situations where something else needs to be done or the 

situation may not be clear enough and this board needs to make 

those decisions. 

 

We have to be very sure and be very comfortable, and the 

people of Saskatchewan have to be very confident that the 

make-up of this board is such that any decisions that they would 

make are decisions that carry out to the best of all possible 

intents, the wishes of those people making the donations. 

 

And then secondly, that as they carry out those wishes, it’s done 

to the best benefit of the health users of this particular province. 

In order to do that, Mr. Speaker, I think we would have to 

ensure in one way or another in some shape or form, that this 

particular board does have that cross-section. We need to be 

ensured that the working person on the street is represented. We 

need to be ensured that the elderly are represented. We need to 

be ensured that communities of all sizes are represented. 

 

Communities that have health facilities that may be very 

adequate; communities that have health facilities that may not 

be anywhere near as adequate  all those need to be there and 

that is what a good board should do. Bill 114 does not, Mr. 

Speaker, allow for that. There are no safeguards in that 

particular piece of legislation to guarantee that the make-up of 

that board is such as to ensure that the monies are going to go 

where we wish them to go. 

 

And probably continuing with that concept of another level of 

bureaucracy and another board, I don’t think that that is 

anything that we need at this particular point, especially when 

these boards are government appointed. The last thing this 

province needs is another board that’s appointed by a particular 

political party, Mr. Speaker. And the way the legislation 

presently stands, it would be very much, and in fact it will be 

totally, a politically appointed board. 

 

We have boards without end in this province that are politically 

appointed. Whether we’ve got the top ranks in education and 

whether we happen to talk about the health situation, I think 

that’s one that we’ve seen this happen very much and because 

this is in the same area, probably similar things will happen  

where the earliest of health boards that were set up under the 

new plan of this particular government had a make-up that was 

totally government appointed. 

 

And so the people that would be appointed would obviously be 

those, Mr. Speaker, that have the wishes and desires and the 

philosophy of this government. And, Mr. Speaker, if we look 

very closely at the last election, we realize that less than 50 per 

cent of the people of Saskatchewan voted for this particular 

government. 

 

So if we’re going to take and appoint a board that has that 

particular bias, it is not representative, Mr. Speaker, of the 

political directions and philosophies of the majority of  



2704 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

Saskatchewan people. That is abundantly clear, and so the last 

thing we need is another appointed board by this particular 

political body. We don’t need it, we don’t want it, and the 

people out there don’t want it. 

 

And I think while we’re on that board, the issue of 

remuneration comes up. This is basically another bureaucratic 

body, Mr. Speaker. And bureaucratic bodies, as we know, do 

not work for free. They’re going to have to travel; they’ll be 

paid mileage; they’ll be paid per diems; they’ll be paid lunches 

 and probably so they should because they’re doing some 

public work. But on the other hand, these are expenses. This 

money comes directly  according to the plan that the 

government has put in place  it comes directly out of 

donations. 

 

And I think if we go back in time, probably five, ten years, we 

remember a whole, major kerfuffle throughout North America 

where we looked at charitable donations and what percentage of 

the dollars given to various groups were actually spent on the 

uses for which they were intended, and how many dollars were 

spent on bureaucracy, on management, on just the work of the 

day. 

 

And in many cases the amount of dollars spent in those ways 

became astronomical. It became more than 50 per cent of all 

dollars given were going to fund just the ongoing business of it. 

And very few dollars ever ended up, Mr. Speaker, helping those 

people who actually were supposed to be the recipients of those 

acts of charity. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at this situation that’s in front of us 

today. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Same kind of a thing will unfold here. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  And as the member from Cypress Hills says, 

it’s exactly the same kind of thing. We are going, Mr. Speaker, 

in an identical direction. We’re building a bureaucracy. A 

bureaucracy, as I’ve just explained in detail, has a political 

philosophy, is made up of the political friends of the 

government of this particular time. 

 

Now as that bureaucracy grows and becomes entrenched and 

decides it wants to do more work, those works will have to be 

paid for, Mr. Speaker. And so that money keeps coming out of 

those donations. And if that keeps rolling . . . we’ve seen it 

happen in the past. We’ve seen it happen in the past, Mr. 

Speaker, where over 50 per cent of monies to some charities 

end up going just to the activities of the bureaucrats running it. 

We have no checks or balances in place here to limit those 

dollars. We have no checks and balances, none whatsoever. We 

need to have some. They aren’t there. 

 

So as I started off saying, the boards themselves are not 

necessary. The appointment of the board and the way they’ll be 

set up are very political. And now we’ve opened up a funding 

problem  and this is the third situation  where these boards 

get a funding. How much they’re going to get — there are no 

limits placed on that. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we really 

have a bit of a Pandora’s box over here not knowing . . . 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I want to remind the hon. 

member for Rosthern that his remarks must be directed to a 

very narrow subject matter, and the narrow subject matter is the 

amendment. 

 

The hon. member . . . Order. The hon. member for Rosthern has 

previously addressed, in principle, the second reading debate of 

Bill 114. And having previously participated in that debate, and 

with the rules of the Assembly not allowing him to speak twice 

to the same question, he must now confine himself very strictly 

to the subject of the amendment which is before us. Order. 

 

And I have been listening for some time and listening rather 

carefully, including to the member’s own summary of his 

remarks to date, and I am not hearing debate which is relevant 

to the amendment before us. I will ask the hon. member for 

Rosthern to direct his remarks to the amendment which is 

before us. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The amendment 

basically, Mr. Speaker, related to the concept of going back to 

the public to make sure that the information that we need in 

order to continue with this bit of legislation is there. And so we 

need to go back to the public, and the public are those 

individuals that will give us the information, because, as the 

servants of the people, we need to know what they want us to 

do. That hasn’t happened. 

 

And so as we do that, we need to look at those particular 

groups. And in specifics I go back to my home area, where we 

have numerous groups that are happening there, that do get 

bequests. 

 

I called the administrator last week, from one of the Mennonite 

care homes in my own constituency, and asked him how this 

would affect that. And he told me very definitely the effect that 

this would have on his particular enterprise that he’s in charge 

of. Because especially those groups that have religious ties tend 

to receive a lot of money from bequests, and we need to know 

exactly what effect that will have on them; what amounts of 

cut-backs there will be. And so we need to obtain that sort of 

public input on this in order to get the legislation in place and 

get it modified in such a way that will meet the needs of the 

public. 

 

Now as we continue with this, we need to look at the donors 

themselves. We’ve talked a little bit about the recipients, and I 

mentioned the home that I’d phoned to and the administrator 

and the concerns that he’d had and the opinion that he voiced 

very definitely to me on this. 

 

(1545) 

 

All of our constituents are possible donors because they’re all 

going to die. They all will have an estate and . . . (inaudible) . . . 

we have to know exactly what they’re going to do with that 

money. And so they give it to some group. They need to know 

exactly what’s going to be happening. 

 

And each one of us as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) I’m sure would love some opportunity  and this  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2705 

amendment allows for that, gives us that opportunity  to go 

back to our constituents and say okay, as you’re planning your 

will, as you’re planning your estates, as you’re choosing your 

executors, where exactly are you going to give your money? 

And do you know  is a question that’ll have to come up when 

we deal with this issue  that the monies that you’re giving are 

going to go exactly and in total — and the interest — to where 

you want them to go? 

 

And for that reason we need to pass this particular amendment, 

Mr. Speaker, so that we can get that particular input. We can 

hold those public hearings, as we wish, as MLAs, and our 

constituents. We can meet with the various boards and, as I 

mentioned earlier, we can meet with those particular 

individuals. 

 

And I think we have to do that, because the arrogance of this 

government has shown that they want to take this piece of 

legislation and put it through. I really do not think that anyone 

in my constituency has been contacted by this government, 

unless they were contacted by myself, to find out exactly what 

they’re thinking on that. 

 

And we need that time. This amendment, as I said, Mr. Speaker, 

is an amendment that gives us that opportunity to go ahead and 

get that information that we need. And if we set that up 

correctly, it will not be perceived as a political committee. If I 

go back there on my own, they’ll say well okay, here’s our 

MLA, he has a political stripe, and so he’s trying to defeat the 

government on an issue. But if we have an all-party committee 

and we come in with members from all parties, they’re going to 

say, here’s the information and they’re going to put that 

together and as legislators they’re going to work this through. 

 

I mentioned earlier on in members’ statements that I’d been at 

the Seager Wheeler opening, and our Deputy Premier was there 

and gave a very eloquent address, Mr. Speaker, at the Seager 

Wheeler centre. And in that address that he gave  and as I 

said, he did that quite eloquently  he mentioned the 

cooperation that takes place within the House. And that the 

little question period blurb people see on TV is in no means 

indicative of what actually happens in this House  fortunately 

they don’t always see all of it  and that there was a lot of 

cooperation there. And I think after having heard those words 

from our Deputy Premier, my constituents would be very 

receptive to seeing an all-party committee coming in, showing 

that cooperation that the Deputy Premier mentioned when he 

was at the Seager Wheeler opening. 

 

And so we need to, Mr. Speaker, deal with this amendment. We 

need to go ahead and pass this amendment so we can have 

those kinds of hearings. Because this sort of arrogance, this sort 

of saying we know what’s best for the province, as this 

government has been doing, cannot continue. 

 

This government is probably so used to taking taxpayers’ 

money they think that some more is probably the same as the 

last they took. Well one dollar is not the same as another dollar. 

For a lot of these people it’s their bequest  it is in fact their 

last dollar. So this NDP government may have taken the first 

dollar and the middle dollar and the fortieth dollar but they now  

want to take, Mr. Speaker, the last dollar from every citizen in 

Saskatchewan. They want to get their hands in . . . as the 

member from Cannington said, they want to put their hands in a 

dead man’s pocket and take the last dollar that’s there. 

 

And I can see there’s a member across the floor that has a 

toonie and I’m sure it may be a lot bigger than a loonie but the 

government would be glad to have that too. So we need to make 

sure that full value for every donation that is given goes to those 

particular directions that it’s given. And so this amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, give us the opportunity to be the kinds of governing 

people that we’re expected to be, the kinds of governing people 

that we go home and tell our constituency we are. 

 

And from time to time, as I mentioned, the Deputy Premier 

came to my constituency and said, we all are. And so here’s our 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to deal with this amendment and to 

go ahead and ensure that that is what takes place. This money, 

Mr. Speaker, is earmarked for a particular facility and it should 

go to that facility. It should go there, interest and all. Interest is 

earned by the money and so the whole thing belongs in the 

same pot, the same pot that it was given to, not the provincial 

pot, Mr. Speaker, as is presently being planned by this 

particular administration. 

 

This Bill should not proceed. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to move adjournment on the debate on this particular 

amendment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 120 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 120  An Act 

respecting the Reorganization of Labour Relations between 

Health Sector Employers and Employees be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

just reiterate a few of the points that I raised the other day 

regarding this piece of legislation that is before us. And I note 

. . . I believe the other day I called this legislation somewhat 

Draconian, and I get a feeling that even in this Assembly, there 

are many other people that may feel the same way only they 

may be looking at it in a different view than I am. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I certainly have taken the time to talk to 

individuals involved in the health care field, and I haven’t had a 

chance to get as broad a representation as I would like to have 

had, but certainly talked to board members in my constituency, 

talked to a few of the local individuals who happen to work in 

the health care field. And what I found from these individuals 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, while we hear that there’s been a 

broad consultation, it seems to me that most individuals or most 

people, whether they’re employees or union members or even 

board members, are not totally aware of the piece of legislation 

that is before us. 

 

The reasons for the legislation I think have been given to them  



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

somewhat broadly, but as I found out today in sitting down with 

representatives from SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations), the fact is they recognize as well that in 

the last few days that things have proceeded quite rapidly, 

which has resulted in this piece of legislation being brought to 

the floor of the Assembly when we were given assurances about 

three weeks to a month ago that there really wouldn’t be any 

more heavy pieces of legislation to be brought forward. And 

especially as we’re getting to the dying days of this legislative 

sitting. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, as I was talking to the director 

and the president of the SAHO, they had certainly indicated that 

they really haven’t had the opportunity as well to relay all the 

aspects of this piece of legislation to their membership as it has 

really moved along, and they’re certainly in the process of 

doing it. But they have in general tried to keep their 

membership up to date with what’s been going on and the 

reasons why we would have this piece of legislation here. 

 

And as I indicated in the Assembly on Friday, I can understand 

where SAHO is coming from; I can understand where the 

government’s coming from; and in some cases I can understand 

where some of the union members are coming from. Although 

quite frankly it surprises me that we would see any kind of 

agreement to even have, if you will, as this legislation does . . . 

appoint a commissioner to set up the guidelines as to how this 

particular Bill  Bill 120  will be enacted, and how it is 

going to work. When you look at the fact that in this province, 

we have I believe five or six different unions operating within 

the health care field and we even have some facilities and 

organizations in the health care field that are non-unionized. 

And so those are some of the concerns we’ve been raising. 

 

And I guess, as I indicated the other day, the concern that the 

fact that this may become a kind of a provincial bargaining 

process whereby union membership in the city of Regina, if you 

will, would find that if a position ceased to exist and they were 

out of a job and there was no room to move within the Regina 

Health District, that they could then move out and say to the 

Pipestones or to the Moose Mountains or the Cypress Hills or 

any of the other health districts in this province . . . 

 

And I’m assured that that isn’t what the intent of the Bill. But it 

certainly remains a question that we will want to bring up with 

the Minister of Health to make sure that indeed that is the 

understanding. 

 

As I understand from SAHO, the understanding and the feel 

they have now is that what it does is brings together, 

amalgamates together, if you will, the unions in the province, 

but in the districts so that the negotiations take place at the 

district level and the employees are only affected at the district 

level. So you may have a . . . communities within a district, but 

you’re not looking at all . . . the whole province. Like someone 

from Lloydminster coming to the south-east, or south-east 

going up to Yorkton or what have you. 

 

In that regard, Mr. Speaker, based on the area I represent and 

the concern that many people have in the health facilities 

already and the health services that we have available such as  

home care and our acute and heavy level cares in the 

constituency of Moosomin, the feeling has been and there 

continues to be a feeling of uncertainty because of the 

downsizing, if you will, of services, whether it’s through 

funding cuts to acute care beds, which means a number of our 

facilities are going to be losing positions, or in heavy care beds 

or even in home care services. 

 

And as we’ve seen in the past four years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

seen where, because of the changes, we’ve seen nurses have 

been moved out of acute care facilities. They have taken over 

jobs that individuals who had gone through the home care 

program and received the education to become a home 

care-giver . . . now find they’re on the outside looking in 

because of staff coming out of heavy care and acute care 

facilities to serve and being offered positions even if it’s part 

time. 

 

And so that uncertainty remains. And that is one thing we want 

to make sure, that we don’t add to that uncertainty through this 

piece of legislation. And I’m assured, Mr. Speaker, that this 

piece of legislation doesn’t do that, and that indeed most of the, 

if not all, of the aspects of this legislation basically fall where 

there isn’t a definition of the employee. It’s our understanding 

the definition of the employee is the same as it is under The 

Trade Union Act. 

 

Those are areas, Mr. Speaker, that we want to make sure that 

we have a better understanding of, and that’s why I moved 

adjournment of debate the other day in order to ask some of 

these questions, in order to get some input from people who 

would be directly affected. 

 

It’s I think very easy for me to stand up . . . or easy for the 

Minister of Health or the government to bring in a piece of 

legislation that’s going to drastically affect people’s lives when 

we’re sitting here and while our jobs are dependent upon the 

desire of the electorate approximately every four years to 

re-elect us. The fact is we do have a job today, but somebody 

out in our communities may not have a job. And that should 

concern us and that should concern . . . I’m sure it should 

concern the Premier; it should concern certainly the Minister of 

Health. 

 

And I suppose if I were I would be . . . probably I would be 

surprised if there aren’t some back-bench MLAs that may not 

have some concerns with regards to this legislation. As I look at 

the legislation and, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, in view 

of the fact that we still have so many different unions working 

together, maybe that’s why we’ve come to the point where this 

piece of legislation talks about a commissioner being appointed 

to oversee and come up with a recommendation. 

 

Now if there’s anything, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve been talking 

about or that right through this whole session . . . that point that 

we would certainly recommend again in this piece of 

legislation, is the fact that the government heed what it’s been 

telling us. Where it talks about consultation, we see them right 

now — we see the Minister of Education holding meetings 

across the province to supposedly get the input of the taxpayers 

of this province as to how education and the delivery of  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

educational services will be in the next year and certainly into 

the year 2000 in this province. 

 

We also have the minister responsible for CIC holding public 

meetings to get public input as to whether or not there should 

be privatization in the Crown sector, what areas of the Crown 

sector should continue to operate in the public domain, and 

what areas should be allowed to work in the private domain. 

 

(1600) 

 

And the unfortunate part, as I view what’s taken place to date in 

the meetings so far, I see a deliberate attempt by the unions to 

manipulate the meetings and not really . . . as I noted in one of 

the papers, or actually not just one, a couple of the papers, 

bringing out the fact that some of the information the unions are 

giving is not really factual. That the public in general, they 

would look at some of the numbers with regards to the unions 

suggesting that the Crowns have injected so many millions of 

dollars into the public trust or to the general revenue pool. The 

fact is on an ongoing basis it’s very minimal, and yet we see 

what the private sector has done. 

 

And I think if I can recall in one figure, this year was the first 

year, and there’s only been about two or if not three out of the 

last five, where the Crown sector has actually injected and put 

money into a general revenue pool. And this year I believe it 

was around 50 million. But the fact is the areas that were turned 

private put $220 million into general revenue through taxation. 

 

So what I’m saying here, Mr. Speaker, coming back to the piece 

of legislation in front of us, is that we trust that in the debate 

going on, that all the information related to even this specific 

Bill . . . and I’m sure that the directors of SAHO would agree 

with that, that they’ve got everything out so their members 

understand what they’ve been discussing and how they’ve been 

discussing and the reasons for the implementation of such a 

Bill. 

 

And we would trust as well that the unions would even bring all 

their membership in, into the debate, that they would indeed 

include them and be all-inclusive so that their membership is 

aware of what’s going on. Because at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, while the SAHO directors over here and the union 

leadership sitting over here . . . there’s a level of people, an 

enormous level of people down below, that are going to be 

affected. And their livelihood, Mr. Speaker, is totally dependent 

on the decisions made by the commissioner as to the 

implementation of this piece of legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been indicating, we have some 

concerns. And some of these concerns, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

we’ll be able to even enter into and maybe get some questions. 

Hopefully we can have a debate when we get into committee on 

this piece of this legislation that just clarifies even a little more 

too, in our minds and in our caucus’s minds, some of the 

concerns we’ve got. 

 

While we’ve raised them with the unions and with people that 

we rub shoulders with on a daily basis, while we’ve raised them 

with SAHO and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I believe I  

heard one of the members talk about shoulders, and rubbing 

shoulders and kind of scoffing at the idea. Well I do rub 

shoulders with union people out in my constituency  not the 

Barb Byers’s of this world; I’m not sure she’d really want to 

rub shoulders with me, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker  but I do 

talk to union membership in my area that in many cases, while 

they’re union members, they can see a lot of the points and they 

certainly agree with a lot of the stands I’ve taken and they’ve 

given me input. And that’s why I feel that they need to be 

represented and their voice needs to be heard as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s . . . I believe I’ve raised a number 

of the concerns. I believe I’ve brought to the fore the issues that 

I feel quite strongly about, issues that I feel that I’ve already 

just through the weekend been able to get some input on, these 

issues and how we address them. And I think it’s only 

imperative that I give other colleagues in the Assembly the 

opportunity to speak to this piece of this legislation as well 

before we allow it into committee, so that we indeed, if there’s 

something that I haven’t seen . . . someone else can bring up 

some of the areas or the questions or the concerns they may 

have. 

 

And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m more than willing 

to allow anyone else who would like to address this Bill, before 

it is moved to committee, to raise the questions they may have. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had thought that 

seeing as how this is a fairly recent Bill and one that has just 

been introduced, that the official opposition would want to go 

first. But as they prepare their statistical material and get ready 

for the debate, I would like to bring up a few of the things that I 

find that I feel are wrong about this particular legislation. 

 

Now we recognize though that there are again some things in 

this Bill that people have probably been looking for. There’s 

probably . . . as with all things, there are two sides to every 

story. And as the member will note, in this situation the health 

boards apparently would find themselves in an advantage to 

have the vehicle portrayed in this Bill placed in their hands 

under legislation. And normally in the past we found that 

legislation generally has benefited the philosophy and direction 

of the government. 

 

In this case we find the government simply saying, well we’re 

going to facilitate something for the health boards that they 

seem to want. That seems to be the argument. And yet on the 

other hand, when we look a little deeper, we see that in reality 

this is a philosophical direction that the government wants to go 

on in other Bills, and so they’re really doing it for themselves 

again. And that is, of course, to centralize power and control. 

And the power and control that is being centralized here is the 

ability to negotiate wages with larger groups of people rather 

than with small units of people. 

 

And then that brings me to the question of wondering who 

these groups are. And I began to do a little investigating and 

checked into it. And I find that the folks that know what’s going 

on in these matters tell me that we have several unions that now 

represent different people in the health area  



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

throughout the province  several unions representing 

different people in different work categories and different 

groups in different locations. 

 

And so then my question became, why would these people want 

to have legislation passed that, as I understand it, will relinquish 

their power over their membership, that in fact will in time 

promote the organization of one super union taking over all of 

the union activities in the health care field? 

 

And I’m wondering then, I wonder if these smaller unions 

know about this. So as the critic for Labour for our party, I’m 

thinking, well maybe it’s time to reverse my role. Maybe it’s 

time to start to defend some of the things that the union people 

should have. Because it’s easy enough to criticize them in the 

past when they appeared to be trying to take too much power. 

 

In this situation we have exactly the opposite thing happening. 

We have the potential for one super union to take over control 

of all the little unions and to basically take over all of their 

membership, to basically take over all of their responsibilities. 

In other words, this appears to be a union battle within the 

unions and within the ranks of the different union structures. 

And as the critic for Labour, I think somebody has to stand up 

and reveal what is really going to happen so that the people in 

the union movement have time to consider this and think about 

it. 

 

I do believe that the masters of the super union who believe 

they will take over, probably drafted this legislation and asked 

the Minister of Labour to throw it in as a last minute thing 

before he escapes from the province, to help them out one more 

time. Help them out one more time of course to consolidate and 

take over all of the smaller unions in the province and all of the 

smaller unions that represent the health care boards throughout 

the jurisdiction within our health care system. 

 

Well I wonder then in my mind, is that what those folks really 

would want. And I can’t see it. I just can’t see where they 

would want to be taken over and probably basically eliminated. 

Now that just doesn’t make sense to me that all of the smaller 

unions would want to be taken out of the process and be now 

represented by this super union that would negotiate with the 

government. And so who would it benefit? Obviously it would 

benefit the government because they can then dictate what the 

conditions will be throughout the entire health system. They can 

also dictate the prices, and pass on the cost because now we’ve 

got a situation where the health boards, Mr. Speaker, are 

responsible, according to the government, for the costs involved 

in our health care system. 

 

The government has more or less divorced itself from that 

process by saying we’ve set up these health boards; they’re 

responsible; it’s their fault. We’ve heard it every day, question 

after question, day after day. The Minister of Health stands up 

and says the health boards are taking care of it. It’s their fault. 

It’s not my responsibility any more. I’ve found now that the 

minister in fact is listening to the debate again, and I’m glad 

that he wants to contribute and I’m hoping that he will get into 

this debate and assure us later on that the problems that I see 

here are going to be resolved. 

Because as you know, Mr. Minister of Health, the situation is 

such that the smaller unions will no longer, once this is passed, 

have control over their jurisdictions. They will eventually be 

drummed out of business. They will be without any kind of a 

portfolio or obligation or a membership. It will all end up 

consolidated into the hands of one super union. Who will that 

be? Which union will triumph? 

 

An Hon. Member:  SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union). 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  The SGEU, Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Union  well perhaps. I hardly think that the 

unions involved in health care would be pleased about that. 

After all, aren’t there different kinds of unions like CUPE 

(Canadian Union of Public Employees). Well there you go. 

Now we’ve got CUPE, and don’t you think they would like to 

have a say? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Barb Byers is organizing it all. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well if Barb Byers is happy with all this, I 

suppose we should consider it even more because obviously 

then there must be something wrong with it. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we truly do want to bring to the attention of the people of 

Saskatchewan that are concerned. And basically in this situation 

it will be the smaller unions that will be eliminated in time. 

They must have some concern. 

 

And I would be really surprised if some of the back-benchers 

over there haven’t been receiving some calls about this. I’d 

really be surprised if some of them don’t represent seats where 

the unions actually supported them as their candidates in the 

last election. If so, are they happy with you? I think it’s time 

that those back-benchers stood up and took a stand in this 

Assembly, and spoke on this Bill and represent the people that 

probably helped to get them elected. And they should represent 

them in such a way as to preserve themselves. 

 

I am standing here defending some of the union’s rights that are 

being ignored by this government. And this may be a special 

day in the history of this province, but nevertheless, we are 

elected to defend the underdogs and the people who are singled 

out as minorities and who are unable to be represented here 

today because of the gag order that the government will have 

put on the back-benchers that should be defending this union 

position of some reconsideration and renegotiation. 

 

Because certainly, Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that this 

Bill will eventually bring about some hardship for some of the 

union movements. And those people have got their jobs 

basically because they were elected by the workers. The 

workers have decided in this province that they wanted to be 

represented, and so they elected unions and they had to run 

through the process of organizing themselves. 

 

I’ve never agreed that they need to do that in most cases. But 

the fact that they have is now a fact of life and a reality. And so 

dealing with reality rather than with fiction or things that we 

might have been, we’ll deal with the reality that those unions 

are in place because the memberships wanted them there. 



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2709 

Should we not be going back to those memberships and saying 

to them, do you want your small union to be eliminated from 

the process? Why are we not going back to the rank and file in 

the union membership, saying to them, here’s a Bill that could 

eliminate the spokesman that you have democratically elected. 

And that spokesman will be eliminated from the process of 

bargaining on your behalf. 

 

And there is nothing wrong with bargaining on behalf of the 

people that you represent. The collective bargaining process is 

one that we have supported. We don’t support some of the ways 

that this government goes about administrating those matters 

but we do support the concept and the principle. 

 

And the principle here will be violated because the people who 

elected their representatives will now no longer have those 

representatives necessarily being the ones that will be chosen by 

the process of elimination in the final analysis to be the ones 

that are going to negotiate the collective bargaining process for 

the entire province under this Bill. 

 

So if we’re not making any sense, I’ll stay here until we do. But 

the truth of the matter is that for this day, Mr. Speaker, we have 

to defend the little people, the smaller unions that are being 

drummed out of business. And this is not necessarily a role that 

we would choose for ourselves, but it is imposed upon us by a 

dictatorial government that has taken its lead from some place 

like Cuba, I’m sure. There’s no other explanation but that the 

arrogance of this government has driven it to the point where it 

no longer cares about the very folks that elected it and 

supported it. 

 

The back-benchers are too quiet today. I can see their concern. 

They have come to understand that they themselves are not 

representing their people properly. And they know very well 

that my point is well taken when I say that they are being 

gagged by their leadership into not speaking out on this very 

issue  an issue that should be bothering them more than it 

bothers me. 

 

And yet I have to stand here and defend for them. Something is 

wrong in this picture. Something is wrong with a government 

that becomes so arrogant and so power hungry that it muzzles 

its back-benchers from defending the very people that would 

have elected them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are also some other points in this 

legislation that are extremely bad. Going past the point of who 

should be representing who, we now should get back to the Bill 

itself and take a look at some of the things that are not in it, 

some of the things that should be in it. 

 

For example, on page 1, and I’m not going to review the entire 

Bill because that’s not the process for this part of the debate, 

but there are some things that are left out here. For example, 

under the interpretations, we have a whole list of things that are 

interpreted. Every Bill has that. Everybody’s familiar with that 

process. 

 

(1615) 

 

What is painfully clear here though, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

word employee is not here. It is not defined. And as the member 

from Cannington has pointed out to me earlier, people might 

say, well maybe you shouldn’t have to worry about that because 

maybe it’s covered under The Trade Union Act which of course 

is alluded to in this Act. And that argument might be made. 

 

But if you look, you will find a definition for the word minister, 

and the word minister I know very well is defined under The 

Trade Union Act. So if the things that are in The Trade Union 

Act are being defined in one area, why not then in all areas? 

Why not have employee in there? That sends a red flag to us 

immediately that there’s something wrong. Why would they 

deliberately miss the word employee? Is the employee no longer 

important? Is only the employer’s interest important here? 

Perhaps. Ordinarily this government doesn’t defend employers, 

but they do when they are the employer. 

 

You see, we’re talking about the government being the 

employer. So now the employer’s position is totally and 

completely taken care of. And the employee, the workers of this 

province, aren’t even mentioned in the definition. Why? Why 

would that be? What is that red flag signalling? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a good possibility that what it is 

signalling is that this new board that is set up then would have 

the discretionary power to establish who an employee is. 

Perhaps that is a non-union worker right now. Would that be 

fair? Of course not. So maybe this is not such a simple thing as 

an error or amiss of one of the things that should be in here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned not only by what is 

implied and printed in this Bill, but what is excluded. And the 

very simple thing like a word, employee, can mean so very, very 

much when you’re dealing with a New Democratic government 

whose principles are basically to be against employers. And in 

this case, suddenly they come out writing a Bill that is totally in 

favour of the employer’s position. And the employer, of course, 

is identified as the government. And that tells us the whole 

story. 

 

Why would they suddenly write a Bill that helps the employer 

to do everything that all other employers in the province would 

never ever hope to be able to get under legislation. But yet, 

when the government is the employer, they’ll write their own 

Bill, write their own ticket, make their own law, give 

themselves their own authority to do whatever they please even 

to the point of deliberately eliminating some of the necessary 

definitions so that they can interpret the Bill whatever they want 

for their own best interests as time goes by some place down 

the road. 

 

So this Bill was, of course, by no means an accident. It is by no 

means an accident that it is brought in in the dying days of the 

Assembly. It’s no accident that it is brought in by a lame-duck 

minister who is fleeing from the province because he will no 

longer be able to find a job here. 

 

It is no accident because it is known very clearly, very well, that 

this is a place where a minister can quickly bring in a very  



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

objectionable piece of legislation and not have to remain to live 

with the repercussions of what this legislation will do to the 

province. He can leave. And then the government can say, well 

it wasn’t our fault; he did it. It was his fault. He left though, so 

we’re sorry but you just have to live with it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. As you know, we 

had a member in this Assembly, I think from north Moose Jaw, 

who once said, the jig is up. Well that jig is up this time again. 

We caught them red-handed. They’re trying to do under the 

table what they’re not allowed to do out in the open. And the jig 

is certainly up because we’re going to once again reveal to the 

people of this province what this government is up to. 

 

In spite of all of their tactics of the trickery of bringing in this 

piece of legislation by a lame-duck minister in the dying days of 

this Assembly, we are identifying and taking the time from our 

holidays to stay here and tell the people of this province what is 

wrong with this legislation and what needs to be done about 

this piece of legislation. 

 

First of all the smaller unions need to be contacted. I don’t 

believe their representatives are telling them what’s going on. 

Someone’s got to take the time to do that. I guess if that has to 

be me, I’ll do it. I don’t really play that kind of a role and I wish 

I weren’t having to do it, but it seems like that’s what I’m going 

to get paid for this week, so that’s what we’ll have to do. 

 

So we’re going to call on the smaller unions. Some of those 

folks are probably watching the debate. We’re going to tell 

them straight out front today, if you don’t take a look real 

quick, your union is probably going to be eliminated. You’re 

probably going to be dust, history. Elected or not, somebody 

else is going to take you over. So wake up, smell the coffee, 

phone your member, contact the Premier, contact the minister, 

contact somebody, do something. Because if you don’t wake up 

pretty soon, this legislation will be passed. We’re in the dying 

days of the Assembly; lot’s of people want to go on holidays. 

But we’ve got to tell you, if you don’t do it pretty quick it’s 

going to be gone. 

 

And then you’re going to be gone and lost for ever and you’re 

going to cry out and wonder why you have no longer got a 

smaller union, a union that’s working for your benefits as a 

worker. So perhaps the workers out there will themselves want 

to say, why is my small union not going to be the one that’s 

going to be involved in the collective bargain process to 

establish our wages and our rights and our processes in the 

future? 

 

After all, maybe a nurse wants her union to be the one to take 

care of these things that concern her. Maybe there is someone 

else out in the world of health care. Perhaps the care workers 

have different kinds of problems. They might want to have a 

union that just specifically talks about their problems, handling 

their issues. 

 

Because everybody knows that when things sometimes get too 

big then we all sort of, as individuals, get lost in the shuffle. 

And that can happen. And I see this happening here very likely, 

Mr. Speaker, that the ordinary workers in this province are  

going to lose their pipeline to the top of their own negotiating 

and bargaining units. They are no longer going to have the 

people that they voted in, the people that they asked to represent 

them, doing that representing. And their interests might not be 

the same as the interests of those people that belong to the 

bigger union that in the end might take over the control of all of 

the negotiations for everybody in the health field. 

 

So some of the little people down there won’t ever have their 

ideas expressed at the table of bargaining. And that to me is not 

a fair way to allow the process to work. So the process that we 

have in effect has to be stopped. We’ve got to put this on hold. 

We’ve got to get some input from these people. 

 

I think this Bill has some merit. Certainly it is a lot easier to 

bargain with one unit than 45 or 50 different small units. 

Obviously that makes some sense. If you can negotiate with 

one, make all your arguments at the table, settle things all up in 

a collective bargaining process at one big table, and when 

you’re done, you’re sort of done  you’re not doing it 40 times 

over with all the other people. That makes some sense. 

 

And the school boards will tell you time and time again, yes we 

use that process and it has some merit. It does have some good 

qualities. It also has of course the negative side which I fear is 

bigger in this sense for the little people, the workers in health 

care, than it is for the school system, because teachers are more 

or less teachers. They have a lot in common no matter if they 

teach in Shaunavon or Prince Albert or Moose Jaw. 

 

Teachers teach basically the same curriculum; they basically 

have the same kind of problems. Kids are kids. Some are good; 

most of them are better. Some are a little bad; but mostly in 

general they’re just all right. They’re kids, and so they don’t 

change a whole bunch. Well, Mr. Speaker, that makes teachers 

of course a unique group that they sort of have a lot in common. 

 

But take health care workers for example. How many people 

working in a special care home really have the same kind of 

problems that a nurse who works with an operating doctor 

might have? Day and night difference. They may have gone to 

the same school to learn the fundamentals, but once they’ve 

started their profession, they are totally different in the concept 

of what they have to do. And their needs and their wants will be 

different. And they can’t be represented perhaps by one super 

union as well as by their own individual groups. 

 

And so we’re saying quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that today we 

are standing here to defend the rights of the little people, to 

have the unions of their choice represent them in the bargaining 

process and not to be squeezed out, just in case that’s what this 

legislation ends up doing. And we really believe that that is 

what the intent of the Bill is, is to force one large main 

bargaining unit to be forged out of all the small ones. 

 

Now given time, perhaps 15 or 20 unions get together  I 

don’t even know how many there are, but there’s a whole lot of 

them out there  perhaps they all get down and they 

collectively bargain and decide that they want to form one big 

union body that will elect members to be represented from  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

every area. Nothing wrong with that, if that is their choice and 

they democratically go back to the people they represent and 

they are all given a democratic right to vote on this process 

being changed, because that’s not the process now. This would 

be a major deviation from the policies set out in the union 

organizing strategies that have gone on in the past. 

 

But if they did collectively get together and put it through the 

democratic process, everybody votes on it, I guess we’d have to 

accept that and live by it too. But supposing that they haven’t 

had that opportunity. Supposing they haven’t had a chance to 

see this legislation or even hear about it. And that’s what we 

suspect. We suspect they’ve never had the chance to sit down 

and do this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying here is, we’ve got to put 

this thing on hold a little while, inform those folks, give them 

the chance to play out that democratic process. What would be 

so terrible about this piece of legislation not being passed today 

or tomorrow and waiting until January? Would that be so 

horrendously, terrifically bad that we would wait six months or 

eight to have a process of negotiations and debate go on 

throughout the country on the Bill, with the people that it really 

affects? The government knows it’s better for them. They’ve 

figured that out. They’ve had all year to think about it. 

 

But what about the people who are affected by it the most  

the workers in the health care system of Saskatchewan. Have 

they had any input? I haven’t heard about it. Nobody told me. I 

see some heads bobbing the wrong way here because I haven’t 

heard this. I don’t think those folks out there have had a chance 

to vote on it. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, here is the test. If these democrats believe 

in democracy, then they should also believe in the right for the 

people to be informed and give them a chance to vote. And if 

they vote against you, then you either haven’t got a good plan 

or you haven’t sold it well. 

 

So you’ve got your challenge ahead of you. Spend the rest of 

the summer talking to these folks. It’s not that much fun golfing 

anyway. You could just as well be talking to the folks and let 

them have a chance to debate this issue. And even if you 

wanted to take a few holidays, I’m sure the people would 

understand if you took till fall to talk about this. 

 

And realistically we need something to do next year too. We 

don’t want to do all the work this year or we’ll find ourselves 

out of work next year. So why not send this thing back to the 

drawing board, ask the folks out there to have a democratic 

input into this, a little round table discussion, out front, open, 

above board, at the table, talking it over. Sounds good to me. I 

mean, shucks, what else could be better for the province of 

Saskatchewan than to have the good people talking about how 

their lives will unfold in the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see things that are wrong in here especially 

when we talk about The Trade Union Act. Right away I figure 

we’re probably into trouble. and we have . . . it’s quite a lengthy 

piece of legislation, this one, as I’ve gone through it. I realize 

now that it also has towards the end, one other item   

not to want to pick it apart bit by bit  but there is one other 

item that is in the legislation that demands debate. It demands 

conversation about the way that this Bill is going to affect 

people. 

 

And that of course goes to the end and just before the Act 

prevails. It’s the powers of the board. Believe it or not, Mr. 

Speaker, here once again we have got one of these Cuban kind 

of attitudes towards legislation. It’s the dictatorial approach. 

 

And I have to say it; I’ve got it underlined here. The words, 

very clearly underlined say: “no appeal.” No appeal  no 

appeal. Can you imagine that? And, “not reviewable by any 

court of law”. Those are very powerful words to be putting into 

legislation. 

 

There is no appeal from any order or decision of the board 

pursuant to this Act . . . 

 

That’s an almighty kind of an approach to take towards giving 

power to a board. Absolutely no appeal to this board’s findings 

or actions. 

 

. . . and the proceedings, orders and decisions of the board 

are not reviewable by any court of law . . . 

 

In a democracy such as ours where we have staked our right to 

freedom on the ability of people to be able, in the final analysis, 

to challenge even the government, by taking their concerns to a 

court of law to hear and have heard by their peers, in the court 

system that we have established, to have their concerns heard in 

a court of law by their peers so that they can determine whether 

or not there has been wrongdoing, that principle is fundamental 

to our democracy. And in this piece of legislation we have, in 

two and a half lines stroked out the entire meaning of the 

democratic process — the entire meaning of the right of people 

to go to the court as a final appeal against a government that 

becomes so dictatorial, so arrogant, so conceited about its job 

that it simply will legislate Draconian legislation that would 

take all of the powers away from all of the people all of the way 

across the board. 

 

Even when we’re talking about unions, Mr. Speaker, we cannot 

in this opposition stand by and allow this to happen. We cannot 

allow that to happen. As much as we have talked about the 

wrongdoings of the unions in the past and as much as we have 

said that they do things that are not great, we cannot stand by 

and watch their democratic principles and rights destroyed by 

this arrogant government that would stand in its place today and 

become the dictators of our province. 

 

It is not fair and it is not right and we will stand in our place 

today to defend the rights of the little people, the workers of 

this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have to join 

with my colleague, the member from Cypress, in saying a few 

words about this particular Bill. This was a Bill that was 

brought in, as my colleague said, in the waning days of the  



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

session. I think the members opposite expected we would be 

out shortly. I know that the official opposition had it in their 

mind that we would be done here today or tomorrow. Their 

agenda for the province had been fulfilled, or at least they felt 

that it was an appropriate time to leave before the sky did 

indeed finish falling on them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Bill should have been brought in 

earlier in the session if it was to be brought forward. Obviously 

the problems that this Bill is trying to solve didn’t just occur 

overnight. It’s been an ongoing process that has been in place 

ever since the member from Regina Hillsdale, when she was the 

Health minister, joined all the union hospitals together into 

forming the health districts. That was the start of the problems 

that this Bill supposedly tries to address, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Since that joining together, that forced amalgamation took place 

in 1993, Mr. Speaker, surely within the three years since that 

point in time, the government would have realized that there 

was a solution needed to the problems that they perceive or that 

SAHO perceives, or that the unions perceive to be in place 

when it comes to the bargaining process for the health care 

employees and the health care employers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I find it surprising . . . no I shouldn’t say that, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t find it surprising that this government would try to slip 

this kind of legislation through at the end of a session. At a time 

when MLAs are working from 10 in the morning until 10:30 at 

night; when there’s a heavy workload on them; when there’s 

not a lot of time to consult with the stakeholders. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s more than just SAHO or just one or two 

unions that are stakeholders in this. Every union bargaining unit 

is a stakeholder in what this legislation brings forward. Every 

health district, Mr. Speaker, is a stakeholder in what this 

legislation proposes. And those stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, need 

an opportunity, deserve an opportunity, and indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, have the right to have the opportunity to make their 

wishes and their opinions known on this particular piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately, by bringing this Bill in at such a late date, at 

such . . . in the waning hours of a session, Mr. Speaker, it does 

not give all of those stakeholders the opportunity to present to 

the government, Mr. Speaker, their concerns, their opinions, 

and any changes they might desire on this particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

And I believe that is certainly a fault of the Minister of Labour 

when he brought this forward. No one had heard  outside 

perhaps of the unions involved in the discussion, the 

government, and perhaps SAHO  very little about this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

The board members that I have talked to around my corner of 

the province, Mr. Speaker, had heard in vague terms what this 

particular piece of legislation was proposing to solve. Yet only 

on vague terms. They didn’t know the nuts and bolts They 

didn’t know the words that would be used, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we all know what kind of meanings, what kind of actions, 

can be couched in words, particularly words that have more 

than one meaning, and in particular, Mr. Speaker, when we 

come to parts of this Bill that allow the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to define the meaning of the words within this Act. 

 

I mean we may have an Oxford dictionary that tells you the 

definition of black, but if the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

wants to say that the colour of black is actually white in this 

particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, they have that 

opportunity. Because it clearly says: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 

regulations: 

 

. . . defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 

word or phrase used in this Act but not defined in this Act; 

 

So there are about five or six different items, Mr. Speaker, that 

are defined in this Act but everything else is up for 

interpretation by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Now for those who don’t know who the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council are, that’s the Premier and his cabinet ministers. They 

get to, you might say, rewrite the definitions of the English 

language that aren’t clearly defined in this particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

And what things are defined? Because, you know, perhaps most 

things are defined. Well for the public’s edification, the things 

that are defined in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, are board, 

board order, collective bargaining agreement, commissioner, 

health sector employer, and minister. And as my colleague 

pointed out, no place in this Act does it define the term 

employee. And that’s who we’re talking about in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s who the minister is aiming this at; it’s at the 

employees in the health care sector. But in no place in here does 

it define who the employees in the health care sector are. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, not all employees in the health care 

sector are unionized. I’m told about 20 per cent of them are not. 

Well if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, can that 20 per cent be 

rolled in under this particular piece of legislation if the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council says, by the term employee we 

mean everybody employed in the health care sector, whether 

that be the ambulance driver, whether it’s the janitor, whether 

it’s the nurse, whether it’s the receptionist, or whether it’s the 

doctor. 

 

Each and every person working in the health care field could 

fall under this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, could 

fall under The Trade Union Act if that is the definition applied 

by the Lieutenant Governor, by the Premier and his cabinet. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that in that particular area this Bill 

certainly does need to be tightened up. The word employee 

needs to be included in the legislation; needs to be defined. 

 

There are a number of other areas in this piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, that need to be worked on. 

 

The powers of the board I think, Mr. Speaker, are very  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

Draconian, very, very Draconian. The member from Cypress 

mentioned the fact that there is no appeal allowed to any 

decision made by the commissioner. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, very few pieces of legislation  I can only 

think of a couple that this government has brought forward 

since I’ve been elected in 1991  that comes close to this. 

GRIP, Mr. Speaker — the GRIP debate is a clear example of 

how this government is prepared to use its legislative hammer 

to beat down any opposition where they deemed an event to 

have happened, and denied the farmers who held GRIP 

contracts the right to go to court. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s another example where people hold 

contracts. Unions have contracts with their employers, a 

commissioner is going to come forward, is going to make 

decisions. Those unions and union members have no right to 

appeal. They have no right to a court action. They have no right 

even further than that, Mr. Speaker, because it says reviewable 

by any court or . . . I’m not even going to try to say that word, 

Mr. Speaker, but mandamus, prohibition, injunction or any 

other proceeding. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I . . . they’ve covered off the bases here pretty 

well. There is very few, if any, legal actions available to anyone 

who wishes to contest an order made by the commissioner. 

Now the representatives from SAHO that we have talked to 

said, well that’s true, but you can appeal if it is patently an 

unreasonable decision. 

 

Well I guess the question has to come down, Mr. Speaker, as to 

who makes the determination what’s patently unreasonable? 

Well I guess the only way you can do that in our system is in 

court. And yet the Bill says you can’t go to court. So we have a 

catch-22 position here, Mr. Speaker. To get a determination on 

what is patently unreasonable you have to go to court, and the 

Bill says you can’t go to court to determine whether it’s 

patently unreasonable. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe they’ve written a piece of legislation 

here which will serve the NDP very well, but which will not 

serve the health care employees very well and indeed may not 

even serve the health district boards very well. 

 

If you look around the province, Mr. Speaker, not every health 

district board is finding themselves in a financially secure 

position. If you enter into arrangements where you have 

provincial bargaining with all of the unions which would now 

be amalgamated into one or two, into a situation somewhat 

similar to the employee bargaining circumstances of the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) where the 

province sits down with a group of representatives from the 

people who pay a significant portion of the bills, the board 

members from the local school divisions, the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association, to bargain with the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation with the government holding the majority 

hand in this particular case, the people who pay the bills, school 

boards, have to be responsible for the decisions made by the 

government. 

 

In the case of this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, the district  

health boards will be faced with the cost of paying the bills 

made by this bargaining group that would be put together, the 

commissioner and the board, in dealing with province-wide 

negotiations. Some boards, Mr. Speaker, are financially in the 

position to be able to afford to pay perhaps somewhat larger 

salaries. Other boards are already in a deficit position. For them 

it’s either a question of cutting back on services or failing to 

meet the requirements that the commissioner and board may 

place on them to pay their employees. 

 

This would cause a very severe impact, Mr. Speaker, on health 

care within those districts. It may very well mean that they 

would have to close facilities. It could very well mean that they 

have to cut back on the number of acute care or long-term care 

beds that they have available at each and every one of their 

facilities. And all of this, Mr. Speaker, because in some of the 

larger areas they may have the financial wherewithal to meet 

their commitments. 

 

And part of this, Mr. Speaker, may roll back into the previous 

Bill that we were discussing, Bill 114, where some of the 

foundation monies could be used to help pay some of the costs 

associated with these union agreements that would come 

forward, would be forced by the commissioner to support some 

of the health districts. 

 

But I would have to suspect, Mr. Speaker, that not enough 

money would be available through those foundations to support 

every district. So it could run into a situation there where some 

are allowed to pay and others bear the brunt and have to cut 

back on their services, which if they had to cut back on the 

services may very well fit into the Minister of Health’s formula 

for health care in Saskatchewan, but would not serve the needs 

of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are a couple of the areas that I would like to address. One 

of the other areas, Mr. Speaker, deals with home care. And I 

note in the paper on Friday that home care workers have just 

struck an agreement with the Saskatchewan . . . with SAHO, 

with the health districts. But it only represents 22 health 

districts, Mr. Speaker, and I believe there’s 30 or 32 or so in the 

province. 

 

Under this piece of legislation that we’re dealing with, Bill No. 

120, would it impact on all the home care workers in the 

province? How would this Bill deal with all of them? After all, 

they’re all employees of the health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

Some of them are unionized, some of them are not. 

 

Now if the settlement is made by the commissioner for the 

people who are under the trade union agreement, are the others 

then going to be brought in to that same agreement? Because 

obviously according to this Act, the commissioner is bargaining 

for all the health districts. So are they going to have to provide 

the same pay scales, the same benefits, the same call-outs, all of 

these things, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Talking to one of my district board members, Mr. Speaker, over 

the weekend, the indication was that in many cases home care 

workers are called out perhaps for an hour to deal with one 

particular person once a day. And because they happen to be  



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

resident right in the neighbourhood, whereas the regular home 

care worker may live 10, 15 miles away or even more in some 

of these districts, Mr. Speaker, it would be significantly greater 

cost for that person to drive the distance back and forth and pay 

them mileage, etc. So they have one person hired as a home 

care worker to go in for an hour perhaps to visit a neighbour. 

 

But under the union agreement, Mr. Speaker, you can’t do that. 

You have to pay them three hours work. So, Mr. Speaker, in a 

health care district which is financially strapped as it already is, 

if you were to add that burden on for the one hour per day that 

that home care worker may work, you would add a significant 

impact if there was a number of those circumstances happening 

throughout the health district. And there are, Mr. Speaker. So 

those would be added costs, costs that the health districts could 

not afford, and yet costs which could be imposed on them by 

this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1645) 

 

Another concern that we have with this particular piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is what happens when a facility is 

downsized. Obviously if it’s downsized you are going to have 

more employees in place than are required further on. 

 

Within the union structure you have bumping rights. Does that 

mean, Mr. Speaker, when the Plains hospital closes, if it ever 

closes . . . but which the government says they are going to 

close much to the regret of people across southern 

Saskatchewan and in particular to the regret of people in 

Regina. 

 

In fact the member from Regina South spoke in favour of 

keeping it open, at one point in time. And yet once he’s in the 

House here sitting as a government back-bencher with high 

aspirations and ambition of moving up a little closer to the front 

than the very far back corner, he has changed his tune, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But when the Plains hospital closes, now with the acquiescence 

of the member from Regina South, what happens to the nurses 

there? Well obviously some of them are in a more senior 

position than others. Is that going to put them into a more senior 

position than a nurse at Redvers, once they are all under a 

single bargaining unit? Is the nurse at the Plains hospital going 

to be able to bump a junior nurse in Redvers? 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a very good system. It 

happens now within the districts, but those are separate 

districts. And I haven’t heard of any nurses yet trying to bump 

across the districts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again that’s a problem that needs to be dealt 

with, that needs some resolution to it. And I’m sure that the 

nurses in most of the smaller communities are apprehensive 

when we see a facility the size of the Plains hospital proposed 

for closure. 

 

It’s also a concern when we see a number of long-term care 

facilities being proposed for closure. We see the potential, Mr. 

Speaker, for some adjustments in the classifications of  

long-term care residents that may disqualify them, Mr. Speaker, 

from residency and long-term care facilities, and things that we 

would normally consider to be level 3. Some of those may be 

. . . those patients, Mr. Speaker, may be downgraded to a level 2 

and told that they no longer meet the requirements for 

institution care and therefore it be recommended that they be 

returned home to their own homes or their family’s homes or to 

some other private facility where they can be looked after at 

their own expense. 

 

If that happens, Mr. Speaker, again we have the situation 

similar to the one in Swift Current where a 72-bed facility, I 

believe it is, is being closed. Half of the people have found 

accommodations within other institutions in the community, but 

approximately 38 of them have not found any accommodations. 

 

When that facility closes, what happens to the staff there? How 

far  if they’re unionized  can they bump other union 

employees? I think that’s going to cause a great deal of concern, 

Mr. Speaker, across this province when that type of bumping 

starts occurring. So if the nurse from Regina bumps the nurse in 

Redvers, and the nurse in Redvers bumps the nurse from Swift 

Current, how far does it go, Mr. Speaker, and where does it 

stop? I believe there needs to be some form of restriction on 

that. And because the bargaining units today are smaller, their 

bumping rights are within a smaller area, Mr. Speaker, and that 

impact is not felt quite so widely. The jobs are still then within 

a relatively short distance within their own communities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole Bill, I think, needs to be given some 

very serious consideration, particularly on the language being 

used in it. I’ve already talked about the minister being able to 

define words; we’ve talked about the appeal process  all of 

these things, Mr. Speaker, need some very, very serious 

consideration, need the opportunity for the public to have a 

better look at them. 

 

I think the public and the unions, as my colleague from Cypress 

pointed out, need to take some various long looks at this, and 

some very hard considerations as to what the minister is 

proposing to do. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, talking with a number of people on the 

different health districts, they have some concerns about this 

particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. They would like to get some 

definitions, such as the definition of the word employee, and 

how it’s going to affect their particular workers. 

 

How is it going to impact them? Are they going to be forced 

into a union shop when they don’t want to be? Are they going 

to have a choice on the matter? Under this particular piece of 

legislation, it would certainly look like they’re not going to 

have a choice on that matter. And I believe there again, Mr. 

Speaker, as my colleague from Cypress Hills said, we are 

rolling back democracy. 

 

Hopefully this particular government is not going to roll it back 

as far as the Magna Carta. But it certainly in a few areas, Mr. 

Speaker, they have certainly attempted to roll back our 

opportunities to deal with the third level of government, the  



June 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

judiciary. I mentioned the GRIP situation, Mr. Speaker. They 

also . . . the judges . . . the government broke the rules and then 

changed the legislation, Mr. Speaker, at that particular time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t even the start; they had done that 

previously with other government employees when they first 

formed government in 1991  rolled back a number of 

different issues, Mr. Speaker. Even the secretaries in some of 

the offices had their contracts broken and changed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the fact is I was told by one employee that the government 

refused to make a settlement with them, that they were told that 

it would take a period of time, while this particular employee 

had no work. Because if the settlement took time, the employee 

went and found a job some place, well then not near as much 

severance and settlement would have to be paid to that 

particular employee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is not a new scenario, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

would try to deny the people of Saskatchewan its rights, would 

try to deny the people of Saskatchewan its opportunity to be 

heard before its peers. Mr. Speaker, this is actually very much a 

growing trend by the members opposite and their government to 

use arbitrary measures; to use power of the minister to override 

the rights and the opportunities of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that some of these issues need to be 

debated; these issues need to be talked about; these issues need 

clarification when we get to Committee of the Whole sometime 

next week. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that when that happens I hope that 

the minister has been listening to the comments made by 

members on this side of the House, and that he will have his 

answers prepared, that he will have his definitions ready, and 

that he will have  as the member from Canora-Pelly has said 

 that he will have the proper amendments ready to deal with 

this particular piece of legislation, with the concerns that not 

only we have expressed but also that the health district board 

members have expressed. 

 

And once my colleague from Cypress Hills contacts the various 

unions that may be representative, that the amendments that the 

unions may be seeking in this particular piece of legislation can 

be represented before this Assembly and that their opinions 

would be given due consideration and weighed in the balance, 

Mr. Speaker, to come up with a solution to this particular piece 

of legislation that would suit the needs of everyone. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we can allow this 

particular Bill to move forward at this point in time, so that the 

minister will be given enough opportunity to study and bring 

forward his amendments in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier on in the 

debate, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from the south-west 

part of the province talking about hoping the opposition would 

get up and lead, as we usually do. In this particular case, we 

thought we would feel out the third party and we did, and found  

that, as usual, they were unprepared once again. 

 

Had the members been present all through the session on a 

regular basis, they could’ve gathered a lot of the information 

that has been discussed about the different Bills that we’ve 

looked at, and would’ve been a little better informed of what 

this government opposite is trying to do with many pieces of its 

legislation. 

 

I’m also a bit surprised, Mr. Speaker, in hearing that the 

members of the third party are sticking up for the big unions — 

once again, as we suspected, had their own agenda as well. 

 

However I think they missed the point, Mr. Speaker. And the 

people that we should be concerned about when we’re looking 

at pieces of legislation like Bill 120 are the people of 

Saskatchewan, and what this Bill will do for the health and the 

well-being of these people as it pertains to their health care 

needs. 

 

One thing that should be noted. As I look at this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, I see June 13, 1996, 11:58 a.m. stamped on this Bill. 

The reason that this Bill has come to us at this point in time is 

because of the lack of courage that the government opposite 

had, back when they did health reform, to address the issue that 

we’re concerned with today, and that is of unions and how the 

workers flow across the system. 

 

At that point in time, when health reform came about, Mr. 

Speaker, the government opposite was very reluctant to deal 

with the situation at that time because of the lack of support 

they had for the health reform process. And consequently they 

didn’t want to have to have the unions involved at that time, 

Mr. Speaker, and create further division within the system and 

for their health reform. 

 

And so now we’re dealing with it now at this late hour in this 

session. Bill 120 speaks for itself, with the 120 being stamped 

on it, and lots of legislation, and this one in particular, brought 

forward at this late date. 

 

We talked about the health reform and when it was initiated, 

Mr. Speaker, and the reasons why this government didn’t want 

to deal with the issues of the unions, and the workers crossing 

the sectors and crossing union lines is a very good point. The 

problem that they had with that is that . . . and you can look into 

the south-west part of the province at Eastend where there was 

a major labour dispute some four years ago. And that was one 

of the reasons why the government was looking to deal with it 

at that point in time. 

 

One of the other problems that we have, Mr. Speaker, is of 

course SAHO, who represents basically all the health agencies 

in the province and particularly the 30 health districts . . . For 

information for the members of the third party, there are 30 

districts. And SAHO does represent those and does have 

representation on the board from the health districts. 

 

However, I’m not sure when this Bill was tabled that the health 

districts at that point in time had a chance to look at it yet in its 

entirety amongst themselves. Therefore I think that the districts  



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 1996 

will have some things to say about this and will want to have 

some questioning. And many of them will be contacting us, and 

particularly myself directly, with many of their concerns about 

the Bill and the things that they do like about it. 

 

Hopefully as well, that given the association with the members 

opposite and the unions in this province, that I’m sure that all 

small unions will have made their representation to the 

government as well, whether they’ve listened to it or not. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in looking at the hour and the agenda that we 

have before us, and the stall tactics of the third party, there are 

many concerns that we have certainly with this legislation. We 

want to ensure that the people of the province and their health 

care needs are looked after and that this doesn’t infringe on it. 

We want to make sure that seniority doesn’t take precedence 

over the capability of many of the health workers; and 

unfortunately that’s what happens many times, is that those 

with seniority, in particular union, do have precedence in the 

jobs. And consequently we do lose a good number of our 

workers. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that once we get to 

Committee of the Whole with this Bill, there will be many more 

questions that will come to light, and we will be asking the 

government through the minister to rectify. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2687 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2688 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................2688 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................2688 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Congratulations to Graduates 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................2688 

 Sale of Gas and Oil Rights 

  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................2688 

 Gord Kluzak Inducted into Sports Hall of Fame 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2688 

 Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame Induction Awards 

  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................2689 

 Seager Wheeler Farm Site Opening 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................2689 

 Clearwater Forest Products Partnership Agreement 

  Langford ..................................................................................................................................................................................2689 

 Alameda Agricultural Society Fair 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2689 

 The Fringe and Comedy Festivals 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................2690 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Agreement With Rural Health Coalition 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2690 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................2690 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2692 

  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................2692 

 Occupational Health and Safety Regulations 

  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2693 

  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................2693 

 Highway No. 5 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2694 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................2694 

 Resignation of Minister of Labour 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................2694 

  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................2694 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Talks Break Down 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2695 

PRIVILEGE 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................2665 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................2680 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 



 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2665 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2666 

 Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act ................................................................2669 

 Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................2670 

  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2670 

 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................2675 

 Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their 

Affiliates 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2675 

  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................2676, 2703 

 Recorded divisions ..................................................................................................................................................2680, 2698, 2702 

  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................2680, 2695 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................2698 

 Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of Labour Relations between Health Sector Employers and 

Employees 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2705 

  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2707 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2711 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2715 

 


