
























































June 13, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2595 
 June 13, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. The officials are 
the same as they were yesterday but with three additions, and 
I’ll introduce the three additions if that’s fine. Tony Antonini is 
sitting behind Dan Perrins, to my left; and James Benning, the 
president and CEO (chief executive officer) of SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) is also 
here. He was here for part of the day yesterday. And John Biss, 
the director of universities branch, is also here. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again a return 
welcome, Mr. Minister, to your officials as well. 
 
We had last day asked a few questions dealing with aboriginal 
and northern education funds, and so I’d like to continue with 
that particular focus this evening. And the first question there is 
how many people who have participated in that particular 
training have completed their education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We don’t have the information that the 
member seeks. We will try, in the next day or two, to pull 
together as much of that information as we can. And that’s 
about the best that I can do tonight, I’m afraid. But I will put 
the material together and send it to you. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. As an old educator 
I guess I should have known better  you always start off with 
the easy questions first to give a little confidence and then you 
move on to the tough ones a little later on. 
 
The next question may create some of the same problems. And 
that is, how many of those have gone on to receive jobs? If 
we’re putting money into it in order to produce that, I guess 
that’s the measure of success. How many of those have gone on 
to receive jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We’ll try and provide as much of that 
information as we can too. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving then to 
programs for the disabled, and one question there. And that is: 
list the programs and services that you offer for the disabled; 
what sorts of training do they receive; and how successful have 
you been over the past year in placing disabled people into 
jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I’m 
going to provide some information now and we’ll supplement 

that with written information to the member when the officials 
are able to get back to their offices and dig out some more. 
 
We have three programs. Vocational rehabilitation for disabled 
persons, the so-called VRDP, which is a program to assist 
disabled people in obtaining training and education they need in 
order to participate in the workforce. That’s a cost-shared 
program with the federal government. 
 
The second program is a training-on-the-job special needs 
program, which is a program that funds seven community-based 
agencies to provide vocational counsellors who assist disabled 
individuals to access the VRDP, the first program. And that’s 
also a cost-shared program with the federal government. 
 
The third program is the adults special needs initiatives. And 
that program provides the capability to respond to the learning 
needs of adults who have special needs, which covers quite a 
broad range. That initiative might include things like research, 
in-service, and other supports for training. 
 
Going back to the VRDP program, this program is likely to be 
extended by the federal government for another year but with 
reduced funding, and we are quite concerned about the future of 
that program on account of the federal government’s apparent 
intention to withdraw. We’re going to carry on though as best 
we can for this year. 
 
We fund training-on-the-job positions, for example, with a 
number of NGOs (non-governmental organizations) and that 
sort of thing. 
 
And I think I should stop at that point because that’s what I 
have to offer to the member as I stand here tonight. But as I said 
at the beginning of my response, we’ll provide as much 
information as we have in response to the member’s question. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mention in 
your answer basically I believe, there were three programs. The 
first two which had some federal funding in them  they were 
cost-shared. You also responded then there was some cut-backs 
from federal funding on those two programs. 
 
Could you elaborate on that, to the amounts of cut-backs that 
exist maybe this year and in the next two or three years as 
you’ve been informed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I know I indicated to the member that 
there was danger of funding being reduced for this fiscal year, 
and I’m just advised by my officials that there has been a recent 
development that will result in the funding staying at the same 
level this year as for last year. The development is that the 
federal government has established a parliamentary committee 
to examine this whole question of the training for the disabled. 
And while that committee is working, they’re going to continue 
with their funding. What happens after that is, as I indicated 
earlier, really at risk. It’s not known and we’re quite concerned. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Moving into the . . . one question  



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

dealing with New Careers Corporation. And we notice with a 
certain amount of satisfaction, I guess, that you’re planning 
returned funding to New Careers Corporation. And as you 
know, our caucus has always felt that’s a very successful 
program and does an excellent job of training welfare 
recipients. And so it’s more or less a continuation of an older 
program. 
 
What areas will be getting further funding in the New Careers 
Corporation, and are there any new programs and initiatives 
that are being considered in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The programing for the current fiscal 
year will be under the same heads as last year, about the same 
as last year. We have no plans for any new areas of funding or 
any new programing within New Careers for this year. It will 
just be a continuation of the programs that were offered last 
year. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I’d like to ask a number of 
questions dealing with universities. And it seems that any level 
of education, regardless of what it is, is a very solid, 
unchanging body. And it seems the higher the education goes 
the more less likely it is for change. 
 
In looking at some of the cost concerns with operating 
universities and those sorts of things, it would seem that there 
should be substantial savings that can be put in place by making 
a joining of the universities in a number of areas. 
 
One is just the financial aspect of it. Secondly, there should be 
some savings by running the universities more efficiently by 
having one body basically deciding what areas are offered at 
what universities. 
 
So it becomes a fairly involved and complex question. And I 
would like some comment on that to see where we’re going and 
what possibilities there are to achieve some savings through 
various forms of union or amalgamation. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member, I 
appreciate the question. It’s a very topical and very important 
question that has occupied a great deal of the time of myself 
and my officials over the last several months. 
 
There are discussions and a lot of work being done between the 
two universities over the past few weeks and continuing on into 
the summer. And what they’re . . . they are senior 
representatives of both universities meeting together and 
establishing working groups, spinning working groups off from 
that to look at quite a large number of possibilities. 
 
I haven’t seen the list personally but I understand that the two 
vice-presidents of administration have developed a surprisingly 
long list of services that have potential for finding efficiencies 
for cooperation or uniting the two programs and having the one 
university deliver  I shouldn’t use the term programs  but 
uniting the two services and have one or the other of the 
universities deliver the service. And each one of these have  

potential for saving some money, and in some cases, some 
considerable amount of money I’m told. 
 
So that work is going on and Harold MacKay is involved in it, 
as I’ve explained previously, and I’m really encouraged by the 
approach that the two universities are taking. And I’m looking 
forward to seeing what comes out of it. 
 
The member will know, Mr. Chair, of the Johnson panel, the 
Johnson committee that examined the university structure in 
Saskatchewan and made a number of recommendations. He 
recommended, that is the panel recommended, a three-person 
panel, that the two universities be maintained as separate 
institutions but that they examine a number of possibilities for 
program rationalization. In some cases it would be one or the 
other of the universities considering getting out of a particular 
college and that sort of recommendation. It’s quite an 
interesting report and quite a thoughtful report. 
 
The universities didn’t do anything with it that amounts to 
anything. They sort of held it in abeyance, I think, until another 
day. And the recent events with the federal changes and the 
budgetary pressures and then our budget, they have dusted off 
that report, and it’s back in circulation and in consideration for 
what they might do as far as rationalizing programs are 
concerned and realizing some efficiencies there. They want to 
address the question of overlap and duplication with a view to 
effectiveness and efficiency, with a view to realizing 
effectiveness and efficiency. So that’s begun also and again, 
we’re all very interested in seeing what comes out of the work 
of the universities on that score. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, and you mentioned the Johnson 
report and I think . . . I’m personally not overly surprised that it 
gathered some dust for a period of time because that takes me 
back to a statement that I made just at the start of the section on 
universities, that they tend to be fairly slow to invoke any major 
change. 
 
In the rationalization that they’re undertaking at this particular 
point, you mentioned that the service area was one that was 
looked at, and I think that’s understandable. It’s probably an 
easy one to work with. It’s when you start looking at possibly 
the programing, which involves some of the teaching and 
instruction staff over there . . . And I’m wondering at what 
point your department’s prepared to step in and maybe put a 
little initiative and spunk into the negotiations on that aspect of 
it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t know, as I stand here, how to 
answer the member’s question with very much precision. We 
are all concerned that we have a high quality university system 
in this province, the highest that we’re able to afford. We want 
that for the simple reason that we want our kids and 
neighbours’ kids and people who are not kids to be able to go to 
the universities here and obtain a degree of a high quality which 
they can then use to find good employment and realize a happy 
and full life. So I think we all share that view. 
 
The universities are faced with a difficult situation. They’ve 
been faced with a difficult situation over many years now. All  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

universities in Canada have. And I believe that they realize that 
significant change is going to have to occur. That change will 
take many forms, I think. We mentioned some of them  the 
cooperation with respect to the various services that the 
universities have to provide in order to run, and rationalization 
of programs, and an internal examination of their own 
programing with a view to trying to be very clear on what their 
mandate is, what their goals are, what their priorities are. 
 
One university, particularly in a small province like this, can’t 
do everything in the field of education. They have to make 
some choices. And those choices change over time as the 
province changes and as the economy changes, as the world 
changes, and as the needs of students change. Their own 
research that they do at the universities change in response . . . 
changes in response to the same factors. And that means they 
have to be flexible about their programing, and in my view 
make decisions about what programs they’re going to continue 
to offer, what programs need to be modified, what new 
programs need to be brought in, what programs are no longer 
relevant to the world in which they operate. 
 
So hard decisions there, and we’re satisfied that the universities 
understand, at least in a general way, the public interest in the 
kind of decisions they have to make. And we’re really 
encouraged by the work that they’re undertaking. 
 
We have Harold MacKay there to try and ensure the process 
gets off the ground, as I think it is, and gets going and keeps 
going and that the public interest is comfortable with what’s 
happening. And we’re proceeding on the assumption now that 
all that’s going to work and that choices will be made and 
decisions will be made and changes will happen of which we 
will all be very proud because it will result in quality 
universities in this province. 
 
Now of course, if that doesn’t happen, then that’s another thing. 
And that’s where the member’s question was really going. At 
what point would we step in and do something? And we don’t 
know. We are optimistic at the moment that the present process 
is going to result in substantial things being done. And for the 
moment, we’re content to leave it there. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess I share 
a part of your optimism, in that obviously I think they realize 
when the dollars are just not going to be there, they will need to 
make some changes. However I’d like to pursue that direction a 
little further and suggest that we may need to have to look at an 
insurance that those changes that are actually needed out there 
actually take place. 
 
I think within the last year on the Saskatoon campus, there was 
some discussion of moving the Education college into the Arts, 
making it part of the Arts college. It was a discussion that 
started, and it may still be ongoing, but I haven’t heard anything 
of it recently. And I suggest that’s very often a major part of 
each college being very protective of its territory. And having 
spent some 20 years trying to pick up a smattering of education 
at university, I know that some of the classes offered are very 
significant, very meaningful, on occasion even interesting. And 
yet there’s others that seem to be very much a  

filler of time to make sure that that’s all adequately done. 
 
And so I’d just like to get some assurance from you that your 
department is watching close enough that they are prepared to 
say at some point you will step in if those changes do not take 
place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I understand what the member is 
saying. The way I think about it is this, Mr. Chair, there is a 
very significant public interest in the quality of the education 
that is made available at the two universities. And the source of 
the interest is easy to understand. We’re the people and our kids 
are the people who are being elected . . . or educated, rather. 
And we have, I think, a consensus on the two universities  
that there is a public interest and that it’s appropriate that the 
government be involved to the extent that we are. 
 
Now that’s not much of an involvement, you know, but our 
representative, Harold MacKay, is there. He has the cooperation 
of the two administrations and the two boards of governors, and 
his project seems to be flowing smoothly. After some initial 
concern, particularly at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), it seems to be up and running. 
 
He hears and we hear things that are cause for optimism, that 
the universities realize that change is an element of life in 
modern society. And they realize that change is taking place in 
all of the other institutions that make our society what it is, 
driven by all kinds of factors over which we have little or no 
control. And they’re a part of the this world and they have to 
move with it. We get that over and over again from faculty 
members and from people who are involved in the university in 
various capacities. And I think that it’s going to work. 
 
We run here into the reality of the autonomy of these 
institutions. And I think that autonomy is an important value. I 
think that it is just not appropriate for government, either 
elected members like ourselves or the very highly qualified 
officials that we hire to assist us in government programing and 
the delivery of that programing, I don’t think it’s appropriate for 
us to move in on the universities and start directing what should 
and shouldn’t be done. 
 
And that’s certainly been the history of universities in the 
western world and I think it’s a value that is important and 
should be respected. At the same time  at the same time  
the public interest that I talked about earlier is an important 
factor and that requires us to have some assurances about 
quality and about the relevance of what’s happening. 
 
After all, it’s taxpayers dollars that are going to fund the 
universities and there is a level of accountability that goes with 
that funding and that’s . . . there seems to be a consensus that 
all those elements are present and are important. 
 
(1930) 
 
So in that framework, I think we’ll go forward with this project 
that is under way. The people involved are trying to not treat it 
simply as a budgetary problem but are trying to treat it as an 
opportunity for change, an opportunity for renewal and  



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

revitalization and all those words that have been bandied about 
about this project. 
 
But they’re trying to therefore view it in a more positive light 
and not merely as a negative, cost-cutting exercise. And I think 
that all speaks well. It may not come out to everybody’s 
satisfaction  obviously it won’t  but I think the universities 
that emerge from all this will be stronger and more relevant and 
probably of higher quality, considering the needs of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s interesting you 
should mention the word autonomy because I had just written it 
down a couple of seconds before you came up with it. And I 
know it’s one of the things that universities consider very 
precious to them. 
 
I had two unique occurrences that I won’t detail in great detail, 
but sometime last summer I was asked to visit with a member of 
the university students’ organization in Saskatoon, and through 
part of the discussion they came up with a number of 
construction projects that they had costed out and looked at the 
value of them, and they were fairly upset as students that they 
felt these projects were, first of all, excessively expensive, and 
not particularly necessary. 
 
And that was very strongly underlined later in fall, last fall, 
when I met with one of the contractors that does a fair bit of 
work at the university, at the Regina campus, and came out with 
very similar statements, where one particular parking lot had 
been sort of reworked and redone three times in five years. And 
he was moderately upset by what he saw as being a waste of 
money. 
 
So if we on the one hand say that, let’s respect the autonomy of 
the education part, because I don’t think we want to see 
government telling the universities what to teach specifically 
and exactly how to do it, but I’m wondering on other levels in 
Saskatchewan, municipal level particularly, towns and RMs 
(rural municipality), a lot of the projects that they carry out have 
to sort of fit some government criteria in order to get the 
funding. Is that the case with university funding or are they 
totally autonomous on the projects they carry out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I agree with the member and 
my officials do also, namely that the autonomy is about 
education, about academics, and not about capital spending. We 
are more deeply involved on the capital side and scarcely 
involved on the academic side. And it’s in respect of that 
autonomy that that result happens. 
 
With respect to the capital programs, we of course set the 
budget, as we have this year. We set that every year. They 
provide us with a list of their projects, priorized. If we object to 
them or think they’re mistaken or some other priorization is 
more appropriate, we say that, we work with them, we finalize a 
list in close consultation. And there’s a lot more interference or 
involvement on the capital side than there is on the academic 
side, I was going to say. There’s scarcely any on the academic 
side. 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Switching to the 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) branch, a question. With the purchase of seats or 
desks or whatever you want to call it that takes place there, who 
now is purchasing seats and how many and at what cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Sorry to take a while, Mr. Chair, and 
Mr. Member. But the question is really quite difficult. But I’ll 
give you an answer that I think is fairly close on two of the 
three matters that the member asked about. 
 
First of all as to who purchases the seats, there are five sources. 
The federal government, which is now a moving target  the 
member will understand that, as they move their changes  but 
they would currently buy about 10 per cent of the seats. The 
province would buy about 5 per cent. These are mostly social 
assistance situations. Aboriginal organizations would probably 
buy about 1 per cent of the seats. Corporations, perhaps 2 per 
cent of the seats, which would leave individuals purchasing the 
balance which would be 84 per cent of the seats  84 per cent. 
 
Now the cost is the part where we just can’t provide you with a 
satisfactory answer, at least not tonight. We can give you a lot 
of information but in the end we won’t be able to give you a 
solid answer to your question because it’s too complex. There’s 
156 programs that are offered at SIAST, and they all have a 
different cost element to them. 
 
The tuition is about 10 per cent of the cost, and if that’s what’s 
required to be paid, that is the cost then. The tuition probably 
averages $1,400 on the average. But with respect to some 
programs, there are sponsored programs and the purchase of the 
seat is a full-cost purchase. 
 
Now we can give you a better breakdown on that cost matter 
that I have given you just now, and that’ll take several days. But 
if the member likes, we would write to you and provide you 
with that information. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving to two or 
three final questions, and one comes from the Estimates on 
page 105, item 4. There is an item there about . . . under 
sub-programs: grants to Saskatchewan universities  urban 
parks. I wonder if you could just explain what that’s all about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Those urban parks are the  in the case 
of the University of Saskatchewan  the Meewasin Valley and 
the Meewasin Valley Authority. And in the case of the 
University of Regina, it’s the Wascana Centre where we’re now 
doing our work, and the Wascana Centre Authority. And that 
line represents the funding that the university . . . the part of 
their total funding that they turn over to those authorities. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  And then from page 106, item no. 6, that’s a 
whole section on distance education. And I guess what I would 
appreciate from you there is a general statement on the direction 
that you see distance education going as far as post-secondary 
education is concerned, and what kind of vision there is for the 
future in that area. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Chair, I wonder if I might have 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1945) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Chair, many years ago I was 
fortunate to have lived in Churchill, Manitoba. And I’m pleased 
that we have a visitor here that comes from Churchill, who I 
knew many years ago. He’s here in Saskatchewan exploring 
employment opportunities, but that’s another story. 
 
I wonder if the members might join me in welcoming Mr. 
George Spence. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, again I took a few moments 
to discuss this with my officials to try and give you the best 
answer that I could. 
 
This is a very exciting area, this distance education, and I 
believe that it is . . . will be an increasingly important part of 
our future in this province. My vision is that more and more 
training and more and more education will be delivered to the 
regions of this province, if I can use that term  the rural areas, 
the small cities, the small towns. 
 
As time goes on, more and more of the SIAST programing, 
more and more of the university programing, more skills 
training, will be delivered under the heading that the member 
uses of distance education. That will be building upon a long 
tradition in this province. Such things as correspondence 
schools; such things as instructors going out to teach classes at 
a regional college; the regional colleges themselves becoming 
quite active around their regions in delivering various kinds of 
programing. 
 
And superimposed on all of that is the really exciting new 
technology that we’re experiencing. The SCN programing and 
their delivery sites around the province and their arrangements 
with the regional colleges and the school systems  very 
exciting opportunities that are developing, have developed, and 
lie in the future. 
 
In addition to that we have the multi-media technology that is 
just blossoming. Where interactive computer programs with 
CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory) base will provide, I 
think, excellent opportunities for inexpensive, effective training 
delivered at a distance to the end that people don’t have to 
move to Saskatoon or Regina or Moose Jaw or Prince Albert in 
order to get education or training but they can stay home in  

Maple Creek and get it there, or get a lot of it there. 
 
And I believe it’s coming. I’m told that on the Internet today 
you can get a university degree in your own home by taking the 
courses that are offered over the facilities of the Internet. Now 
if that’s possible in the U.S. (United States), it’s possible here. 
And I think it has an exciting future. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman. I found this a bit ironic, that the minister is talking 
about distance education and the use of new technologies and 
computers when he himself is computer illiterate and he’s 
talking to my colleague who is also computer illiterate, talking 
about all these new and wondrous technologies. 
 
They are indeed very marvellous and do have a significant 
amount of potential. Unfortunately though, Mr. Minister, in 
some cases they’re being restricted because of the shortage of 
funding, and some of the programs and some of the areas being 
stressed because of that. And it’s a problem that we have with 
the distance education system because it is initially a high-cost 
system to initiate. While the benefits are certainly there, it’s a 
capital-intensive, upfront program when you start it off. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s happening in Saskatchewan though with 
university distance education or the delivery of university credit 
courses outside of Regina and Saskatoon? I look at my own 
constituency, and some programs are available but they’re 
coming out of the university of Brandon in Manitoba. What is 
happening in Saskatchewan as far as university program 
availability outside of Regina and Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I have 
some information on that. But before sailing into it, I was 
stunned to see my friend with a laptop computer on his desk the 
other day, apparently using it. 
 
An Hon. Member:  And knowing what I was doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  And knowing what he was doing, he 
says from his seat. And I have no doubt about that. 
 
I want to tell the member that I read enough of those books I 
referred to in question period yesterday about various programs 
for dummies, and I qualify as a consumer of that book. I qualify 
as a reader, that I actually can do some things. I’m on the 
Internet. That’s good isn’t it; yes. And I’ve got an e-mail 
address, and I use it; that’s good too. My scheduling is part of 
that process. And while I am not any kind of a speed reader, I 
think I’m better than illiterate. I just wanted to put that on the 
public record . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m very proud of 
it. I play solitaire too, that’s right. 
 
Let me give you some numbers now. The numbers are 
improving, and the level of interest is really high and growing. 
But let me give you the numbers that I have. There are, as of the 
last fiscal year, there were 49 programs being offered from the 
universities and from SIAST out to various points. Thirty-six of 
those were post-secondary, either from one of the universities 
or from SIAST; and 13 of those were high school programs. 
The hours are at, I think, the highest level they’ve  



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

ever been in. The hours are over 2,300. And the number of 
classrooms into which these are being delivered are at 150, and 
that’s a higher number than has been the case anytime in the 
past; shown a good, steady growth over the years. 
 
So it’s happening, and the universities are quite taken by it. 
They see this as part of the change with which they should 
cope. They have to get tuned into it and offer more and more of 
it. So they’re talking about it in proper terms anyway, and I 
hope it comes to pass. And I’m encouraged by what I’ve heard 
there. I think that it has a great future, this whole area. 
 
Let me say again I think the multi-media, CD-ROM technology 
will, in a few short years, really be the training tool. Some really 
remarkable things have been done there. I don’t understand it, 
but they have demonstrated it in my office, and it is quite 
remarkable what they are able to produce. It would be a fun way 
to learn, if you were a student, you know, taking a class using 
interactive technology. It just seems to have limitless 
possibilities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I’m glad to know that the minister 
is learning something about computers. He’s certainly getting 
all the buzz-words down: multi-media and interactive and 
CD-ROMs. One of the things though, Mr. Minister, that in 
accessing all of these technologies, the availability of which 
relies on dollars. 
 
The schools, the community colleges, regional colleges, even 
over the Internet, Mr. Minister, it’s a fairly expensive program. I 
understand that SaskTel has come out with a special program 
for schools of, I believe, it’s $150 per month for the school 
divisions, and I would assume that likely also applies to the 
regional colleges, for unlimited access. 
 
But unfortunately next year that will go up to $250, and I 
believe that’s 75 hours a month. The third year, it goes up to 
$500 for 100 hours a month. To me it simply seems like that is 
a trap. You get the students and the schools hooked on to it for 
$100 a month unlimited time. And next year once they’ve 
purchased the hardware, they’re locked into the system, and 
now you raise the rates and reduce their access time so that 
they’re paying a much greater amount than they were before 
because of the cost of . . . I believe it’s 250 an hour that the 
schools are going to pay. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if there is something you can do to lower 
those costs to the schools for those Internet connections, I think 
that would be a great advantage to those students, to continue to 
be able to have access to the systems at a reasonable cost with 
the unlimited time factor that they currently have this year. I 
think that would be a significant benefit. 
 
The regional colleges, I think deliver an excellent program, but 
again as I mentioned earlier, they’re stressed financially, and 
they have been limiting some of the classes that they’ve had 
previously. The access to the university programs, I think is a 
wonderful idea in the local communities because people can 
stay at home. They can live with mom and dad. They can hold 
down a part-time job or even a full-time job, because some of 
these classes are taught in the evenings, and maintain a  

tax-paying base while furthering their education, which I think 
is important. 
 
(2000) 
 
So I’d like to encourage you, Mr. Minister, to do those three 
things. See if you can’t get the cost of Internet down for the 
schools and the regional colleges. Expand the funding so that 
the programing can continue to the regional colleges. And 
encourage the universities to provide further access to their 
credit courses outside of their main plants in Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Chair, I thank the member for 
those remarks. With respect to the cost of Internet access, the 
member’s numbers are correct. 
 
And I’m concerned about the same point he is. My department 
has been working with SaskTel, raising this question, and trying 
to produce a more satisfactory result. And we’re going to 
continue that work and I thank the member for that 
encouragement. 
 
On the funding level, I know the problem. I mean the whole 
system is short of money and everybody’s concerned about that. 
As and when funds are available though, I tell the member that 
this is a priority area and we’ll do the best that we can. 
 
On his final point, university credits, I’ve indicated already in a 
previous answer that we’re working with the universities and 
encouraging them to get involved in this and take some lead on 
this. And we’re quite encouraged about that too. So things are 
looking good. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 37 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Vote 141 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 141 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to take 
this opportunity to thank officials from the department and from 
SCN and from New Careers that have been here over the past 
several meetings to assist the committee in its work. These 
people have done a tremendous amount of work this year as the 
departments have been formed out of the former department 
and as all of the projects that are under way have taken form 
and taken root and begun to develop. They have performed at a 
very high level, and I want to recognize their work generally 
and with respect to their assistance to this committee. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2601 

thank the minister and his officials for the discussion that we 
had. I think it’s exciting, some of the things that are happening 
in education. And also, as we discussed, there is some need to 
dig in your heels a little bit and work with a few somewhat 
intransigent groups. So thanks again to your officials for their 
help. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
 
The Chair:  Before we begin, I’ll invite the minister to 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much. Tonight, 
assistant secretary of Metis Affairs, Donavon Young; executive 
director of policy and planning, John Reid; and executive 
director of Indian lands and resources, Glen Benedict. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’d 
like to welcome the minister and her officials here this evening. 
I wonder if you could give us an update as to what is the 
general progress of the treaty land entitlements and the specific 
entitlements, including the details of what lands have been 
purchased this year and what percentage of the entitlements 
have been fulfilled to date. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  That was quite a long question. Maybe 
I’ll just summarize a couple of the points, and then I could send 
a copy of this across to you so that you have the detail that 
you’re looking for. 
 
There was sufficient money to buy a total of 1.9 million acres, 
and there’s been 220,000 acres total so far purchased. And of 
that, 22,558 have achieved reserve status, and that’s 26 bands 
having made their selections. 
 
And I’ll send the rest across to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Would the 
numbers that you’re going to send across include the 
percentages of the entitlements fulfilled to date? 
 
I’ll repeat the question for the minister. The numbers that 
you’re sending across, do they include the percentages of the 
entitlements fulfilled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We don’t have it broken up in that way, 
but the answer would be that percentage is very small. We’re in 
the first 4 years of a 12-year agreement that has the option of 
extending to an 18-year agreement. So really so far we’ve just 
got our toes in the water. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Madam Minister; 1.2 
million acres hardly sounds like a toe in the water though. 
 
There’s been a lot of controversy over the settlement of the 
entitlements and the specific land claims as it comes to 
compensation to municipalities for the lands that are purchased  

for treaty qualification, Madam Minister, as you well know 
because we’ve had a number of correspondences going back 
and forth dealing with this issue. And I’m sure you get all the 
same letters related to this that I get from the municipalities. 
 
What role is your department playing in all of this? What 
presentations are you making to the federal government to try 
and get an equitable settlement on the compensations to the 
municipalities for the lands that are purchased within their 
jurisdiction that revert to reserve status? What role does your 
department play on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Basically we’ve had meetings with 
both the federal minister of Indian and Metis affairs and also 
with our Saskatchewan elected representative in cabinet, Mr. 
Ralph Goodale. And their indication to us was that, although 
some people were concerned about it, it didn’t seem to be a 
large enough concern to warrant necessarily changing their 
position on it. 
 
Now certainly when your members put forward your resolution 
and when the opposition supported it, and we supported it, I 
think that put us in a stronger position. Certainly the letters 
coming from municipalities have increased. And we recently 
sent a copy out to all the municipalities, rural municipalities, of 
that joint motion. And we received a response back from 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
thanking us for taking that action in the House here. 
 
And I guess we’ll have to wait to see what kind of a response 
we get based on that all-party resolution and decide whether in 
fact we need to make an all-party presentation on the matter to 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder 
if you can give me some indication of how many RMs would be 
involved in the 22,000 acres that was transferred to reserve 
status and how many RMs would be involved in the 1.9 million 
acres. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It could conceivably involve . . . I mean 
it does involve every area of Saskatchewan. It’s north, south, 
east, west. So really it would be hard to get that specifically, but 
we could try to get an estimate of it and provide it if that’s 
important to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Madam Minister, I’ve been 
getting presentations from a number of RMs on this particular 
issue. And I’m wondering if those RMs that are most vocal on 
this are those that have the 22,000 acres this year or acres that 
have been transferred in previous years to reserve status, if 
they’re reacting more strongly and therefore the numbers are 
still fewer than if everyone affected by the 1.9 million acres was 
making presentations. 
 
Normally in society, society doesn’t react to an issue until it 
actually hits them personally. And I’m wondering if that’s what 
the position is right now within the RMs, that those that are 
being affected directly are concerned about this issue, those that 
haven’t been impacted directly yet are not viewing this quite as 
seriously yet until the land within their jurisdictions starts to get  



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

transferred over to reserve status. 
 
So that was the reason I was interested in the numbers, 
particularly of the 22,000, of how many RMs are being 
impacted by that group. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Maybe I should clarify. There is a 
difference between the tax loss compensation under the Treaty 
Land Entitlement Framework Agreement and specific claims. 
Specific . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh you know the 
difference. Okay. 
 
So it’s not all of the entitlements that are affected; it’s only the 
specific claims. And there’s a much smaller number of those, 
about eight or something. It’s a much smaller number. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well maybe that’s where I should be 
asking my questions then, rather than aiming at the 
entitlements, and the specific claims as a group. 
 
How many RMs . . . or how many acres are involved in the 
specific claims, specific land claims settlements, and how many 
of them have reverted to reserve status, and how many RMs 
would be affected by that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We can get that for you. But really, to 
spend time doing it here now, we’d have to get out our 
calculators and what not, so . . . 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. If 
you would supply that information. 
 
This is an issue that I think is causing a great deal of 
controversy with those people who are affected by it. It 
certainly doesn’t reflect on the natives who are buying the land 
because they’re certainly entitled to it and they are well within 
their rights and privileges to purchase this property. The 
problem arises with the settlements from the federal 
government when they’re only offering, I believe it’s five times 
the assessed values for the specific lands where they’re paying 
22 times for the entitlements. 
 
And there’s clearly an unfairness in there. Obvioulsy if there’s a 
road goes past a piece of property that is settled as an 
entitlement, there’s a cost to maintain that road. That same cost 
is associated with the road that goes past the specific land 
claim. There’s no difference in the cost to the municipality in 
servicing either road. 
 
And so to settle at 5 times for one type of claim and 22 times 
for the other is clearly unfair. And that, I think, Madam 
Minister, is what the problem is in here and it certainly doesn’t 
reflect on the natives that are purchasing the land, although I’m 
sure to a certain extent there is some animosity towards them 
for those kind of settlements which they have nothing to do 
with. It’s not a problem that they have created. It’s a problem 
that has been created by the federal government. 
 
And I believe this legislature did good work when we passed  

the motion in this House to convey the message to Ottawa that 
we felt that it was unfair and that it needed to be changed. And I 
think anything we can do to encourage that the proper 
settlement’s a fair settlement on those issues would be work 
well done by this legislature. 
 
Under the treaty land entitlement agreements though, the bands 
are suppose to be acquiring lands from willing sellers and 
willing buyers. And in most cases, that is the case. However, 
some of the bands have been complaining that there has been 
some tardiness or some lack of cooperation amongst some of 
those who are selling the land in some of the areas, that they 
feel that some of the non-natives are trying to block them from 
purchasing land in that area or that they believe that the bands 
have unlimited funds and therefore they want this particular 
piece of land, so I’m going to sit on it and I’m going to wait 
until they up the price. 
 
Madam Minister, some of the bands have been suggesting that 
the government should act perhaps as an intervenor in those 
particular kinds of situations and provide some mediation 
services or provide some assistance in making some settlements 
in that area. 
 
Has your government, has your department, established a policy 
on this and are you acting on behalf of anyone in that particular 
area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Really the only difficulty we’re 
experiencing in the area is not with the private land that’s 
purchased; it’s with Crown land. And part of that is because 
people have often been able to use Crown land at very low rates 
and have been getting a very substantial economic benefit from 
it. So we do have some difficulty in that area. We have moved 
to mediation and enhanced mediation in some places to try to 
get it resolved. 
 
Again, because we’re in the first four years of the agreement, 
we’re testing this out to see if we can achieve a settlement still 
through some kind of mutual agreement. I guess down the road 
we’ll have to see, if we continue to have too much difficulty, 
but at the moment we haven’t felt that the difficulty has been at 
the level yet where we need to take more measures beyond 
helping with the mediation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  When you talk about that Crown land, 
Madam Minister, are you talking about the lease holders on the 
Crown land being reluctant to release their leases, or are you 
talking about the owner of the land, the Crown, be it federal or 
provincial? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It would be the lease holder itself. 
We’ve made a commitment to honour the entitlement 
agreements and provide the land. It’s being conscious of the 
needs of our lease holders. I will mention that other provinces 
do not take lease holders’ interests into account. They just make 
the decision and do it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. On the 
other side of the coin, some non-natives have been complaining 
that the bands have been purchasing land all around them to  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

encircle their land holdings in an effort to encourage them to 
sell. Have you been receiving any complaints along that line, 
and are you involved in any mediations in that area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you very much, Madam 
Minister. Some of my other colleagues have questions to deal 
with SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs 
Secretariat), so I will allow them to proceed. But I would like to 
thank you and your officials for coming in this evening. And I 
would certainly encourage you to put all the pressure you can 
on the federal government to make equitable settlements in the 
specific land claims. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just before I get 
to my . . . I’ve only got three questions for you this evening, 
Madam Minister. They’re not very tough questions, but I want 
to make a very quick point in reference for the need for us as 
government to begin to address the whole issue of the Metis 
Act and certainly also something relevant to the Indian Act for 
the good of the native and aboriginal peoples of Saskatchewan. 
I think in northern Saskatchewan we’ve been calling for many 
years for some kind of devolution of control over a wide area of 
services that may include things like social services, like 
housing, and like the management of land, and you know, the 
list goes on and on. 
 
The people are asking for that through the Metis Act and 
certainly through a similar Act for the first nations to try and see 
if they can develop their own system of government. And what 
they’ve been doing for that is that they want to see if they are 
able and if there is some way and there’s some means in which 
they could develop their own capacity to manage themselves 
and their affairs. 
 
We understand that along with self-government initiative we’re 
calling for comes a tremendous amount of responsibility. 
Responsibility, Madam Minister, can only be achieved through 
knowledge and also through learning the process and taking 
time. We don’t suspect the self-governing model that we are 
going to look at is going to be developed over a period of one 
year. 
 
I think some of the tributes that the Metis people have towards 
self-government could be attested through the municipal 
government of northern Saskatchewan. Most of the municipal 
governments in northern Saskatchewan consist of Metis people. 
We have a Metis mayor, Metis councillors, and certainly Metis 
administrators, and these are the type of examples that we’re 
trying to talk about when we talk about Metis self-government. 
And really, Madam Minister, we believe it is time that we be 
allowed the flexibility to not only exercise that right of 
self-government but also to certainly gain greater control over 
areas I spoke about earlier. 
 
At this point in time we feel  and certainly myself as a 
legislator  that there is no overall plan or overall strategy to 
deal with these issues. We have to do that ourselves. Certainly  

as a Metis person, I recognize 90 per cent of that challenge 
must come from ourselves to government and that there’s a 
common misconception out there, Madam Minister, that 
government is developing this strategy. I believe with all my 
heart that you guys are not, and therefore I urge you all to start 
that next level of thought in terms of how we can devolve 
control of government services over to the local Metis people. 
 
Again, some of the things that I think we need to immediately 
initiate when it comes to items of this nature, speaking about 
the Metis Act, is that we must develop a comprehensive plan. 
By “we” I mean we the people on behalf of the people that we 
represent to discuss on how we could actually begin to set up 
that process. 
 
If governments truly want to support the Indian and Metis 
people in their call for self-government, then they must make 
every effort to recognize their input and take their values. Over 
the first step that we all have to do is we must go through the 
history of how the treaties were set up and the history of how 
the Metis people were set up. And this is where you go back  
and I urge you all as government members and certainly as 
people involved with this department  is to understand our 
history. Once you have a basic understanding of that history of 
the injustice and the treatment of the aboriginal people in the 
past, then you’ll be able to get a better grasp of what they mean 
when they call for self-government, of what they mean when 
they call for the inherent right to self-govern. 
 
And this is what it’s all about. And certainly I would encourage 
you as the minister to look at that particular aspect of northern 
and aboriginal life. 
 
I guess one of the things that we need to look at is, in order for 
us to survive, to stop some of the problems that we’re having in 
northern Saskatchewan, northern people must rid themselves of 
the disincentives of the government-run systems. Everywhere 
you look there are disincentives for the northern aboriginal 
people, whether it’s in housing, whether it’s in social services, 
whether it’s in the non-existence of family support systems, the 
high rates of violence and crime. What hope have we got to 
educate our masses and get a brand new direction for our 
people if we as leaders cannot afford them the opportunity to 
develop an alternate system? 
 
Yes, there are linguistic differences, there is some cultural 
ignorance, and perhaps even racial challenges, but I believe that 
facing the educational efforts that many of the Metis people 
have towards educating the non-aboriginal community on their 
background and their history is something that we should all 
admire. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I think that’s some of the things we have 
to look at when we talk about the Metis Nation, is that really if 
you maximize the benefits, not necessarily to one organization 
but to the Metis people themselves, that’ll certainly be a 
positive step in this whole process of your understanding of 
Metis issues and certainly your responsibility as minister. 
 
I think the key thing that we want to ensure, Madam Minister, 
that in our call for self-government, that time be allowed to  



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

develop the capacity to manage ourselves, that time be allowed 
to understand how the inner workings of certain systems that 
you guys have been running for many, many years . . . that we 
could use for our advantage. 
 
And as well, the key thing that we want to point out here is that 
self-government is of absolute no value if all you’re doing is 
exchanging a white bureaucratic system to a brown bureaucratic 
system. We must make every effort to maximize benefits to the 
grass roots level, to the people that this system and any policy is 
designed to serve  and that is the Metis people in some of 
these communities,; so right now and then, that there is 
immediate impact and an immediate support for the people at 
the grass roots level. 
 
So again, Madam Minister, I just share some of these opinions 
with you and also look at the issue of the land and the access to 
the resources. Without those two tools, there’s very little that 
the Metis people can do to try and get a brand-new destiny 
designed for their people. 
 
So you throw in the fact that self-governance, access to land, 
access to harvest some of the things that we’ve traditionally 
harvested for many years, which includes animals and fish and 
some of the forest products I spoke about, then and only then, 
with these three tools are we able to over time develop a 
brand-new system of self-governance for Metis people. It 
indeed can be done. 
 
There is no question in my mind that we’ve had challenges with 
various Metis organizations over the years. But, Madam 
Minister, we must be diligent in saying that yes, this can be 
done, and over time we can develop a system. All it takes is a 
government that says, we support self-government to the fullest 
and we will initiate plans in cooperation with the native 
organizations to do exactly that. 
 
So, Madam Minister, we do need some leadership; we do need 
some solid commitment; and if we’re going to profess 
self-government, then we certainly must follow through with 
some very good plannings. 
 
And so with that, the few questions I have is, particularly for 
the Bill C-31’s . . . As you’re probably aware, Bill C-31’s are 
people that were . . . had lost their treaty status years ago, either 
because they got married or they moved from the reserve or 
some other silly excuse. 
 
Could you ensure this House that you will develop a strategy to 
deal with people in the North and in the province, the whole 
province for that fact, that are falling through the cracks of the 
aboriginal system? 
 
(2030) 
 
When we look at the situation with the treaty systems, they 
simply can’t afford to take in more people. So as a result you 
have a lot of Bill C-31’s that are actually in limbo, that have 
nowhere to go. They have their treaty status back but the reserve 
band councils can’t take them back. They haven’t got enough 
money for housing and for social services. They  

haven’t got enough money for the educational demands of the 
additional population associated with Bill C-31. 
 
So I was wondering if you could commit a great amount of 
energy to try and come up with some system in which the 
non-status Indians and the Bill C-31’s, the group of native 
people that we’re leaving behind, to try and find some ways and 
means in which we can support them. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well you leave me with an interesting 
dilemma. I just want to mention a little bit on some of your 
previous points, because although Metis people are listed as 
aboriginal people under section 35 of the constitution, the 
federal government does not recognize this in any practical 
way. And I will remind you that that federal government are 
members of your party, not mine, and you should probably have 
a chat with them on this subject. 
 
One of the things we have to think about carefully when we go 
about talking about an Act is that an Act can prejudice the 
rights under the constitution unless we very carefully think 
through what this is all about. We can talk about municipal 
government though and we don’t need . . . it could be a 
northern municipal kind of approach rather than specifically a 
Metis Act. But there is that danger of prejudicing the 91 (24) 
section of the constitution by virtue of a province enacting 
legislation affecting Metis people. 
 
In terms of an overall strategy, we have met with the Metis 
Nation. We do have a . . . jointly agreed on bilateral plan under 
which we’ve agreed to discuss the merits of the Metis Act, of 
economic development and gaming, of resource management, 
and of enumeration. And that is a commonly arrived at agenda 
which they have not suggested to us that they would want a 
different agenda at this point. 
 
We actually had a meeting today with some people from the 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, and the kind of gap 
you’re talking about in history and people’s understanding, I 
think this commission will go a long way to filling a lot of that 
gap. I’m looking forward myself to getting access to that 
information and materials. 
 
Self-government does mean law-making powers. But as we go 
into this process we have to think about what’s effective, 
practical, and affordable. And I would use, as an example, it 
wouldn’t be practical for every local community to develop 
their own curriculum. So as we go through this process, we’ll 
have to talk about what things are better done separately and 
what things are better done collectively. 
 
As a province we are legally bound under the constitution to 
provide services and programs of general application to all of 
our citizens. So wherever we veer away from that, we have to 
carefully think about how it affects also our constitutional 
responsibilities. 
 
The disincentives you talk about, certainly in the times that 
we’ve been elected, we’ve added sewer and water, we’ve added 
roads, we’ve got the multi-party training agreement, NORPAC, 
(Northern Professional Access College), NORTEP (northern  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

teacher education program), various affirmative action 
employment and job development agreements in the North. I 
agree with you that we need to do more, but I think these set a 
good tone for the kind of things that need to happen. 
 
And as far as the Bill C-31’s goes, getting around to your 
question, we do acknowledge them, but the fact is they are a 
creation of the federal government. It was their laws that 
created the possibility for people to become Bill C-31’s. They 
created the crack. It is up to them to finance all on-reserve 
activities because the province certainly has enough on its plate 
with the almost two-thirds of first nations people that have 
moved off reserve. And there is really no way constitutionally, 
morally, or ethically that the federal government can escape the 
fact that that’s their responsibility. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Certainly we 
need to have discussions on that issue at greater lengths, but not 
at this point in time. 
 
I think the second part of the Saskatchewan solution, if you 
will, is in reference to the associated entities fund. As you’re 
probably aware, you’ve entered into negotiations and discussion 
and perhaps even in agreement with the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan in reference to the associated entities fund. And 
really the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan . . . the first step in 
showing some of the things we speak about is that I think you 
must recognize the fact that you’re dealing not with a cultural 
group, Madam Minister. You’re dealing with a nation of people 
here. And I think throughout time . . . You talk about the 
document that your government has put out, Toward A Shared 
Destiny. You spoke about the need to recognize Metis 
governments and Metis people. So in essence one of the very 
things that you’ve entered in agreements with, namely the 
associated entities fund, you’ve referred to the Metis Nation as 
a cultural group. 
 
I would suggest, Madam Minister, if you could give us a 
various breakdown of what role that the Metis Nation is playing 
in reference to this particular point. And secondly, will you now 
consider the Metis Nation a nation and deal with it from a 
government-to-government point of view? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again I will mention that that kind of 
recognition and jurisdiction begins at the federal level under the 
constitution. And the level of government which has the most 
control over that does not recognize the self-governance of a 
jurisdictional nature for the Metis Nation. Now that does not 
affect our thinking particularly in that way, other than making 
sure that whatever we do doesn’t prejudice the potential that 
some day they may resolve that issue. 
 
What we have done in the meantime is allocate 25 per cent of 
the associated entities fund to the MNS (Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan) of Saskatchewan, and we have a joint 
negotiating committee where we’re sitting down to talk about 
how that money will be held in trust, who the trustees will be, 
how that money will be delivered, what kinds of things that 
they intend to spend it on. 
 
And I might add that at the moment they’re incorporated under  

the non-profits Act, and therefore that is where they legally 
must reside because that is their legal status as an entity. At 
some point, as we go through our discussions on 
self-governance, etc., that legal status may change. And then it 
would be appropriate at that time to talk about whether there 
might be other legal arrangements and future agreements. 
 
I might add that first nations have millions of dollar investment 
in this project. And because of that investment, MNS will 
actually see real live cash before first nations will, because 
they’ve tied up so much of their money in the front-end 
investment. So in actual fact they’re not doing too badly by this 
arrangement. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I’ve got two more quick questions, then 
we’re certainly done. 
 
The point I want to make, sometimes when it comes to the 
Metis issue, we hear the clause . . . and the comment time and 
time again that some day they may get to this in the 
constitutional discussion. But, Madam Minister, some day 
never comes. 
 
And I would also ask, has the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan 
got their core funding this year? And if they have, can you 
assure me and the members of this House that in the future that 
we will not have delays in transferring their core funding to 
them as quickly as we can, because certainly two or three 
months past their fiscal year, it does create a significant amount 
of problems. And it feels that because the delay is there, then 
obviously it’s meant as a . . . it’s really affecting how the Metis 
Nation operates. Thereby it also affects their attitude; it also 
affects their credibility. 
 
So in essence, if you could assure me that delays of that nature 
will not occur in the future, I think it would be the first positive, 
big step. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Of course there is no reason that we 
would artificially want to delay that funding. The core funding 
 just to be clear on terms  the core funding is federal, from 
the federal government. We provide tripartite funding under the 
tripartite agreement. They have their cheque for three-twelfths, 
and as soon as we’re done this budget process they’ll get the 
balance. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  And my last issue, Madam Minister, is the 
issue about the Metis veterans, if you could give us an update 
on that. As you’re probably aware, there was an Indian and 
Metis veterans commission that was set up to discuss the fact 
that upon the return of World War II, many veterans in the 
province were given a piece of land to begin their lives with. 
However the Metis and the Indian people that did go out to 
World War II went back to their home community, were 
isolated, and communication wasn’t all that great in those years, 
so thereby they didn’t have the same opportunity afforded to 
them. 
 
So can you assure me that you’ll do everything in your power to 
correct this injustice done to the Metis veterans and the Indian 
veterans of Saskatchewan. 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, the report you referred to, a 
federal Senate report, I actually did hear a report from one of 
the senators who was involved in doing that work. It was a 
good report. And I would say that partly as an outcome of that 
report, that SIMAS supported events last year for veterans, both 
Metis and first nations. 
 
But we’re happy to support you in encouraging the federal 
government to right this wrong. Because again, I know you 
smile, but there is a division of powers between federal and 
provincial governments, just as there will be between provincial 
governments, first nations, and Metis. And if you’re going to 
respect that those powers mean anything, then the levels of 
government that have those powers must use them. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I also want to 
thank you and your officials for taking time to come in this 
evening. And over the next three years I’m sure we’ll be having 
similar discussions and probably at greater lengths. Thank you 
very much, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’d like to thank both of the members 
for their questions. They were thoughtful, and I know it’s 
frustrating when we get caught in these jurisdictional debates. 
But hopefully we’ll be getting those resolved over the next 
couple of years. 
 
And I thank my officials also for all their good work continually 
on getting this stuff done. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 agreed to. 
 
(2045) 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Don Metz, 
Don is the acting deputy minister of Highways and 
Transportation; Barry Martin, Barry is the executive director of 
engineering services division; Lynn Tulloch, Lynn is executive 
director of corporate information services division; and Bernie 
Churko is the executive director of logistics, planning and 
compliance division. 
 
Item 1 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, welcome and to your officials. A few questions, Mr. 
Minister, around some of the things that you’ve stated in the 
House over the last couple of months. You indicated a number 
of times that you’re restructuring in terms of the funding and  
I shouldn’t say restructuring, I guess the better word would be, 
to use, is reallocating funding in different areas  you’ve 
indicated that you’re shuffling, I think you’ve quoted, $6 
million. Could you indicate to us in the Estimates as to where 
the 6 million is being shuffled and exactly how you plan to 
meet that objective? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The streamlining savings are from 
engineering services, 1.6 million; from regional operations 
streamlining, $800,000; fleet operations, 1.2 million; 
preservation field organization streamlining, $1.3 million; 
logistics and planning division streamlining, 700,000; other 
initiatives, 700,000; for a total of 6.3 million. And that will go 
4.1 to increase in capital program expenditures and 2.2 into 
preservation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In terms of the 
reduction of $1.5 million on engineering fees, I see that that’s 
possible under your line item as you’ve referred to it there. How 
will you accomplish . . . I see that you’re still planning to do the 
same amount of capital projects, or in terms of the dollar figure, 
or whether it’s the same number of projects, I guess, we’re not 
sure. Will you be able to accommodate the engineering by some 
other method? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The reductions in engineering basically 
come from policy in the standards area. We’ve eliminated some 
duplication as well. If you recall, we used to have six districts. 
Now we have three regions. The engineering services are now 
provided out of Saskatoon and Regina and not the six different 
locations. 
 
So there’s the streamlining in the engineering department . . . is 
the reason for the savings. But we can certainly handle what 
engineering needs are there internally, so there will not be any 
changes. It’s just streamlining and becoming more efficient. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
terms of determining capital projects and the kind of capital 
project that . . . we note across the province that there seems to 
be various methods of resurfacing  whether you’re talking 
about the hot mix or the cold mix. What kind of criteria do your 
officials put in place in terms of determining a stretch of 
highway, as to whether you’re resurfacing it by method A or 
method B or method C, or how many there are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It’s basically based on economics: 
maintenance versus reconstruction. And then we also take into 
account the type of traffic that’s on a particular road. A road 
may need a structural pavement while another road may need a 
sealed, sand-sealed or sealed surface. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, in terms of a very specific 
project  and I’ve drawn your attention to this before  in my 
constituency, Highway No. 5, you were resurfacing 16 
kilometres of road right now, of a total amount of about 23 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

kilometres, I believe, that is not resurfaced according to the 
specifications that will now be attained. And the response that I 
received was, number one, there wasn’t enough money. And 
number two, there was an evaluation of the particular section of 
that highway that was not being touched this year, and it could 
handle the load for at least two years. 
 
It turns out that this year, this spring, that chunk of road that is 
not being touched has just fallen apart completely. In fact there 
has been an accident, I understand, now on that chunk of road. 
 
The third response was that of course you would look at it in 
terms of when the money was available, over two years from 
now. Your per kilometre cost for the 16 kilometres is at a 
particular level; I don’t know whether it’s high or low or 
whatever. When you look at resurfacing 6 kilometres that will 
be left in two years time, to bring in a contractor to do that, your 
costs are going to be astronomical. I wonder how you arrive at a 
situation where you take almost 80 per cent of the job and do it, 
and then leave such a small chunk for a year or two down the 
road. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’m sure the member is aware of 
the amount of roads that we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan, so we basically look at a structure and the 
distress on a particular piece of road. And if it needs improving, 
but a small section or a section we believe will last a couple 
years longer, we will not do that, but we’ll move into an area 
where there is distress and a need and hopefully get another two 
years out of a particular piece. 
 
Because of the competition in the road building industry, we 
haven’t been paying, I guess, a premium for small jobs versus 
large jobs. So we’ll have to continue to do that because we’ve 
got a lot of roads, a lot of roads need work, and we have to base 
it on something. And certainly, you know, to redo a 6 kilometre 
stretch that we believe we could get a couple more years out of, 
we believe would be wasting that money. And we would sooner 
put that money into maybe another area where there is more 
distress and more need. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I appreciate your comments regarding the fact 
that there is, you know, keen competition out there, I guess, and 
that you’re not worried about a small job versus a large job. 
 
In light of the fact that I’ve pointed out to you that this 
particular chunk  not all of the 6 kilometres, but I understand 
about 2 kilometres . . . and I drove on it coming back into 
Regina on Sunday night, and it’s a disaster. 
 
What process . . . or who will determine that that is indeed an 
emergency situation and could be repaired by adding 2 
kilometres again. Because as I see it, the person or persons who 
completed that survey on that particular chunk and said this is 
good for two years, you know, erred, and indeed we have a 
problem. Who determines whether or not that can be, you 
know, fixed at this appropriate time when you have a contractor 
there who might be able to get these 2 kilometres fixed and 
prevent serious injury? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  All the tenders for road construction this  

year is already tendered. And so if in fact . . . The decision 
would be made by the executive director of that particular 
region. But you have to understand, if that decision was made, 
we would have to pull the cost of those two kilometres away 
from some place else that has already been tendered. So what 
normally we will do is go into that section and maintain it as 
best we can until we can get back to it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, if you could indicate the 
purpose of a supplementary estimate. I note that we’re going to 
be dealing with ‘95-96 supplements of about $5.85 million. Am 
I correct that that is an expenditure that you incurred for the 
flood conditions that we experienced last spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The money was used, you’re correct, for 
the flooding. It was about half for municipal road damages and 
about half for highways damages. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Before we turn back to this spring’s problems 
that we’ve incurred, while we’re on vote no. 16, in terms of a 
question, it’s indicated there that you’re also talking not only 
about the damage caused by spring flooding, but you also have 
indicated it’s for expenses, including downsizing costs. 
 
Could you give us a breakdown as to the $5.85 million in terms 
of what amount went towards actual highway repair and what 
was used for downsizing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The figures were $2.65 million for 
damages to municipal roads, and $2 million for damages to 
provincial roads and a little over a million or right around a 
million to the early retirement program. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Therefore, Mr. 
Minister, if you were able to look at the problems of last spring 
. . . and I guess we’re saying this spring we have very similar 
problems in the province. I’ve indicated to you, you know, that 
a chunk of road has fallen apart beyond what your officials in 
fact felt was a situation whereby it would last. 
 
Is there any emergency type of assistance that can be provided 
to construct or resurface that 2 kilometres of road, rather than, 
as you’ve suggested, that you have to pull that 2 kilometres 
from somewhere else? 
 
Obviously the repairs that were done last year, you quoted $2 
million of provincial repair; that must have been a fair chunk of 
resurfacing. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  As the member will know, Mr. 
Chairman, that the Finance minister presented her budget, our 
budget, not too long ago, and the estimated surplus this year is 
about $8 million. It’s very tight; it’s very close. So we just 
haven’t got anywhere to find that additional funding. 
 
So what we will do is repair it. We will maintain it. The crews 
right now are about two weeks behind because of the wet 
weather. And so as they get the work done on the main primary 
roads, they will move then onto the secondary roads, and I  



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

think by hopefully mid-summer that our roads will be in a 
reasonable condition again. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’ve indicated in this House of course that there were 
significant downsizing of depots in terms of the number of 
depots and how maintenance would be handled. I think you 
talked about centralizing repair services because of 
improvements in equipment and improvement in terms of how 
you’ll be able to do that. When we start to look at the number of 
kilometres of road, and I find it difficult to understand how you 
will be able to maintain those same numbers of kilometres by 
reducing depots. Could you explain to the people of this 
province how you still will ensure that there is an adequate level 
of maintenance, not only summer? 
 
As you have indicated, weather and spring conditions may play 
a slight role in that. But more importantly, in the wintertime, 
when we’re talking about the severe winter storms that we have, 
constituents have noted that to me, that secondary highways 
have in fact remained closed or blocked because of winter 
storms for as much as two days because the crews couldn’t get 
to them. Now we know in my constituency we’re going to have 
a further reduction in terms of the number of depots. 
 
Do you think that you can adequately say to the people of this 
province that there will be as good a maintenance program and 
as good a safety level this coming winter, next spring, as we’ve 
had in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The current maintenance organization 
that we had was developed in the 1960s. And the need for 
organizational change certainly was there. 
 
We now have trucks, for instance, that have 8-yard capacity 
boxes compared to the old trucks that were 5-yard capacity 
buckets. We can do more with a truck. We don’t need two 
trucks going to one job. We may only need the one. 
 
We have larger graders. Certainly the snow ploughs have 
change dramatically. They’re a lot faster; they can handle a lot 
more territory than they used to. 
 
And I want to say that we still have 96 work crews in 107 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan. And so we 
believe . . . It used to be like some of the crews would look after 
maybe 100 kilometres; some others would maybe be 275. With 
the restructuring we’re looking at 300 to 350 kilometres for 
each crew. 
 
In many cases, the crews are larger now. There’s very few 
two-person crews. So when you do a summer maintenance job, 
for an example, you have more people on site to complete the 
work. 
 
So we believe actually that maintenance probably will improve. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister this is 
not a question but I’d like to just make a comment about 
something that I found rather funny. And I know you talk about  

automation and the improvement in our vehicles. 
 
I recall about . . . well a number of years ago, five, six years 
ago, Highway No. 5, the maintenance depot was in the 
community of Canora. In the springtime you always use to end 
up with these small, little potholes that use to be, you know, 6 
inches in diameter. And of course if they were left 
unmaintained, they became huge. 
 
The gentleman that was, I think, the supervisor in Canora used 
to throw a couple of yards of cold mix on the back of a half ton 
and use to come out with a shovel down that stretch from 
Canora to Invermay and they used to be fixed in a matter of no 
time. 
 
Now I noted the other day that this nice, huge, big truck that is 
equipped  I think it’s manned by one person  and it has the 
ability to drop the oil and then drop the cold mix and then they 
back up. I think it took him about eight or ten minutes of 
backing up, going ahead, backing up until he found the hole 
and was actually positioned over the top of it and then he finally 
filled the hole, then he packed it, and he was gone in about 10 
to 12 minutes. And based on what I saw six or seven years ago 
of manual labour, I think he would have probably have filled 
about 15 holes by that time. 
 
So I know what you’re saying in terms of improvements, but we 
wonder sometimes exactly how much improvement we really 
are gaining when we start looking at those small jobs that need 
the quick repair in the spring. 
 
Mr. Minister, another problem that occurs and it’s a problem 
that has been here for a number of years. And I know I’ve heard 
you say in this House you’re very concerned about the 
abandonment of the Crow subsidy and the fact that now you’re 
going to be looking at railway lines. 
 
That’s something that might happen in the future, but we know 
what has happened to the road conditions over the last number 
of years. There’s a major problem in terms of how they’ve been 
standing up to the load. I know that in my area we see 
anhydrous trucks that travel the highway early in the springtime 
and that’s not this year, that’s last year and the year before and 
the year before. We can see the damage that they have done 
because the highway was not constructed to handle the load that 
they’re taking. It has nothing to do with the farmers that will be 
sending large amounts of grain down that highway. 
 
Is your department assessing the roads in terms of primary and 
secondary highways, in terms of trying to get a handle around 
what highways can actually take the kind of weights that the 
department is allowing on them now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you for those comments. 
First, the comment about the temporary patching that was done 
a few years ago and the temporary patching that is done now, 
and that can happen certainly. But what the member may not 
realize is that our system of deep patching now where we take a 
complete section of road right out to the base and all and 
replace it takes fairly modern equipment and more than one 
person. And that’s what we’d like and do as we go along. But  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

we often have to do temporary patches until such a time that we 
can in fact get to a more serious type of patching like a deep 
patch. 
 
You’re right. Things in rural Saskatchewan are changing 
dramatically. We have the grain system changing, the grain 
elevator consolidation, the use of anhydrous. We have now I 
think, in most cases, farms getting larger. In a spring like this 
spring in particular, where there was a lot of rain, everything 
was in a rush. The roads, you know, had to take that pressure, 
that’s for sure. Now we have a lot of farmers with B-trains, 
with large, large trucks. 
 
What we’ve done in the south-west is a pilot project. It’s a 
transportation council. There’s over a hundred municipalities 
involved with the Department of Highways to look at priorizing 
the transportation needs in that particular region. Part of that is 
looking at the possibility of designating certain roads for truck 
traffic and that sort of thing. That will develop over the next 
while and I believe that there is a lot of possibilities in that kind 
of a concept. There is no large pot of money at the end of the 
rainbow. So what we have to do now in order to have a 
transportation system for the 21st century, that works for our 
particular situation, is look at new ideas. 
 
I think you were in the House this afternoon when I announced 
the partnership with a forestry company. Those are some of the 
new initiatives that we have to look at in order to have a 
suitable transportation system in Saskatchewan for the 21st 
century. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, my 
final questions or comments around the area that you just 
discussed, and that is a national and a provincial transportation 
system. My questions to you, Mr. Minister, are you working 
with the federal department of transportation in terms of not 
only determining highway systems that need improving, that 
need changing, but also in terms of working with the railway 
companies, in terms of understanding what that map will look 
like in the year 2005, to try to figure out indeed where our 
railway lines will be. 
 
We know that there will be some restructuring and we have had 
constituents of course that are questioning where the railway 
lines will be located. Because they want to know whether or not 
there will be a highway that will be able to accommodate the 
trucking that you’ve indicated. And I wonder whether or not 
you’re working with the federal government in terms of trying 
to determine the plan that we will see. 
 
Because I think if we approach this in a very segmented kind of 
way, we will never have that strategy in terms of developing the 
proper transportation system for the year 2000. It’s just not 
going to happen. 
 
I recall someone in the wintertime I think, said that, you know, 
the best way in Saskatchewan to save the roads is to ensure that 
all farmers could ship their grain between December 1 and 
March 31 and take advantage of the frozen road conditions, and 
then we’d never have a problem with resurfacing. 
 

Well that’s not reality. I mean unless we have every grain 
company in the world willing to abide by that fact. But that’s 
not reality. So I guess I’m interested in hearing your comments 
about whether or not we’re looking at this in a more national 
approach, a more global approach, in terms of the railway lines, 
the highway system, and of course the grid road system. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’ll start sort of from the last 
comments and move forward. The timing of hauling, a very 
interesting concept  perhaps we could haul more of our grain 
to the elevators in the wintertime. Well that might not be that 
bad an idea. And we have talked with the Canadian Wheat 
Board, for an example, at perhaps, you know thinking of that, 
where possible at least, and so that’s not entirely out of the 
question. 
 
As far as working with the federal government, I guess what I 
would say is we have tried, and we have tried very hard. We 
made a presentation to the Standing Committee on 
Transportation in regard to Bill C-14, and what that Bill does of 
course is deregulate the rail industry, certainly giving more 
power to the railroads, allowing them to abandon lines much 
faster, but we got absolutely no response from the federal 
government. There was no amendments made to the Act. 
 
We also  three prairie provinces again, the Highways 
ministers from each of those  made a presentation to the 
Senate Standing Committee on Transportation. Again, the same 
thing. 
 
We asked the federal government to participate with us in a 
national highways program. We have a national highways 
network that all provinces and territories sat down and 
determined back in 1987. In Saskatchewan, some of those roads 
that are included in the national highways program are Highway 
No. 1, Highway No. 16, Highway No. 11, for example. 
 
What we thought is we could have a permanent program, a 
50/50 cost-sharing program, that in fact we could improve those 
roads. If we could do that, then we would have more money 
internally for other roads. If you look at the United States, their 
national highways program is funded 80 per cent by their 
federal government, 20 per cent by the state. 
 
But it didn’t happen. The federal government has refused to 
participate. 
 
We did get a little bit of money, and we are working with the 
federal government in regards to the little bit of transition 
money that Saskatchewan’s going to get because of the 
cancellation of the Crow. There’s $84 million that will come to 
the province of Saskatchewan  $20 million this year. 
 
The first 10 million will go unconditionally to the rural 
municipalities; 5 million will go to municipal roads, and that 
will be cost shared between the federal government and the 
municipality; and the province will get $5 million. 
 
Now these roads will be basically agriculture roads that are to a  



2610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

new elevator or to an elevator, and there is some concern with 
what will happen to the road. The problem I guess with that, is 
that we get $5 million this year, but we have identified roads 
that would likely qualify for that funding in the neighbourhood 
of $165 million. So it’s not going to be very much but it will be 
a little bit of help. 
 
The committee will be made up of three federal representatives, 
two provincial representatives, two SARM representatives, and 
one SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
representative. This committee will be set up in the very near 
future, and then we’ll pick the projects that are most suited to 
the rules of the program. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 
points. As you’re probably aware, Mr. Minister, I’ve been 
harping away on the road issues in this Legislative Assembly 
since the day I walked in, and certainly I want to make sure that 
I’m harping on it the last couple days that the session is on. 
 
And for the benefit of your officials, I’ll indicate the roads in 
my constituency that are in very, very poor conditions. First of 
all . . . And there were also promises made, I remind the 
minister, that Garson Lake would have a road. There was 
promises made that this road would be built  30 kilometres. 
Patuanak  80 kilometres . . . to repair, to repair these roads. 
Dillon  60 kilometres, again to repair this road. And Turner 
Lake  30 kilometres. 
 
Those have never been done. The road to Garson Lake was 
never built. And certainly these roads were never repaired. And 
as I mentioned to you on a number of occasions, Mr. Minister, 
in terms of the ruts, of the wash-outs, and of the washboards 
and all the poor maintenance of the roads, that we often find 
that 3,200 Saskatchewan people are often stranded as a result of 
the poor conditions of these roads. 
 
And in this day and age, I feel it is totally unacceptable, 
especially in the fact that you have the . . . there’s medical 
emergencies, and these people can’t get through with 4x4’s. 
Then obviously something is critically wrong somewhere. 
 
Will the minister please address this problem and commit to 
replacing these trails called roads and follow through on those 
promises made to the people of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for the 
question, and certainly realize that some of the roads in the 
North, as some of the roads in the South, are in a condition that 
we would certainly like to see improved. 
 
But I want to just mention that the roads that you talked about, 
Garson Lake gravel road cost $1.2 million to upgrade. Turner 
Lake road, 1.8 million. Dillon, a sealed granular road would be 
$5.5 million. Patuanak, sealed granular, $8.6 million. Pinehouse 
road, gravel, $4.8 million. Canoe Lake road, $3 million. For a 
total of about $26 million for 300 kilometres. 
 
Now take a look at that and then take a look at what we’ve done  

to this point. Grandmother’s Bay access, certainly a partnership 
with Indian and Northern Affairs and the Saskatchewan 
government. The improvements to 102, 905, which again is a 
partnership with the mining companies. The commitment of 
$1.5 million to the Athabasca road; 965, the Canoe Lake road, 
which we are proceeding with; $6 million . . . well $2 million 
provincially for the Cumberland bridge; and there are others. 
 
What I am trying to say I guess, is we would like to do them 
right now but, you know, you only have so much money to 
work with. So what you have to try and do is, do a little at a 
time. Certainly I will be in Turnor Lake on the 24th of this 
month. The executive director of the department for the 
northern area was up there this past week. We have to try and 
look at ways of maintaining those roads as best we can until 
such a time that in fact we can make the improvements 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. Just in reference to 
some of the things that the Department of Highways receives in 
terms of the road tax. I understand the partnerships that are 
starting to form and also the . . . Is there running rights on these 
roads? Like do companies like NRT (Northern Resource 
Trucking) pay certain fees and dues to the province? And in 
terms of all the different revenues that you do get as a 
provincial government, specifically for the highways program, 
where are these monies coming from and what are these 
amounts, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We haven’t got that broken down but 
it’s in the vicinity of a million dollars and it’s not with . . . NRT 
does not pay but Cameco pays on that partnership. But I could 
get you the exact figure if that would be helpful, but I can’t give 
it to you tonight because they’re all together here. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess that would also have the other types, 
of either the partnerships, or the road tax income and all that as 
well. Am I to expect that from you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We can give you a breakdown of the 
partnerships, but fuel tax of course has got nothing to do with 
Highways. Fuel tax goes to general revenue and makes up part 
of the funding of health care and education and social programs 
and roads and all of that. So that’s a separate issue, and you 
would have to ask the Minister of Finance for the amount of 
fuel tax that the province receives. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Several years ago, SUMA put 
together a plan to begin the process of urban government 
renewal. I believe that they established a task force, and they 
also came out with a report. And if my memory serves me 
correctly, Mr. Minister, there was a proposal in there in which 
the municipalities would participate in generating revenues to 
assist in fixing up these roads. 
 
And again if my memory serves me correctly  and many 
times it hasn’t, so I may be way off here  but I understood 
that SUMA proposed a $20 fee on each licence, the licence 
plates of each vehicle, to assist in that effort. Have you ever had 
any type of suggestion made to you? And what has been the 
general response to issues of that nature? 



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2611 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well most people in Saskatchewan, I 
think believe  and it’s my understanding that they believe  
that probably we’re taxed pretty much already. They understand 
that we have interest on our debt and our debt to pay down, and 
so they believe that another form of taxation or a tax wouldn’t 
be appropriate at this time. 
 
They would sooner us look at other solutions like partnership, 
like internal efficiencies within the department, like working 
much closer with other levels of government, rural 
municipalities and urban municipalities, so that the limited 
funds that we do have can be spent more wisely. So no, I have 
not had any request for a fee on licences as a road fee. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  May I suggest, Mr. Minister, that one of your 
officials from your department get a copy of that and see 
exactly what the proposal spoke about, and there’s some pretty 
interesting concepts and discussions on how the urban 
governments can, for the final time, have some say and have 
some direct benefits in terms of getting some of these roads 
fixed. They are the source of a lot of information, a lot of good 
ideas and suggestions. And I think we have to pay much more 
attention to efforts of organizations like SARM and SUMA. 
 
I just wanted to share with you, again going back to the road 
issues in my constituency  and I spoke to you about the five 
roads that I feel are very important, or the six roads rather  
well I want to share with you a letter from the mayor of Turnor 
Lake, John L. Montgrand. And I’ll quote: 
 

The present road conditions leading into Turnor Lake 
needs immediate attention on upgrading and construction. 
The road in its present condition is putting our people in a 
dangerous position. Accidents are waiting to happen. 
 
We would like you to investigate into this matter regarding 
the road with the Minister of Transportation and Highways 
and to discuss possible measures to ensure the upgrading 
and construction needed will occur this summer. Please 
advise John L. Montgrand on this important matter. Thank 
you. Sincerely, Mayor Montgrand. 
 

And that concludes the letter. I’ll send a copy of this letter over 
to you if I can have the assistance of one of the pages, and you 
can certainly respond to Mayor Montgrand on that matter. 
 
Mayor Montgrand’s point is very clear. The people of Turnor 
Lake have waited long enough for this road to be fixed. They 
are Saskatchewan people and I urge  and I strongly urge  
you as the minister responsible to do the basic, decent thing and 
that is to get that road fixed. 
 
The other fact is we look at the Canoe Lake road. What is the 
cost of that road and when is the completion date, when you 
spoke about the Canoe Lake road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The cost of the Canoe Lake road from 
Highway No. 155 to Highway No. 903, 49 kilometres, about $5 
million. 
 
And I just want to add to that, based on your comments about  

working very closely with SARM and SUMA. I meet regularly 
with both SARM and SUMA. We have a good working 
relationship. We are working right now on railway crossing 
safety. Certainly we talk about roads so we’re working together 
as an adviser and on technical advice to the proposal to 
purchase grain cars. We are working with SARM very closely 
with the regional concept of deciding priorities for road 
expenditures. We’ve worked very closely with the different 
municipal governments on many, many different issues. 
 
And I want to say about Turnor Lake road, I did meet with a 
group of people at a meeting with the chiefs of the Meadow 
Lake Tribal Council less than a month ago, I would say, now. 
They certainly . . . they had the opportunity to give me some 
pictures of their road. We had a very good meeting, a very open 
meeting. The executive director, Stu Armstrong, was in the 
community this past week, and I am going to Turnor Lake on 
June 24 to meet with the community. And certainly we’re going 
to have to look at perhaps maintenance solutions until such a 
time that we can upgrade the road there. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I just have about three or four 
more questions left on three or four different roads. In reference 
to the Grandmother’s Bay road, how many kilometres were 
built, at what cost, and who shared in these costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The total length of the road is 11.7 
kilometres; there are 2.63 kilometres being on the Indian 
reserve land. That portion is 100 per cent funded by Indian 
affairs and northern development The remainder is funded 
under the infrastructure program, so there is one-third by the 
federal government and two-thirds by the provincial 
government. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So there is a road to Grandmother’s Bay and 
what is the total cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We don’t have the cost, but I will 
certainly get that for you. And we don’t have that information 
here this evening. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, and I’ll be certainly waiting for 
the information, Mr. Minister. As well, if you can for me, also 
the Canoe Lake road, whether there is some infrastructure 
dollars or whether there’s some industry dollars attached to that 
development of that particular road? 
 
And as well, the Black Lake road, as to what costs are being 
covered by the federal government, versus the provincial 
government, versus industry in general? And in particular with 
the Black Lake road, could you also advise me of the total 
kilometres that are going to be built and how much the province 
is contributing to that road? I’m understanding it is a 
significantly long road and the province has only contributed 
$1.5 million. Is this correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The total projected costs of the tote 
road. First of all, it’s 190 kilometres in length from Points 
North to Black Lake. We believe we can have a tote road for  



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

about $8 million. Canadian Coast Guard, as you know, are not 
participating in the dredging to give access to barge service, and 
so that money will be transferred to this road and we estimate 
that to be $5 million. INAC (Indian and Northern Affairs 
Canada) is willing to put up $1.5 million. The province is 
willing to put up $1.5 million plus contingencies, which we 
believe could equal our original contribution of $1.5 million. 
Plus you have to remember that the maintenance is our 
responsibility and the liability on that maintenance could be, 
you know, easily equal to contributions from other sectors. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. In looking at some of 
the situations with the Black Lake road, with the Canoe Lake 
road, with the Grandmother’s Bay road, with the Cumberland 
House bridge, you tally up the total amount of dollars. Is it a 
fair assumption to make, Mr. Minister, the federal government, 
through their infrastructure program, and industry, through their 
needs to use these roads, have basically outspent the province in 
terms of road maintenance in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly we appreciate the federal 
government’s help on many of these roads. Many of the roads, 
you must understand, serve reserve communities and so we 
believe that there certainly is federal responsibility. In fact 
probably a lot more responsibility than they’re willing to accept. 
 
But we’re certainly willing to partner with them because there 
are other advantages to the roads for the province of 
Saskatchewan, like development of mining and forestry, and 
access for tourists, and certainly access for the communities in 
the North to the southern part of the province. 
 
So we try and work in partnership and it’s been working 
reasonably well. Certainly it would be nice to get more from the 
federal government and we could just do a lot of those roads 
just a lot quicker. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So I guess I’m to assume then, Mr. Minister, 
in the response, that yes, through INAC, and through the federal 
government contribution, and through the private industry 
sector, that they have indeed outspent the province significantly 
in terms of construction of roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I haven’t got the breakdown but 
certainly that will be very interesting to look at. But you have to 
understand that the maintenance of those roads, even though the 
federal government may contribute something to the 
construction, is certainly an ongoing expense and often much 
higher than the actual construction. So we take that 
responsibility. So we have to take that into consideration when 
we’re doing that estimate. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a couple of 
other points in reference to the most significant problem that we 
have at this point in time is the road conditions. Certainly we 
look at the long-term solution you speak about  eventually 
fixing these roads and constructing them on a properly basis . . . 
on a proper basis, be it for Pinehouse or Patuanak or Dillon or 
Turnor Lake or Garson Lake. I can certainly appreciate what 
you’re trying to do here. But the fact of the matter immediately,  

at this point in time, these roads must be maintained with 
greater energy. 
 
And I was just wondering, for that particular region, what type 
of budget allocation have you had in the previous years from 
the highest year to the lowest year in terms of budgets for the 
west side, which is of course Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, 
Pinehouse area. 
 
It would be interesting to see what was your largest allocation 
in one given year versus your lowest allocation in recent years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The figures I will give you are probably 
very close to exact. The average provincial expenditure on 
5,600 kilometres of gravel network in the province is $1,300 
per kilometre for surface maintenance. On the Dillon road in 
1995  well that’s when we took the average annual cost  it 
was $86,972 or $1,478 per kilometre. Pinehouse was $86,323 
 about $1,754 per kilometre. Turnor Lake road was $58,017 
for $1,933 per kilometre; and Patuanak was $126,364 or $1,367 
per kilometre. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m just one massively 
confused MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) here. It 
seems the more you put into these roads the worse they get. 
 
You look at the comparison of Pinehouse and you look at . . . it 
goes from 1,478 and to another community that has roads that 
are in worse shape it goes up to 1,754. And you go to Turnor 
Lake and it has probably one of the worst roads in the 
province’s history  it’s up to $1,933 per kilometre. If all this 
money’s being allocated to these roads on a per kilometre basis, 
why is it that we’re having continual road problems? What is 
the problem here? And what is the portion of cost in relation to 
material versus salaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you for the question. The member 
I think has been on some of those roads and I have, and in some 
cases there is not much of a base. They’re built through some 
tough country  swamps and whatever have you. 
 
So the maintenance costs are high  there’s no question about 
that. And I haven’t got the breakdown today but I will try and 
get the breakdown of materials to labour. And I’m not sure if 
we can . . . We should be able to do that, and I can try and do 
that for you. 
 
And you also have to know that, in certain areas at least, 
moisture conditions have been unusual in the past couple of 
years and winters have been a bit unusual. So we’ve had 
considerable amount of concern with that. 
 
I know in my area, for instance, in the Red Earth-Shoal Lake 
area, we’ve had a lot of floods coming off the Pasquia Hills, 
and certainly that has caused a lot of extra damage in the last 
few years that really for the 10 previous years we didn’t have. 
So it’s just, you know, some unusual circumstances. 
 
Certainly the base of the roads are . . . Many times, like, the 
road is flat and actually almost below the sides of the roads;  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

like there is no built-up base so maintenance costs are certainly 
high on some of those northern roads for sure. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay. I guess the situation that we have  
and this is probably my last question; I certainly appreciate the 
time constraints we’re under  and I guess the one issue that I 
have, Mr. Minister, is to really ask you to investigate thoroughly 
with your department as to how these roads continue to get 
worse and worse. And why is it that . . . You know, I strongly 
believe when I made the statement that 10 yards of gravel for a 
kilometre, I believe, it’s what they’re using now to maintain 
these roads. 
 
And you’ve also got equipment up there; you’ve got manpower, 
but what . . . if your department hasn’t got the proper material 
to do any work, then obviously we’re not doing our job to 
maintain these roads. 
 
So can you assure me that — this evening — that you will 
undertake a very thorough examination of how these roads are 
being maintained so at the very least, if there is 1,700 or 1,900 
per kilometre being allocated for northern roads, then these 
roads should be built up and getting better and better, but 
they’re getting worse and worse. So where could the problem 
be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I guess the worse a road gets the 
more you have to maintain it. And I guess that’s why your costs 
go up in that situation. And I mentioned of course the condition 
. . . or the weather conditions in the last while too. 
 
So I just want to reinforce that we have a commitment to the 
North. This government has as strong commitment to the North. 
I am personally visiting Turnor Lake. I have personally visited 
already other communities like Buffalo Narrows and Patuanak 
and intend to work with the communities to try and get as best 
maintenance service that we can provide until such a time that 
we can in fact reconstruct some roads. 
 
There’s a lot of other areas, like Waterhen, that we’re looking at 
right now. There are a lot of other needs besides the 
communities that you mention in the North, and certainly will 
always be a priority with this government. 
 
But as the member will know, it would be nice to do everything 
at once, but of course that’s just not reality. So we just have to 
do as best we can and as fast as we can under the 
circumstances. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a final few 
points I wish to make, is that we have to make sure that we look 
at the situation with having the communities have more of an 
input as to how often you want to see some of these graders on 
the road and what type of gravel, or how much gravel, they 
need for these roads. 
 
And many times the mayors and councillors of these 
communities that are impacted and affected by poor road and 
the maintenance problems really don’t have a say. They can  

pick up their phone and they can phone their regional manager 
and say, our road needs more gravel, but basically there is 
nothing that the person will do because of the budget problems. 
 
In essence, what I’m asking you to do is to instruct your 
officials and instruct your department in Buffalo Narrows and 
other depots to have a lot more respect and allow the 
communities to have input into determining how these roads 
should be maintained. 
 
Some of the communities say, well perhaps they’re trying to 
grade too fast. Perhaps they should have a grader station here. 
Perhaps they should subcontract the road maintenance to us. 
Perhaps they should allocate more gravel to this particular area. 
This kind of input is very valuable, and I think it’s just a decent 
way of showing that their opinion does matter. 
 
So in that regard, I think that there should be more emphasis 
and cooperation extended to northern mayors and northern 
chiefs when it comes to the maintenance of these roads. These 
roads are very vital links; there’s no question about it. They 
have to get them fixed. The taxi operators are complaining; the 
vehicle owners are complaining that many of these vehicles 
deteriorate and they depreciate at such an alarming rate because 
of the poor road conditions. 
 
And these are the people that are Saskatchewan people; they’re 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. And yet we see that their vehicles 
probably have half the life of a southern vehicle. So the 
maintenance cost and the deterioration of the vehicles really is 
also a major issue. So I would encourage you to hear those 
concerns and I would encourage you to address those concerns 
and certainly consult with as many people as you can. And have 
your staff and certainly your regional directors respect the 
opinions and the positions of mayors and northern chiefs when 
it comes to matters of good road maintenance. 
 
So in closing I sincerely thank you for your time, and also your 
officials. And over the next couple of years we certainly look 
with a lot of anticipation as to what is being done to improve 
the roads to Garson Lake, to Canoe Lake, to Pinehouse, to 
Patuanak, to Turner Lake, and certainly to Dillon. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to say one word before . . . I just 
want to commend our staff. I think our crews are excellent. Our 
staff in the Department of Highways do the very best they can 
under whatever circumstances they deal with. I have great faith 
in them. Can we improve our services in the North? I don’t 
know, but we’re certainly going to look at it. Can we locate a 
grader, perhaps, in a different location to improve that service? 
We’re going to take a look at that just to see if there is 
something that we can do to improve that service. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m, as 
you well know, quite interested in the No. 368 situation, and I 
understand that there will be some work done on that highway. 
And I understand that it was going to be starting this summer. 
I’m just wondering if you can tell me when that work, that 
upgrading, will begin? 
 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  There is no major restructuring of 368 
this year. There will be spot maintenance and preservation 
projects on 368. That will be tendered in the very near future, it 
is my understanding. So we’ll be starting fairly shortly. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I guess there’s always been some confusion or 
question about the commitment that you’ve made to that 
highway. It was my understanding that there would be 
definitely some upgrading in the very low spots, so I guess 
whether you call that spot maintenance or upgrading is maybe a 
misunderstanding on my part. But there was an article in our 
paper that in fact some substantial upgrading would be done on 
that. And I think we did have pretty firm commitment from 
some of your directors. 
 
Okay, so could you just tell me once again when it will begin. I 
missed that for some reason. I don’t think you committed to that 
either, but I’d like to know because the people out there are 
quite curious on when this is going to begin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It is my understanding the spot 
improvements was the commitment, and so there will be 
sections that will be . . . some of the low spots will be done. 
That tender will be let out within the next week or two, and so 
shortly after that the work will begin. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’ve 
noticed that some work has been done on No. 20 Highway from 
No. 11 to Lanigan. It’s really very nice to see that done. It looks 
to me as though it’s been an oil and gravel surfacing. But in the 
member from Watrous’s constituency, it doesn’t look like he’s 
been lobbying you that much because from Lanigan to 
Humboldt No. 20 is really very terrible. I’m just wondering if 
there is some consideration by the department in also fixing up 
that stretch of the highway in the same fashion that it was done 
between No. 11 and Lanigan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I happened to have quite an 
experience in Humboldt the other day. I was going down to 
Watrous to a meeting, and of course the train was crossing in 
front of the . . . across where you go through Humboldt south to 
20. And my wife decided that I should drive, so we’re in the 
traffic line, and we both got out of the car at the same time. And 
when the doors closed, of course they were locked. So we had 
an exciting time in Humboldt. 
 
And then we did drive south on that particular road. And 
basically it was fairly good. There were some spots certainly 
that were broken up in the spring. We have no plans for to 
upgrade that road at this time. Certainly there will be patching 
and maintenance on it. 
 
We also have some hope that maybe that would be one of the 
highways that would be considered under the limited funds that 
the federal government is giving to the province in regards to 
grain transportation routes. So if in fact it would qualify under 
that program or be sort of a priority, there is some possibilities 
there. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while you 
were telling some stories about your travels on the highways,  

that same stretch of road, that No. 20 Highway, close to Burr, 
when I went home last weekend, I had quite an experience on 
that highway. And I thought maybe it was your government’s 
strategy to be able to make use of all of its natural resources and 
to kill two birds with one stone and fix whatever we could with 
what we have. 
 
In fact, it was night time and I was driving along and there was 
. . . I noticed in front of me, right across my side of the 
highway, sort of a white . . . it looked like a piece of cardboard 
or something. And I thought maybe also that it was gravel that 
had been thrown in the holes to patch them. But what it really 
was, was it was one of the many, many deer that are plaguing 
our country right now laying inside of the big hole in the 
highway, and it looked as though it were there for patching 
purposes. So I hit the deer and my car kind of really went 
flying, and I was wondering why anyone would have left this 
animal in the middle of the highway. But none the less, maybe 
we can mulch those deer up  there’s too many of them 
anyway  and use them for patching the holes in the highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, a little more on the serious side here. You’re 
talking about the money from the federal government, the 
transition money is $84 million. Am I correct that you’re going 
to be using that all for highways here or . . . it’s for 
infrastructure. What portion of that will be used, or have you 
calculated that yet, for highway maintenance and upgrading? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well basically we know what the first 
year will be, and that’s this year, and the federal government 
has said there will be $20 million coming to the province of 
Saskatchewan of the 84.6 million. 
 
The $20 million will be used in this way, I believe. Ten million 
dollars will go to rural municipalities unconditionally, so they 
will be able to use those funds as they wish. So SARM will I 
guess develop a system as to how much each rural municipality 
will receive from the $10 million. 
 
There will be $5 million that rural municipalities and urban 
municipalities can use on rural and urban roads. The province 
will get $5 million for highways. And basically the criteria, as I 
understand it at this time, is that it would have to be spent on a 
road infrastructure that has something to do with the loss of the 
Crow or elevator consolidation or rail line abandonment. 
 
And there is an eight-member committee that will decide the 
spending of that $10 million  the 5 million provincial, the 5 
million municipal. There are three federal members on the 
committee; there are two provincial members on the committee; 
there are two representatives from the rural municipalities; and 
there is one representative from SUMA. This committee will 
then I guess choose from the applications that come in from the 
municipalities, which will get the funding and which will not. 
 
And so we will have to wait until the committee is in place and 
in fact some of the decisions are made, to know exactly which 
roads will be accepted. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one more question. 
Considering the value that I think every person in this province  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2615 

puts on good highways for our own use and also for safety and 
for tourism, etc., I’m just wondering whether or not your 
government has considered taking any unexpected revenues that 
it may have coming in, that weren’t projected in the budget, 
such as the 25 million from the potash dividends, and putting 
that into highways and upgrading. It’s certainly an area that I 
think most people would agree, overall most people in the 
province would agree that it would be some of that money well 
spent. Has there been any consideration about using these extra 
monies in that way? 
 
(2200) 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. A point has 
been made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well first of all, we hope that there is a 
balanced budget, and in fact the surplus that we’ve planned is 
$8 million. If it’s more than that, that would be great. But we 
have always, as a government, said that surpluses would be 
used in the following fashion: one-third to reduce the debt, 
one-third for targeted tax relief, and one-third for enhancing 
services. 
 
So, you know, depending on what happens at the end of the 
year, I hope that the economy does what I think it will do. We’ll 
have a great year in agriculture. We’ll have a great year in 
potash and uranium sales and oil revenue, and in fact we will 
have a bigger surplus than what we expect  at least I’m 
hoping. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Okay, we’ve 
gone on with highways for quite awhile and most of the talk 
about potholes, potholes, full of deer, railways, and hauling 
grain and those sorts of things. 
 
The one thing that hasn’t come up very often  and I’d like to 
put some emphasis in that tonight  is the safety aspect and 
specifically Highway 11. I’m sure your officials have the stats 
there, the people that have been killed or maimed on that 
highway, and they’re really quite high. It’s one of the more 
dangerous stretches in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now admittedly there is a certain stretch that is being twinned, 
and I think that’s going to take a lot of the pressure off of the 
traffic going from Saskatoon to a number of the communities 
immediately north of Saskatoon. However, if you check your 
instances of fatal accidents and serious accidents on that 
highway going right up into the constituency from Shellbrook, 
Shell Lake area . . . And maybe the member from there needs to 
stick up for his MacDowall and Duck Lake friends as well . . . 
been a number of deaths in that area as well. 
 
And I’m wondering what the Department of Highways has in 
place there, not necessarily for twinning, although we would 
like that, but other possible safety measures from acceleration 
lanes, deceleration lanes, and all those sorts of things because in 
my community we’ve had fatal accidents at every intersection 
that leads from the highway into town, as well as people who 
are now paraplegic and those sorts of things. So it’s been a 
rather sad story. 

So what are the long-term plans to get a more of a safe aspect to 
that stretch of highway? Especially now with summer coming 
and it being a very high tourist area, chances of more fatalities 
are very high. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I guess it would be nice to twin 
every road in the province of Saskatchewan. I know we have 
No. 1 for instance, which is the Trans-Canada, which goes very 
near the MLA that sits next to you. And the cost of twinning 
No. 1 is about in the neighbourhood of $80 million to do the 
section from Gull Lake to the Alberta border and from Indian 
Head to the Manitoba border. 
 
We have Highway No. 16 from North Battleford to Marshall  
that’s another neighbourhood of $42 million if you count the 
cost of going through the city of North Battleford. Highway 11 
 I do not have the cost but I know it would be up there as 
well. If you look at traffic counts, Highway 1 and 16 are a little 
higher than No. 11. 
 
The highest traffic count on No. 11 is the section that we’re 
twinning, from Warman in. The twinning of 11 is not on our list 
for the immediate future. And I’ll be quite frank with you, I 
believe No. 1 and 16 would have priority to 11. 
 
I know fatalities are a concern; any fatality is a concern. I know 
on Highway 3, right near Tisdale, we’ve had three fatalities on a 
very straight road, wonderful highway; it’s not twinned, but it 
happens. And I know we like to blame roads all the time and we 
believe that twinning would certainly help, and I believe it 
would, but we still have to, I guess, live within our means and 
urge as much caution by motorists as possible. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At least the 
Minister of Highways will remember where we’re from. 
 
Minister, it’s good to see you again. Good to see your officials. 
I want to welcome you and your officials here this evening. And 
I want to say that it is mixed feelings that I have to be here 
discussing highways with you. 
 
Of course I’m always happy to have the opportunity to discuss 
the problems of highways in a question and answer atmosphere, 
and we’ve done this many times before. Most folks will know 
that I’ve been the critic for Highways for the official opposition 
up until the election, and I guess our leader must have thought 
that I asked enough questions about Highways that he thought I 
should do it again, so here I am as the Highway critic for our 
party once again. 
 
So a lot of the things that we will talk about will be nothing 
new between me and you, but they probably still will be 
interesting to the general public because the problems largely 
still remain. 
 
I don’t think I can hold you personally responsible for the 
problems that we have with our roads because the problems that 
you have, I think, stem from the general revenue concept of 
your government, and that principle is probably something that 
you can’t do much about as an individual. However, I would 
encourage you to do that. 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

I guess in all seriousness, Minister, I have to say that while the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs, in terms of technical matters, is 
in more trouble than you are and probably should be the next 
minister to leave the cabinet. She won’t be, because the impact 
in the general community of what she does to people in her 
portfolio, is not going to be felt for some time and will be 
diffused, of course, by time and circumstance. 
 
Whereas you yourself, having a rather a small portfolio in terms 
of the number of dollars, are basically right on the line because 
highways are something that everybody drives on almost every 
day. And there isn’t a person probably in Saskatchewan that 
doesn’t have a friend or a relative that has either been injured or 
killed on one of our highways in the last few years. 
 
In fact there is a sad saying that goes around out in our area 
now and that is that our roads are now paved with coffins. And 
that’s a sad scenario for a province as rich as ours. That’s a very 
sad scenario when you take a look at the financial statements 
that we have. 
 
And I’ve been looking through the financial statements and the 
amounts of money that you’ve got to spend, and when I 
compare that with the amounts of money that you’ve had to 
spend in years gone by, and then I compare that with the 
amounts of money that other portfolios and other areas of the 
government have to spend, I can only arrive at one conclusion. 
And that is that you are not getting your share of money to 
spend on behalf of your portfolio. 
 
You have somehow allowed your cabinet to give you a 
portfolio without the dollars that are necessary not only to 
preserve your job and integrity but to preserve the lives and 
safety of the people of this province and the people that travel 
into it. 
 
It is a sad scenario, Minister, when people in provinces like 
Ontario start to tell us that they advertise to their travellers not 
to drive through Saskatchewan, when they tell people that it 
would be better to drive through the United States instead of 
coming through Saskatchewan. We have to somehow, Minister, 
improve that image, and I think only you can do that. 
 
There is a lot of things that you could do; there are choices that 
can be made. And I have to say though that I’m glad to have 
heard your comments that No. 1 Highway is one that has to get 
priority in terms of roads that need to be fixed and when they 
get fixed. And we can respect the need to do things over a 
period of time. However, it will never get done if you never get 
started. And right now you haven’t started. And that’s the 
position that people view it as. 
 
I don’t think that next to health care I hear as many complaints 
about anything in your government and probably all of them put 
together as I do about highways. Now maybe that’s because I’m 
the critic and naturally they would let me know. But on the 
other hand, when you get 50 miles away from Regina, a lot of 
people don’t know I’m the critic, so then you have to take that 
into the balance of the thing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the folks out there come to me and they say,  

why don’t we fix our highways? What’s the problem? It seems 
like the government has a lot of money. We hear they’ve got a 
5.2-or-some billion dollars of a budget. It seems like a lot of 
money. Where’s all this money going? And that’s the question. 
Where is the money going? 
 
Well I try to explain to them but I’m not in a position where I 
really feel I should defend your government. But I do try to 
explain to them that you have this pooling arrangement and that 
you sort of take from the general revenue. Because they always 
follow up with: how come . . . oh they’re collecting all this gas 
tax. How come that goes up all the time? Why is it that this 
money from the gas tax isn’t being spent on the roads? And I 
try to explain to them again, well the government has made the 
decision. 
 
Well they don’t really care about that answer any more, Mr. 
Minister. Quite frankly, they’re tired of listening to the same old 
answers, whether I give them or you do. And I’m really kind of 
tired of trying to defend your position because it is not 
defensible any longer. 
 
So I guess in order to allow you the chance to defend yourself 
instead of me trying to do it, I’m going to have to ask you a few 
questions that will give you the opportunity to go on the record 
to try to defend the way you do things. 
 
And I’ll go to that gas tax because that becomes the first 
question that people always ask. So how many millions of 
dollars do you collect for the gas tax in this province? And why 
do you, and how do you explain to people that you no longer 
use that tax money in order to pay for the road construction and 
maintenance programs which it originally was intended to be 
for? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thanks to the member opposite for his 
statements and finally his question. As I mentioned earlier, gas 
tax is collected by the . . . and it goes into General Revenue 
Fund as does oil royalties, as mining royalties, as general 
taxation goes into general revenue. 
 
And as the member would be aware when we opened the books 
just after we were elected, the Gass Commission stated that this 
is the way governments should operate  that revenues should 
go into general revenue. Then the government determines how 
much it will spend on health care, education, social programs, 
agriculture, highways, etc., etc. That’s what this government 
does. That’s what every government does. That’s what the 
Alberta government does. That’s what the Manitoba 
government does. That’s what the federal government does. 
And certainly that’s the way it should be. 
 
The member mentioned Ontario, suggesting that they don’t . . . 
somebody in Ontario, The Globe and Mail I guess, that they not 
travel into Saskatchewan. Well, I do have an editorial here that I 
believe was Globe and Mail. And it says: 
 

Ontario’s roads are among the worse. Though roads in the 
East rank among the country’s most dangerous. Mr.  



June 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2617 

Facette believes Saskatchewan/Manitoba need help more 
desperately with the closing of rail lines in western Canada 
the loads on the roads are far more than they were designed 
for. 

 
So what I’m trying to tell the member opposite is that road 
concerns are not only in Saskatchewan but across the country. 
Another statement in the Globe and Mail that I read recently 
stated that “the Devine administration was actually the worst 
ever in Canadian history.” And I think it goes back to the 
spending that the Conservatives did in the ‘80s and in fact a 
debt that was created that costs us $850 million every year in 
interest. 
 
With that money, certainly could have been used, some of it at 
least, for improving our highway infrastructure, but we can’t 
cry over spilt milk. We have to deal with the circumstances that 
are here now and I am excited about the challenges. Certainly 
there are new ways of doing things and this will force us to take 
a good hard look at moving into the 21st century with ideas like 
partnerships, like rural municipality, urban municipalities and 
the province working more closely together. Working on new 
technologies like central tire inflation that will reduce damage 
to our fragile road system. 
 
So that’s the way we’re moving and certainly I know we like to 
complain about our road system but we do have a large road 
system. There are problem areas; there is no question about it 
but we do have a lot of good roads. For a province with 3 per 
cent of the Canadian population and 25 per cent of all the roads 
in Canada. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, you have to defend your 
department in your way. And no doubt you will have done that 
many times. But quite frankly, the people of Saskatchewan are 
no longer swallowing your excuse that you can’t fix the roads 
because past administration left you with a problem in 
financing. 
 
It just doesn’t wash anymore. You’ve been in government now 
for the second term, it started already, and responsibilities are 
now yours. And the responsibilities are to tell the truth to the 
people about how the deficit situation in this province really is. 
So why don’t you tell them that really what’s happening is that 
you’re paying $800 million worth of interest on the $8 billion 
deficit; while at the same time your management expert at CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) has a full 
fund of $7 billion that he reports only being able to get a return 
of between of 1 and $200 million on, leaving a $600 million 
loss between the difference. 
 
Now anybody that ever went to high school already can figure 
out that instead of paying $800 million on interest, why don’t 
you borrow your own money from your own asset base and get 
rid of all your other creditors, and you would save yourself 
$600 million. 
 
The management structure of this government is an absolute 
appalling disgrace, and if I were you I wouldn’t even talk about 
it anymore, because the fact of the matter is that you people just 
don’t know how to handle money. As we find the situation  

right now, we’re running into one of the richest times that 
we’ve had in 15 years in this province. The monies are rolling 
in faster than you can probably pour them into the coffers, and 
yet you don’t have any sense of responsibility or knowledge of 
how to manage those funds. 
 
That’s the same problem that happened to the government of 
the late 1970s. The province became so rich and so abundance 
with capital to handle that the government of the day, being an 
NDP government, didn’t have a clue how to handle the 
management. They made such a botch of it that the people 
threw them out and got a government that knew at least how to 
invest money in things like a Saferco plant where there would 
be actually some jobs. 
 
So the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, that if you’re going to 
dwell on trying to make your excuses because of the past and 
past administrations, it isn’t washing any more. I mean, nobody 
believes your figures. Your facts are all phoney. And the reality 
is that the responsibility now rests at your doorstep, and the 
buck stops with you and your government. 
 
The highways are a mess because you’ve chosen to let them be 
a mess because you’ve made choices, conscious decisions, to 
spend the money that you have someplace else. That’s the fact 
of the matter. 
 
You’ve got targeted taxes that you charge people, and you tell 
them, well we’re going to charge you gasoline tax because 
we’ve got to fix roads. We’ve got to have registration money on 
your vehicles because we have to fix roads. Those two were 
targeted for that purpose. You never change that argument, and 
you never change that approach when you talk to the people of 
Saskatchewan when you collect this money. And yet when it 
comes time for taking that money and spending it somewhere, 
you say, oops, now the story’s different. It went into general 
revenue. Somehow it got lost, and we have to split the pie up 
some other way. 
 
You’re not consistent in your discussions of how you handle 
money and manage money, and that’s why your government 
will eventually have to fall because people understand that in 
poor times NDP governments are reasonably good to handle the 
money because there’s nothing to handle, and they can’t make a 
botch of it. But in good times, they don’t know how to handle 
money, and they throw it away and squander it, waste it, lose it, 
and apply it to all the wrong things. And there’s no growth and 
development. It only means stagnation. And that’s why 
socialism never works and can’t work in a prosperous setting in 
the middle of a capitalistic North America. 
 
It has to fail because it’s out of sync with where it’s located, out 
of sync with the reality of the road around it, and it just will not 
last. People of Saskatchewan will soon learn that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I see somebody else wants to get into the 
debate and discuss this, Mr. Minister. 
 
But right now I think I need to talk to you a little bit more about 
the realities of life in our highway system. You’ve talked about 
Highway No. 1, and I appreciate the fact that you mentioned 
that Highway No. 1 is one that has to have priorities because  



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 1996 

certainly if you measure roads in terms of need to be built, on 
the basis of the persons killed per mile, that one certainly has to 
qualify as one of the first ones. Isn’t that a sad scenario when 
we decide in our society that we fix roads only after you kill so 
many people per mile and then you’re going to patch them or 
fix them or rebuild them. That’s a sad thing. 
 
But the good part of this thing is that you have admitted that 
that road is needing to be double-laned. That it is a serious 
problem and we’re glad that you’ve made that admission. 
 
The fact though that you tried to tie with that an excuse not to 
fix it because it could cost $80 million to fix is not going to 
wash either, because even though $80 million is a lot of money 
in my pocket, it’s not a lot of money for the south-west corner 
of Saskatchewan. The oil industry and the gas industry are 
pouring in more than $80 million a year buying leases from 
your government in order to carry on the production and 
exploration for oil and gas. 
 
The leases that you are leasing out to those companies comes to 
many, many millions of dollars more and the people of that area 
are saying quite simply and rightly, if you took even a portion 
of that money and spent it on the roads that those companies 
need to have in order to carry out their business, then you 
wouldn’t have to look any place else in your treasury to find 
those dollars. Simply target back some of the dollars that are 
coming from those areas where they are being spent and put 
them back into the roads that are needed for the industries to 
continue. And you will have your roads built. 
 
It’s a simple matter of you getting into your cabinet and 
winning a few debates and a few arguments and proving to your 
government that your portfolio is one of the ones that is key to 
your government’s survival. And that is how you have to carry 
the argument, because it’s true. Your government will fall on 
simple things like the Department of Highways not getting 
roads fixed. 
 
And it is a simple thing. It’s not a complicated thing. The 
money is there. You have it. It’s not like this province is broke 
any more. Don’t hand us this line that you’re broke. You’re not 
broke. You’ve got tons of money. There’s money running out 
of the ears of this government. You’ve got so much money you 
don’t even know where to put it any more. You’ve got so much 
money in CIC you don’t even know how to invest it to get more 
than one and a half per cent interest return on your money. You 
can’t even get 2 per cent on your return because you’ve got too 
much money to invest and you don’t know where to put it. 
 
Well it’s quite simple, Mr. Minister, that you don’t know how 
to handle money in your government; you’re squandering it, 
you’re wasting it, and it’s high time you woke up and smelled 
the coffee. All you got to do is put that money back into the 
province and you will get your return. Start by building the 
roads so that industry can come into this province and get to 
where they want to do business. Straighten out your tax base as 
well though, because without that and getting rid of some of 
your labour laws, you’re never going to work. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I want to tell you quite simply that there are  

people out in our constituency who are quite happy to take you 
for a drive to show you that they’re not kidding around, they’re 
not just trying to be vindictive, they actually have these 
problems, and they want to take you out and show you. 
 
Ten-year old boy the other day told us that he would like to go 
for a ride in his school bus with you and I. Why don’t we go on 
out there and ride with him? Or are you afraid that your 
insurance won’t cover you? I’m prepared to take the chance. 
I’m prepared to go for a ride on that bus, and I invite you to 
come along. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to come along for a 
ride with us out in the country and ride with some of the school 
kids in this province on the kind of roads and conditions that 
they have to ride on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Chairman, I didn’t get . . . hear the 
question. I wonder if the member would repeat it, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  On what is probably the best 
response of the night, I think it’s time we rose, reported 
progress, and asked for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  

Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................2599 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training  Vote 37  

Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2595 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2595 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2599 

General Revenue Fund  
Loans, Advances and Investments  
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training  Vote 141  

Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2600 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2600 

General Revenue Fund  
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat  Vote 25  

Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................2601 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2601 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2603 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96  
General Revenue Fund  
Budgetary Expense  
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat  Vote 25 ......................................................................................................................2606 
General Revenue Fund  
Highways and Transportation  Vote 16  

Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................2606 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2606 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2610 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2613 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2615 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2615 
 


