














































 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 763 
 April 4, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of the great citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the closure of the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition are from Regina, from Hodgeville, 
from Shamrock, from Shaunavon, and other small communities 
in southern Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also would like to present 
petitions and names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from numerous 
Saskatchewan communities including Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 
names from throughout Saskatchewan. The petition of the 
undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 
showeth that the government has failed to address the serious 
concern of the landlords who provide rental accommodation to 
Saskatchewan renters. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 
rental properties to the equivalent of one month’s rent; and 
that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies available to 
landlords who are not given sufficient notice by social 
assistance tenants who vacate properties and whose rent in 
their new accommodation is paid by social assistance 
without regard for outstanding obligations in previous 
rental agreements. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from Saskatoon, 
Regina, and Springwater. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 
residents regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 
as follows: 

 
Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Regina and Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition on behalf of the people concerned about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayers read, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures of the people are primarily from Regina but also 
from the outlying rural areas. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 
of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 

The people who have signed this petition are from Francis, 
from Sedley, from Vibank, from Montmartre, from . . . oh, all 
over southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
a petition with names from the residents of Saskatchewan, from 
all over Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that this Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petition is signed by people from the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre, and the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Southey, Balgonie, Kennedy, Grenfell, White City, Pilot Butte, 
and also Regina, just to name a few. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre.  

  



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

People that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
from Regina here. They’re from Gull Lake. They’re from 
Webb, from Eastend, Swift Current, and there’s one from 
Vancouver, B.C. (British Columbia); from Tompkins; from 
Hazlet, Saskatchewan. They’re from all throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to present this to 
the Assembly. 

 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today 
on day 26, the 26th day that we have presented petitions 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre, Mr. Speaker. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 
pretty much all from Regina other than a few from Vibank and 
one from Cunningham . . . oh, no, that’s the name. I’m sorry. I 
so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Thursday next ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance regarding all of government 
employees’ superannuation plans: (1) which if any 
superannuation plans have purchased Cameco shares; (2) 
what is the total dollar value of these purchases; (3) what 
was the price per share of these sales? 

 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall day no. 31 ask the government the following questions: 
 

(1) What are the total operating maintenance and 
construction costs for the training centre and office 
building of the Northlands career college in La Ronge; (2) 
how was the construction of this building financed; (3) 
have any educational program dollars been redirected to 
cover some of the costs of construction, operating, and 
maintenance of the Northlands career college? 
 

A second notice of written question, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on 
day 31 ask the government also the following questions: 

 
(1) Has there been any in-depth study to the affects of 
student enrolment, success rates, and program completions 
in the regions affected by the amalgamation of the northern 
career colleges into the Northlands career college in La 
Ronge; (2) is there a planned commitment to ensure that  

the Westside Community College program based in 
Buffalo Narrows will continue to get its fair allocation of 
training dollars for that particular region? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and to the other members of the Assembly a 
member of my constituency, Mr. Wayne Bacon, sitting in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. Wayne is a very active farmer in the 
constituency and has been very active in many issues of 
agriculture. And he also is a very prominent Kinsman, and has 
worked at Telemiracles and projects of the Kinsmen throughout 
the province. And I would like to ask all members to welcome 
Wayne to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and all 
members of the House today, I’d like to introduce a man who 
needs no introduction in this House. Seated behind the bar, Mr. 
Rick Swenson, a good friend and former colleague of ours here 
in the House, a former MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for the constituency of Thunder Creek. 
 
Rick has taken on some other endeavours these days, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like you to know he’s active in the Western 
Canadian Wheat Growers, just been elected as a director to that 
group. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Western Canadian 
Wheat Growers is the largest voluntary farm organization in 
Saskatchewan and the only farm organization in Saskatchewan 
that knows anything about farm policy these days. 
 
So I’d ask all members to please join with me in welcoming Mr. 
Swenson here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to take 
this opportunity to introduce to you and through you somebody 
who, as the opposition or third party leader stated, needs no 
introduction. But he is a man who is well respected in the 
Thunder Creek constituency and I would like to also ask my 
colleagues to join in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 
18th Annual Powwow 

 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very often you 
will hear members of the Assembly talk about the importance 
of preserving and promoting the different languages and 
cultures that are a part of the fabric of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today I’m pleased to announce that the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College will be holding its 18th annual powwow at  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

the Regina Agridome April 6 and 7. This year’s powwow is 
going to be very special because the college is also marking its 
20th anniversary. 
 
The powwow will include participants not only from 
Saskatchewan but from across North America. Grand entry 
times will be 12:30 and 7 p.m. each day. It will feature adult, 
youth, and young men’s traditional dancing as well as girls’ 
jingle dancing, men’s traditional and boys’ grass dancing. 
That’s just to name a few activities, Mr. Speaker. There will 
also be traditional food, crafts, and singing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite everyone to come to the Regina Agridome 
Saturday and Sunday to enjoy all aspects of this powwow. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College and all first nations groups from across our province, 
along with the powwow organizers, for their hard work in 
promoting Indian culture in Saskatchewan. 
 
To all of the visitors to this powwow, a big Regina welcome. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Easter Greetings 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
take a moment today to extend Easter greetings to everyone. 
Easter is a time of celebration for many people in 
Saskatchewan. Many view Easter weekend as a time of 
reflection on their own religious beliefs. From small-town 
churches in Saskatchewan to massive religious gatherings 
across the world, forgiveness, reconciliation, and peace will be 
celebrated. 
 
As we leave the House today, I would like to extend, on behalf 
of the official opposition, my heartfelt wishes to all those 
travelling to be with their families and friends this holiday 
weekend. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
want to wish everyone an Easter weekend, because today 
begins the final weekend of the Easter season and for Christians 
all over the world this is the most significant religious 
observance of the year, the culmination of 40 days of reflective 
preparation. Today is Holy Thursday, or Maundy Thursday, the 
day on which the commandment to love our neighbour was 
given; tomorrow is Good Friday; and Sunday, of course, is 
Easter. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, but the symbolic suggestiveness of 
such a significant holiday as Easter goes beyond anyone’s 
particular creed. Easter is a highly appropriate celebration at 
this time of year because it begins with the remembrance of 
betrayal, sorrow, and death, just as the season of spring begins 
with the approaching of the end of winter, the season when life 
in the natural world is put on hold. 
 

This is the most optimistic of seasons because it celebrates the 
rebirth of life, the promise of new beginnings, the eternal hope, 
the ultimate good will triumph over evil. And of course Easter 
tells us that the world will once again turn green, a promise we 
desperately need after this winter. 
 
As we should throughout the year, Mr. Speaker, we pray for 
peace among the nations, for goodwill to all people, for help 
and respect for the less fortunate. And I would like to now take 
and wish everyone a very happy Easter weekend. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agri-Food Trade Mission 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize the coordinated plan between the Minister of 
Agriculture and the federal Minister of Agriculture for their 
upcoming agri-food trade mission to the Pacific Rim. Instead of 
constantly blaming each other, this is an excellent example of 
the partnerships that the federal and provincial governments 
should have in trade ventures in international markets. 
 
Accompanying them on part of this tour will be a prominent 
businessman from my constituency, Lorne Thomson. He is the 
chief executive officer of Thomson Meats of Melfort. Just this 
morning he was packing to head off to Seoul, Korea to 
participate in Seoul Food ’96. 
 
Lorne says the presence of both Agriculture ministers is 
extremely important because of the scare concerning mad cow 
disease. He says that he can give potential international 
investors many assurances, but it really helps to have 
government officials reaffirming that Canadian beef has not 
been exposed to this devastating disease. 
 
I would like to wish both ministers and Mr. Thomson all the 
best in their international trade mission. It’s this kind of 
cooperation and partnership that can help turn around 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passover 
 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, I want to join the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood by reminding us of another equally 
significant and older holiday being celebrated this week. Last 
night, sunset marked the beginning of Passover week, the week 
Jewish people the world over observe the preparation for and 
the flight from oppression in the land of Egypt as told in the 
Book of Exodus. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, it is from Passover that much of 
the ritual of Easter comes. So it is only fitting that the two 
holidays be recognized on the same day in this Assembly. 
 
As the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood said, this is 
not the place to extol a particular creed, but it is worth saying, I 
believe, that as we approach the new millennium it would do us 
no harm to remember that we are the sum total of the  
  



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

experiences of millenniums past. 
 
The story and the significance of Passover still has much to tell 
us. The first Passover took place thousands of years ago, but the 
story shows us in dramatic detail the worth of perseverance, the 
dignity of suffering, the value of patience, and the clarion 
determination of the human spirit to be free from tyranny. 
 
It is fair to say that perhaps the most significant migration in the 
history of western civilization took place because a people 
refused to be enslaved. Staying together in the face of 
seemingly overwhelming forces, they triumphed, and left a 
message and a lesson for all the ages. 
 
So on this very important weekend, Mr. Speaker, I join all 
members in saying, be well, and shalom. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Goohsen-Nystuen Nuptials 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Today certainly and this week certainly is a week 
for reflection and celebration considering the Easter season, but 
today, Mr. Speaker, it also is a special day of celebration for our 
caucus. And you may wonder what I speak of, but today, Mr. 
Speaker, the MLA for Cypress Hills’s family is enjoying a very 
special day. Their daughter, Lisa, is marrying into a very 
prominent New Democrat family  the Nystuen family from 
Spalding. And given . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  The special celebration, Mr. Speaker, is taking 
place in Saskatoon later today, and I’m sure all members would 
want to wish them well. But given the events of this week and 
the speculation about people coming to the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) Party, and it appears that even the New 
Democrats are coming over in droves now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Genesis Community Conservancy Incorporated Launched 

 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the Catholic 
Rural Life Ministry and the Interchurch Committee on 
Agriculture held a conference at St. Peter’s College in Muenster 
to launch a land trust called Genesis Community Conservancy 
Incorporated. I had the pleasure of attending this conference on 
behalf of the Hon. Minister of Agriculture. 
 
The purpose of this conservancy is to support ecologically 
sustainable activity and to implement sustainable land 
stewardship practices by making land available under long-term 
security of tenure to lessees, who are obligated to use 
sustainable farming methods, will be assisted in developing an 
economically viable farming unit by leasing this land, and 
through their farming practices will promote soil and water 
conservation. 
 

Land will be acquired for the community conservancy through 
purchase, donation, bequest, or lease. Capital for land 
acquisition will be raised by establishing a holding company. 
Management of the land will depend on the direction from the 
current owner at the time of transfer to the conservancy. 
Leaseholders would have secure access to the land on a 
long-term basis and might pass the lease on to their children as 
long as the lease conditions are met. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Catholic Rural Life Ministry 
and Interchurch Committee on Agriculture for their efforts in 
ensuring our land is put to good use and ensuring its viability 
for the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Contract 
 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute in Humboldt. They have 
secured a project to do comparative testing and evaluation of 
replacement components for armoured personnel carriers used 
by the military. 
 
Armoured personnel carriers provide protective transport to 
military personnel and are used in Canada’s peacekeeping 
efforts around the world. PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute) is well suited to test armoured personnel carriers 
because of their history and experience in farm equipment 
evaluation. Testing will be begin immediately at the former 
Dana Radar Base at Sagehill and is expected to take four to six 
months. 
 
I would also like to congratulate David Gullacher who has 
recently been named president and CEO (chief executive 
officer) of the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute. He will 
manage operations in both Humboldt and at the test station at 
Portage la Prairie. Congratulations, David Gullacher and PAMI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Districts Funding 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
almost 200 people packed the hall in Melfort last night to hear 
local health care officials explain what they can expect in terms 
of district funding this year. It was announced that $1 million 
will be slashed from the North Central Health District’s budget 
because of the move to needs-based funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem is that needs-based funding does not 
recognize the fact that the Parkland regional hospital in Melfort 
treats many long-term care patients and those who are disabled 
and require special, high cost attention. Will the Minister of 
Health explain why such added responsibilities are not 
addressed in funding to districts with regional health care 
centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The good thing  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

about the funding formula that we’ve arrived at in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is it is based upon the population 
health needs of the district  something that has never been 
done before — and it is evidence based. It looks at the 
demographics of the district and the characteristics of the 
population. I think the funding is a much more rational and fair 
system than we’ve had in the past. 
 
And speaking of funding, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
member that the federal government removed approximately 
$50 million in funding from health care in the latest federal 
budget. And in our latest budget, for every dollar the Liberals 
took out of health care, we put a dollar back in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  And we’re doing our very best for the 
people of the member’s district to provide the best health care 
we can, notwithstanding the fact that we’ve had no cooperation 
from the Liberal Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister of 
course misses the point and goes on into another blaming 
speech. Mr. Speaker, $1 million in health care cuts in the North 
Central Health District will undoubtedly mean that there’ll be 
further service reductions or job losses to front-line care-givers. 
 
With this constant downsizing the people of rural Saskatchewan 
are questioning  and rightly so  when is this going to end? 
We continue to see it in health care. And people are really 
afraid that the same will occur in education and other vital 
services that our rural families  indeed all of Saskatchewan 
residents  are counting on. 
 
Will the minister explain when this constant downsizing and 
cuts to quality health care will end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well this is the sort of doom and gloom 
that we hear from the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. But I want to 
say to the member that notwithstanding the Liberal cut-backs to 
health care, we’re putting the money back in, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re doing our best to counteract the measures being taken by 
the Liberals. 
 
But I want to say that this is indicative of what the Liberals do. 
They come into the House and they say, we’re not going to 
have any specialists in Saskatoon or in Regina; we’re not going 
to have any CT (computerized axial tomography) scans in 
Regina; we’re not going to have any health care in Melfort. And 
it just goes on and on. 
 
But I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that 
notwithstanding the lack of cooperation from the Liberals in 
terms of the health care system, notwithstanding the doom and 
gloom, the people of the province  according to the latest 
public opinion surveys  continue to regard our health system 
as good to excellent. And we’re going to keep it good to 
excellent, notwithstanding a complete lack of financial support 
from the Liberal Party. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure there’s any 
physical way you could reword the question so that you could 
get an answer that actually answers the question. But I will try 
one last time. 
 
The Parkland regional hospital provides very specialized care 
for very seriously needy people of disabilities and age 
problems. It is now only a regional hospital in name only 
because the funding formula does not address this special 
service. After hearing that the district will have to do with a 
million dollars less in funding, a lady approached me last night 
at the meeting and said, when will the government exercise 
some responsibility and leadership to come up with a plan for 
health care and services in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t give the woman an answer. Will the 
minister explain when his government is going to live up to its 
responsibility and come forward with a plan that will address 
the needs of rural families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if I was the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be embarrassed to talk about the record of the 
Liberals as well. The Liberal Party opposed the introduction of 
medicare in this province in 1962. The Liberal Party has 
opposed the plan of this government to keep our medicare 
system sustainable. It’s the job of the Liberal Party in this 
legislature to complain. They do it very well. 
 
They will come into this legislature and say they’re not going to 
have a hospital in Melfort, they’re not going to have CT scans 
in Regina, the doctors and nurses are all going to leave. But I 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, we are building a health care system in 
this province that is sustainable and that is going to serve the 
people of the province and the people of Melfort very well, well 
into the next century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Relief 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 
article in today’s edition of the Regina Leader-Post further 
confirms what the people of Saskatchewan have been saying 
since this NDP (New Democratic Party) government came to 
power. It clearly shows that Saskatchewan residents pay the 
highest level of provincial income tax in this country. The facts 
clearly show that the people of this province are being 
suffocated by this government’s high-tax policies, and the 
minister agrees to that. And I quote: “One of the best ways to 
create consumer confidence is to ease the tax burden.” 
 
Will the minister explain why then she will not announce a 
tax-reduction plan that will allow the people of this province 
some tax relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. The member opposite should have 
read further down through the article, because if he would have 
done so, instead of just stopping at the headline, he would have 
realized that Saskatchewan is still the least expensive place in 
Canada in which to live. 
 
And when you take account of a family, you don’t just look at 
one tax issue; you look at what is the cost to live in that 
particular community  the cost of housing, the cost of 
utilities. And Saskatoon and Saskatchewan remain the least 
expensive place in Canada in which to live. And I would add to 
that, in terms of the quality of life, the best place in Canada in 
which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, all the $15-ticket luncheon 
theatre tickets in the world aren’t going to sell the people of this 
province on this government’s performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again the government tries to defend its 
high-tax policies by indicating that it’s cheaper to live here. The 
fact is that this government is about to substantially increase 
these other costs. This government will substantially increase 
these other costs by cutting grants to municipalities and forcing 
them to increase taxes. 
 
This is combined with the already stifling level of taxation that 
they have forced on the people of Saskatchewan since coming 
to power. The people of this province want a firm commitment 
to tax relief, not another study, and certainly not more excuses. 
Will the Minister of Finance make that commitment today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I would say that in this budget we continue the track 
of reducing taxes. We’ve reduced the aviation fuel tax on a 
permanent basis; we’ve reduced taxes for truckers, and we’ve 
reduced taxes for families. There is a further implementation of 
the cut to the debt reduction surtax. And we have said to the 
people of Saskatchewan, we will continue to reduce taxes as we 
can afford it. 
 
Why is he after us about our study? He was notably quiet when 
Paul Martin, after having increased taxes, said he’s going to 
study taxes. Is it okay for Paul Martin to study taxes and report 
back in his next budget but not okay for the people of 
Saskatchewan? We will continue to speak up for the people of 
Saskatchewan. They can continue to be the mouthpiece for 
Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my questions this morning are for 
the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. Minister, today we 
have another report card on your government’s job creation 
strategy and again you get another big fat F. From March ’95 to  

March of ’96 Saskatchewan has lost, unfortunately, 2,000 jobs. 
For the first three months of this year, we’re averaging almost 
4,000 less jobs than last year, not the 4,000 new jobs that 
you’ve been predicting. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to admit that your economic 
policies are failing miserably? When are we going to see a real 
job creation strategy from your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
the member opposite that obviously the biggest problem that we 
are facing in this province still today is the massive deficit that 
was built up by your administration. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Mine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  When a province . . . Yes, yours. 
You can try all you want to run and hide from the Devine 
administration but the sad fact is, is that they are a Conservative 
administration and you are Conservative members. Now you 
can run from that and you can pretend that you’re not. But the 
fact of the matter is that the people who sat in this side of the 
House from your party led to the $15 billion debt that we are 
trying now to pay down. 
 
Now obviously if it weren’t for the debt, we could totally 
eliminate the sales tax in this province. Obviously you would 
know that we have a sales tax that amounts to $80 million per 
point, or $720 million in total, and the interest on the debt is 
$850 million. If it were not for the interest on the debt that your 
administration left us, we could eliminate the sales tax 
tomorrow and still have a surplus of $100 million in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you can 
continue blaming anyone you like, but the fact remains over the 
past year we are losing jobs here in Saskatchewan. Despite all 
of your rosy predictions, there are no new jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you know how many new jobs there have been created in 
that same time frame, March of last year to March of this year, 
in Alberta? There are 32,000 new jobs that have been created in 
that same time frame. That’s more job creation in one year than 
you are predicting in the next decade. And you’re not even 
coming close to meeting any of your predictions, Mr. Minister. 
And the Finance minister says Alberta’s tax structure is 
overrated. On the other side of us in Manitoba they’ve created 
about 4,000 jobs in the same time period. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can Saskatchewan continue to lose jobs 
while our neighbours next door don’t have that problem, and 
obviously, Mr. Minister, are doing something in the job creation 
field. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member continues 
to talk about Alberta and the issues in another province and  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

fails to defend the $15 billion debt that his administration left us 
with that has to be not only the interest paid on, but hopefully 
some day we can start paying down that debt, which is what this 
budget and previous budgets, where we had balanced, are 
doing. 
 
What I want to say in terms of job creation is that year over 
year, between ’92 and ’95, the job numbers increased by 3,500 
jobs per year. We project that this year . . . although obviously 
with the weather conditions in the early part of 1996, many 
areas, for example in agriculture, the total number of job loss 
that you’re talking about is in the area of agriculture. In the key 
areas of manufacturing, in the key areas of manufacturing and 
trade, the job numbers are up, and up significantly. 
 
So if you were being honest you would say that for the past 
three years there have been increases in job numbers of 3,500 
per year, and we project that trend to continue. So hold your 
horses. We expect to have a very good summer in terms of 
construction. And you will see that . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, if you were being honest with the 
people of Saskatchewan you would realize that your lack of job 
creation hurts everyone, but particularly it hurts the young 
people here in this province. 
 
I had a couple of high school students from Regina here in my 
office the other day and they were particularly discouraged. 
They don’t even consider finding a job in Saskatchewan as an 
option. They know that they are going to have to look 
elsewhere for work just as today’s job stats indicate. 
 
In one year the number of jobs for the 15- to 24-year-olds in 
this province have dropped by 5,000  5,000 jobs for young 
people gone in one short year. 
 
So while the NDP can find that 170,000 job for the Premier’s 
50-year-old room-mate, there’s no jobs in this province for the 
20-year-old people here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you think that it’s acceptable, do you think that 
it’s acceptable to loose 5,000 jobs for the young people of 
Saskatchewan and what are you going to do to reverse this 
dismal record in this area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I say again, to the member 
opposite, that the job creation record, not of the government but 
of the business people of this province and cooperatives, is 
actually very good given the circumstance that your 
administration left the province in  that is 3,500 jobs per year 
net increase in ’92, ’93, ’94. And I want to say to you, sir, that 
you should check those numbers year over year. Any month 
you can take, it may be up or down, but in the three years since 
the introduction of Partnership for Renewal the job numbers are 
up, 3,500 jobs per year. 
 
I want to say though, in terms of Alberta, In terms of Alberta,  

our job would be a lot easier if Grant Devine had been premier 
of Alberta for those nine years instead of premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teachers’ Collective Agreement 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Education. We’ve all heard by now that your 
government and the teachers have reached a new contract 
agreement, and I emphasize your government and teachers. And 
I think we need to mentally underline . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. The 
Speaker’s having . . . Order. All caucuses come to order. The 
Speaker is having difficulty hearing the question being put by 
the hon. member for Rosthern, and I ask all members of the 
Assembly to cooperate with question period and allow the 
member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  As I was saying, the contract arranged 
between your government and the teachers  and I underline 
again, your government, so remember this  I say that because 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) was 
unable to attend the final round of negotiations and that they 
have not signed this new agreement although they are left 
millions of dollars short in covering the new costs. 
 
Madam Minister, not long ago you made a promise. In articles, 
you said you provided, quote: assurances to the SSTA in 
writing that any cost increases in the collective agreement 
associated with teachers’ salaries would be covered by the 
province. Do you intend to break this promise just like your 
government has broken so many others? 
 
Madam Minister, just how many millions of dollars short will 
the boards be in the 1996-97 fiscal year? Madam Minister, how 
many millions short because of your broken promise? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that we have been able to reach a 
tentative agreement with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  This process has been long and 
arduous. The teachers and the management committee have 
agreed that no details surrounding the tentative agreement will 
be released until teachers have had an opportunity to vote on the 
new collective agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Details I was 
referring to is the fact that you negotiated this one on your own 
without the school boards being there. You know full well that 
because you have broken another promise, the only choices 
school boards will have is to reduce the number of teachers, cut 
programs for our children, and go back to ratepayers for money. 
  



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

The teachers’ federation said your government’s budget meant 
loss of jobs, bigger class sizes, cutting of vital school programs, 
lack of resource materials, and that quality education for 
Saskatchewan children is only a dream. That was your budget, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Now school boards face millions more in costs to cover salary 
increases and benefits to teachers. Given these facts, how can 
you possibly justify reneging on your promise to cover all 
increased costs in salaries and benefits to teachers. How can 
you do that, Madam Minister, and still claim that education is a 
top priority with your government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
members in this Assembly that school boards in this province 
were the only third parties that received a $2 million increase in 
this fiscal year. I would remind the members . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
members that if they look at the budget carefully, that we have 
back-filled every dollar that was reduced by the federal 
government  some $114 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have honoured our commitments. We’ve said 
to the trustees in this province that we would cover the 
incremental costs of salary increases and we have done that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to remind the minister that indeed the educational 
development fund of $2 million has been scrapped and your 
increase of $2 million still puts the boards of education behind. 
They have lost money this year, Madam Minister. 
 
This morning we also received a press release from the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) announcing that a 
tentative provincial collective bargaining agreement had been 
reached. Although no details will be released until ratification, I 
understand this agreement includes a 2 per cent salary increase 
for teachers. 
 
What this means is that school boards will be forced to pay for 
the wage hikes but aren’t being compensated by the government 
to cover the extra costs. The government seems more than 
willing to make promises with other people’s money. Will the 
Minister of Education explain how her government can be 
involved in promising to raise teachers’ salaries without 
promising the financial backing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to the 
member, if he scrutinizes the budget closely he will note that in 
this fiscal year  1996-97  there is a $2 million increase in 
operating grants to school boards. That honours our 
commitment to school trustees that we would cover the 
incremental costs of teachers’ salaries. 
 

Now I don’t know what else I have to say here, Mr. Speaker. 
Please look at the budget. Please look carefully at what this 
government committed to, and I assure the member that what I 
say will be verified. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister is 
stating is that the money has been reallocated from the 
educational development fund  which was a $2 million 
expenditure last year  to the grant. The same 2 million. 
Therefore boards of education are out 2 million if that’s what 
she says the salaries will be. 
 
Madam Minister, if the teachers receive a 2 per cent increase, 
bus drivers, caretakers, and other school staff will also want an 
increase, and justifiably so. School boards will be forced to 
cover the entire cost. This will be a Goliath task because they 
are already trying to cope with $2 million less from your 
government. 
 
Is the minister willing to make a commitment here today that 
her government will provide financial support to the school 
boards if and when they are forced to renegotiate contracts with 
other school staff? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
Liberal member opposite that it was his Liberal cousins in 
Ottawa that reduced funding to this province by some $114 
million for health, social services, and education. Mr. Speaker, 
we did everything in our power to back-fill every single federal 
Liberal funding cut, and we did so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, that is the difference 
between Liberals and New Democrats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Liberals, in this country, try and 
destroy social programs. New Democrats try and sustain them. 
And that’s what we’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
kindergarten to grade 12 education is the responsibility of the 
province. Let’s admit that. Kindergarten to grade 12 education 
is your responsibility, Madam Minister. 
 
Although the provincial government will channel $900,000 
more into K to 12 education next year, boards will be forced to 
deal with the full impact of all negotiated raises. Estimates 
show that our K to 12 system will actually be staggering under 
an estimated increase in expenses of 12 to $14 million. If the 
boards are not given more money, they will have no choice but 
to make do with less. And less money probably means less 
staff. And we know, and the members opposite know, that the  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

last thing this province needs is more job losses. 
 
Will the minister assure teachers and other school staff that the 
government will work with the school boards and provide the 
necessary funding to make sure jobs are not lost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely 
amazing that this member would say that K to 12 is only the 
responsibility of the province, when the federal government 
comes into this province and puts money into stay-in-school 
programs, preschool programs, and so forth. And they put 
money in, get them going for awhile, and then they take the 
money away. That is the record of the Liberal government in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s talk about what this government has done. The 
members opposite should take a look at the utility rate 
decreases from SaskEnergy and SaskPower for school boards. 
We reduced utility costs significantly, Mr. Speaker. That was 
done by an NDP government, not a Liberal government in 
Ottawa. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would just ask the member, take a look at 
the budget book. Take a look at the budget book. There’s a $2 
million increase in the budget book for operating costs this year. 
We have honoured our commitment to cover incremental 
teachers’ salary increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Members will 
have plenty of time to give advice to one another as to what 
they should do on the Easter break a little later on today. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you and to the 
Assembly, I would like to introduce to you, in the Speaker’s 
gallery, Karl and Joan Will. Karl and Joan farm in the Tisdale 
area, and Karl is a very successful farmer, but it’s a good thing 
that Joan manages the operation, that’s for sure. I would like to 
wish Karl and Joan a Happy Easter, and welcome to Regina and 
to the Assembly today. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I 
welcome the officials back today and try and answer for the 
minister’s requests and perhaps mistakes, and we’ll get into that 
in a few moments. 
 
I would like to start, Madam Minister, by asking: on the figures 
that you sent over yesterday, and right at the top I see Ag and 
Food, and you’re asking for some little over $21 million. Could 
you tell us, Madam Minister, what portion of that money is 
being used to perhaps live up to the promise made by the 
Premier and the former Minister of Agriculture in regards to the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) bills that were never 
supposed to be sent out in the first place? But for you to come 
out and be asking for 21 million in a department that, in fact, 
the season — the growing season, the planting season — hasn’t 
even begun yet. 
 
So, we’re only assuming by looking at your own figures that it 
has to be for the GRIP bills. Could you confirm this? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, none. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure if the minister 
was paying attention at all. In fact she usually isn’t in this 
House, so we’ll pose the question again. In fact I had asked her 
what was the $20 million for and she said, none. 
 
Either she doesn’t understand the question . . . I could print it 
out. Her officials could work with her. She’s having trouble 
with this kind of stuff. Could you tell us what the 21 is for? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, my understanding of 
the question was, how much of the money is going to be used to 
compensate farmers so they do not have to repay their GRIP 
bills. None is the answer to that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Chair, of course the farmers are 
going to find this disappointing because of the promises made a 
full year ago and last spring just before the election. And the 
very fact that they were expecting, they were expecting, Mr. 
Chairman, before going into spring seeding, that there would be 
an expenditure, there would be monies requested by the 
Minister of Finance, or Madam Minister, to in fact deal with the 
Premier’s promises, and yet she’s saying none of this 21 million 
is for that. So then we must assume it’s for what? New farm 
programs? 
 
Could you tell us, give us an idea, what it is you’re asking $21 
million for in Agriculture? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the one-twelfth is 
there because the government has not . . . the opposition has not 
agreed to pass the government’s budget. We have to ensure that 
third parties such as health boards, schools, can continue to 
operate until the budget is passed, so we pass one-twelfth of the  
  



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

budget and the money is used for the operations of the 
particular departments so they can continue to provide the 
essential programs that are required. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s a pleasure to 
be able to ask some questions here today with respect to the 
interim supply motion put forward. 
 
I’d just like to ask the minister to tell us how much of the funds 
expressed here today will be allocated to the government’s 
severance programs for scaling back the civil service by some 
554 positions? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is 
none. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Could the minister 
outline for us just how much money of the severance packages 
that will eventually be paid will be preparing laid-off employees 
for job searches; and how much of the $350 million  or $350 
a month, sorry  of bridge funding is going to be spent directly 
on pensions themselves. And lastly, would she be able to 
provide just how much of the severance will be paid to laid-off 
workers, because I’m just not sure if the answer is none. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, maybe I should 
explain to the member opposite, under accrual accounting any 
costs associated with severance have to be accounted for the 
moment you know that severance is going to occur. So that was 
all included in the 1995-96 budget. And I think that if you want 
to get into that sort of detail, you need to ask the individual 
departments. 
 
I would also say to the member opposite, these will still be 
estimates because we do not know what will occur with respect 
to bumping, as people bump through the system. It’s impossible 
to know exactly how many people will find themselves without 
a job. And the other thing is, we’re working very hard to match 
people whose jobs have been abolished to new positions across 
the public service. 
 
So you can ask that question when the individual departments 
are here, but they probably will not be able to give you a 
definitive answer. They will still be working on the basis of 
estimates. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would just also like 
to ask, how much of the spending today before us might be for 
Crown corporation borrowings? If there are any borrowings, 
what purposes are they for? And what sort of borrowing will 
they involve? And will the borrowing be from foreigners or just 
exactly who? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, again to explain 
what we’re doing here. This is only government spending. And 
we’re saying to people out there in the health boards, in school 
divisions, the budget has not been passed; the opposition has 
not gone through the process of deciding to pass off the budget,  

to make the budget law. So we still have to fund these groups. 
And this will be . . . this is just money that is used to fund 
essential services of government. So there’s no Crown spending 
involved here. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. If I could also just ask 
the Minister of Finance, I note here, under servicing the public 
debt, there’s nothing with respect to that here. And certainly 
there must be a certain amount of monies within this interim 
supply that must relate to financing the debt charges of the 
province. If you could just elaborate on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, financing or 
providing payment of the public debt is statutory. There are a 
number of different things that are statutory. They occur 
automatically by statute; you don’t have to get approval of the 
legislature for them. 
 
What the legislature does have to approve is basic spending  
as I say, in areas like Health or Education, where money goes to 
third parties, or we have to continue providing the essential 
services of government. And you can’t stop that just because 
the budget has not been passed through the House. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With respect to the 
budget the minister referred to, could the minister tell the House 
how much money was spent on preparing the budget, how 
much was spent on printing the documents, and who received 
the work? 
 
And I’d also like to know how much of the spending was for 
design of the document and who received that work. And what, 
if any, firm was retained to offer advice in preparing the budget 
and what were they paid? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, this is a question 
more appropriately asked when we get into the estimates of the 
various departments. Again I would like to draw the member’s 
attention to what we’re doing here. We’re saying that because 
the legislature, the opposition, hasn’t seen fit to let the budget 
pass, we have third parties out there who are waiting to receive 
funding  people in health boards, people in school boards  
and we want to continue to operate the essential services of the 
government. That’s one process. 
 
We will have another process in which we will get into the 
details of all of the different departmental spending. And your 
question then can be asked more appropriately at that time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do wish to point out 
to the Minister of Finance that it certainly isn’t our intention to 
hold up financing for those who are in need, but we do wish to 
ensure that the monies here will in fact be spent for that 
purpose; that they will be spent wisely. So if you would bear 
with me for a short while longer, I do have a few more 
questions here that I would like to ask. 
 
You know when I opened the paper on the weekend, I saw that 
the government had advertising concerning the budget. And I 
assumed that that money was also part of this motion for supply 
here today. Could the minister tell us what those ads cost and  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

who were given the work and how many ads were placed? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, once again I would 
draw the member’s attention to the purpose of what we’re doing 
here. If you would like to pass interim supply, go into the 
Committee of Finance, we would be quite prepared, we would 
be quite prepared to pass off interim supply right now and bring 
the Department of Finance forward and then allow you to ask 
those detailed questions. So you have . . . there is a forum in 
which those detailed questions can be asked. 
 
But I think this is not the proper forum. What is happening here 
is we are talking about the fact that agencies across the province 
require funding in order to provide their vital services, and we 
want to ensure that the government services continue. 
 
And as I say, there’s another forum in which we can get into as 
much detail as you would like. And we would be prepared, right 
away, if you want to vote off interim supply, to bring the 
Department of Finance forward and to get into some of this if 
that’s what you’d like to do. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know I’m sure 
that the spending involved here today is going to also involve a 
road trip for the Minister of Finance, Mr. Chair. And it’s 
somewhat of an annual affair that the minister and the Premier 
travel to New York and Toronto to talk to the bankers and the 
investment dealers. 
 
Would the minister tell us when these trips are planned and how 
much they will cost and how much will be spent on 
entertainment? And what staff would be accompanying her and 
the Premier, and who do they intend to meet? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, again I would say to 
the member opposite, first of all this is not the proper forum to 
get into that sort of questioning. And I again make my offer, if 
he would like to vote off interim supply, we would be prepared 
immediately to bring the Department of Finance forward and 
we would look at the detail of what’s occurring here. 
 
I would say to the member opposite just a word about being Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. It is a serious undertaking to be the 
loyal opposition to the government. I think your responsibility 
is to try to convey to electors that you have an alternative vision 
for the province that would actually equip you to be the 
government. 
 
And I would say gently to the member opposite, this petty little 
dollar here, dollar there appeal to the lowest common 
denominator approach to politics, does not serve you well. 
Because you do not come across to the public as a group of 
people who are credible as an opposition that some day they 
would like to say, maybe these people could run this province. 
 
There is $4 billion of spending going on in this province. And 
to say, please tell us when you go to New York who you might 
be having lunch with and how much it might cost, might seem 
like good doorstep politics, and it may very well be good 
doorstep politics. But I’ll tell you it is not the kind of thing that 
the people of this province look to when they say, who do we  

think could form the next government. And I say this in a 
friendly way because I’m sure that there are many decent 
people over there. 
 
But I honestly say to you, unfortunately the members right next 
to you are, when we go and knock on our doorsteps, coming 
across as a credible alternative because they talk about the big 
issues, they talk about what their vision of this province is. 
They don’t ask us, now when you go to New York who is it that 
you’re going to have lunch with and how much is your lunch 
going to cost. 
 
Please, Member, try to elevate your approach to politics. And I 
say that in a friendly way. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I hope the minister’s 
reference to reducing the debate here today to the lowest 
common denominator has nothing to do with any reference to 
the lower income people in this province, because I assure the 
minister opposite that pennies do count to those folks and that’s 
why we’re here asking some questions today. So if she could 
just have a little bit of patience with us, we are being serious 
and we do wish to represent our constituents in this matter. 
 
But I’d just like to follow up, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, just in 
following up to my previous question, the minister once said 
last year upon her return that the people she spoke to liked her 
budget but they hated the federal government’s. Now in 
reaction to that, given that the federal and provincial 
governments are on the same team, what does the minister 
intend to say about the federal budget when she’s asked this 
time? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I would say this. 
First of all, when we go outside the country, we do our very 
best job to put the best face on what every Government of 
Canada does  every government. We try to explain what . . . 
put the best face on every single government. But we have to be 
honest, and when they say to us, do you believe that the attack 
on the deficit has been too slow, too unplanned, too lacking in 
vision to stay relative to our approach, that’s accurate. But I do 
not believe that any government in this country . . . I don’t think 
there’s one government in this country that goes outside of this 
country and does anything but tries to put the best face on the 
whole country. 
 
But you know, Mr. Member, you keep on trying to avoid the 
real issue. You never really address what we’re saying. It’s sort 
of like we say, what colour is the house and you say, it’s 10 feet 
high. The issue is this: we have one issue with the federal 
government and that’s the fact that the vast majority of their 
cuts have been to health, education, and social programs. 
Three-quarters in the 1996-97 budget. You look at ‘97-98, it 
gets worse  79 per cent of their cuts are to health, education, 
and social programs. That has been the focus of what we’ve 
been saying, and we’ve been saying their priorities are dead 
wrong. 
 
And quite frankly  again, I say this in a friendly way  
we’ve been disappointed in the members opposite that you’re 
not willing to say look, you know we’re Liberals and we’re  
  



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

prepared to defend them on many fronts. But you know on this 
one, we have a concern because when the member from 
Greystone was the leader of your party, she struck, I think, a 
very effective balance. She was prepared, when she had to, to 
defend the Liberal Party and what it was doing; but when she 
fundamentally disagreed with what they were doing, she was 
prepared to speak out. And I’m very disappointed that the 
members opposite don’t seem to have that capacity. Because 
from my point of view, you still do represent the people of 
Saskatchewan, not the Government of Canada. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would just like to 
say that the Minister of Finance provided some words here that 
are a little bit disconcerting to us again. At first she stated that 
she’s a Canadian first. But then she went off into a long 
dissertation about all of the problems that the federal 
government are causing. And I would just like her to just 
elaborate a little further, just provide us with a little bit more 
comfort that will you support Standard and Poor’s version that 
the federal government is doing the right things, or will you 
continue blaming them and damage our national reputation in 
front of our lenders? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Member, what I’ve said to you 
is I’ve said our criticism of the federal government has been 
very direct. It has been that their priorities are dead wrong; 
three-quarters of the cuts coming to health, education, social 
programs. This is our problem. And as I say, we’re sorely 
disappointed that you’re not willing to break ranks and speak 
for Saskatchewan people, because Saskatchewan people believe 
these priorities are dead wrong. 
 
First of all when we go out of the country, two comments  
it’s very rare that they ask us about the Government of Canada; 
they’re more interested in the Government of Saskatchewan; 
and we represented the Government of Saskatchewan. If they 
ask us any questions, they’re very likely to ask our Premier, 
because of his stature as a national statesman, what he thinks 
about the Quebec situation and what his analysis would be with 
respect to that. And he’s taken very seriously and very credibly. 
 
So those are the sorts of questions that they ask and I don’t 
think there’s a premier in this country that has done a better job 
of portraying Canada outside of the country. And he 
consistently does it. 
 
So I find your question, even the question, a little disturbing. 
When have you ever seen the Premier of Saskatchewan go 
outside of Canada and do anything but defend Canada and tell 
people what a wonderful place it is and what a wonderful place 
in which it is to invest. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just with respect to 
the government’s recent polling, the February polling, it did 
point to the fact that there’s a growing dissatisfaction on the 
part of the people here in this province with respect to how this 
government is managing the finances of the province. So I 
would again just request a little bit of patience on their part. 
 

I have just one other question and it does also relate to polling. 
Does . . . or has the minister resumed doing any polling 
regarding her spending decisions, like those in the budget 
before us today? And if so, what is the purpose of the polling? 
Who will do the work? And who will it benefit  will it benefit 
the taxpayers? And what will it cost? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite: no, we’re 
not doing any polling. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just 
have a couple of questions for the minister. And my biggest 
concern, Madam Minister, is with municipal government 
funding. There’s a number of municipalities out there that are 
waiting for futures to be paid. And my concern, is one-twelfth 
adequate to cover these futures? Because these municipalities 
are in bad need of this money. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I would say 
generally to the member opposite what the funding will be for is 
for the ongoing expenditures that will occur in the month of 
April. So if in fact the futures that you’re talking about should 
be paid out by the department in April, that will occur. But it’s 
just to allow the ongoing programs and services of the 
government to continue. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, though, it always was my 
understanding that these futures built up until the budget was 
passed and they were paid in a bulk all at once. And my 
concern is that most of these RMs (rural municipalities) are 
starting into their spring maintenance programs and definitely 
need this funding. So I would hope that by what we are doing 
here and only putting a twelfth on the Table that we wouldn’t 
hold the money back for these people. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again, Mr. Chairman, what I 
would say to the member opposite, that’s the purpose of interim 
supply — to ensure that people out there, other groups like 
municipalities, are not caught short. You’ll have to ask the 
Municipal Government department the details of what their 
essential services are. 
 
But that’s why we’re doing this, so that third parties aren’t 
caught short and don’t find themselves in a difficult position 
just because we have not in this legislature agreed yet to pass 
the budget. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I just 
want to ask you one question. I notice that for the Department 
of Social Services the one-twelfth supply will be $43.693 
million. I have received on my desk a statement of an order in 
council; section 8 of The Department of Social Services Act 
provides that the Minister of Social Services may make grants 
of up to $10,000, and I guess it’s in excess of $10,000 where he 
would need the Lieutenant Governor’s approval, and has gotten 
it. 
 
So these grants go to any agency, organization, association, or 
institution providing programs and services for the benefit of 
people in Saskatchewan. My question, Madam Minister, does 
this grant . . . is that incorporated within this $43 million, or is  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

this above and beyond the $43 million? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I, of course, cannot 
see the order in council that the member has. My guess would 
be it’s a 1995-96 order in council, which will mean it would not 
be part of this one-twelfth. It would be included in the 1995-96 
budget. 
 
But you know, not seeing the OC (order in council) and not 
seeing the date and not seeing all the details, I’m just assuming 
that that’s probably what it is. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
welcome to your officials. 
 
I just have a couple of clarifications. With respect to the 
Department of Intergovernmental Affairs, I see that there is a 
request for some $337,000 for the next 30 days. I just would 
like to ask if you could clarify what that money will be going 
towards  whether there is an intergovernmental meeting in 
the offing or some other major event? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I would say to the 
member opposite, that will be for the ongoing work of the 
Departmental of Intergovernmental Affairs. So that probably, 
for example, they will be continuing to monitor the situation 
across Canada with respect to issues like interprovincial trade, 
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement), Quebec  
those sorts of activities. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I take it then, it’s 
merely for the administration of that department and salaries 
and everything that goes with it. Thank you very much. I 
appreciate that. 
 
In the area of the Justice department, if I could just get some 
clarifications. The amounts being requested for the next 30 days 
 over and above, on occasion, for some special event, such as 
the investigation or at least the review of the Justice department 
that will be in the offing  is any of that money targeted for the 
payment of the attorneys from Alberta to initiate that overview 
of the Justice department? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. What happens across the government is we give them 
one-twelfth of their total appropriation for the year. We do not 
go into details as to what the money is being spent for. So I 
honestly couldn’t tell you if the money is being spent for that 
particular purpose. 
 
My guess, again, is that that will be an ongoing issue, so I 
would be very . . . I would suspect that it is not included in this 
particular appropriation, But again, all we do is we say to the 
departments, we will give you the equivalent  it’s one-twelfth 
because it’s one month spending, to ensure that you can carry 
on the essential activities of your department. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s just to 
again clarify and reaffirm that in the event of any upfront 
payments for special investigations such as what will be in the 
offing, this is not included in the event that there may need to  

be some monies for something separate. 
 
Again, I guess our concern is that there’s enough money, that 
there will be enough money to handle anything that might be, at 
this point in time, not expected. And I appreciate that the rest 
will be for the continuing and ongoing administration of the 
Justice department. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll ask the 
minister, you know, to bear with me. It’s my first crack at this 
interim supply stuff. 
 
Of the $2 million that I can recollect from my notes being spent 
on Indian and Metis departments . . . In relations to cuts, I’m 
not really in favour of holding up this part of the business. I 
realize people are waiting for their allocation. Just a question of 
what’s being spent in relation to Indian allocation versus Metis 
allocation in this interim supply. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again, Mr. Chairman, to the 
member opposite, we don’t have the details here about how the 
department is spending that. You have to look for that when the 
department comes here. At some point in the future the 
Department of Indian and Metis Affairs will be here. They will 
. . . you will then have a chance to go through in detail how 
much is being spent on Indian, how much is being spent on 
Metis. 
 
But I can say to the member opposite, I honestly can’t give you 
that answer because we don’t have the details. And all we do is 
we give them basically one month’s spending so that they can 
continue to provide the ongoing operations of their departments 
and of their programs for a month. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you. And thank you, Madam Minister, 
and welcome to your staff. I too have some questions. And I 
guess first of all, I’d like to tell you that my concerns are 
dealing with. . . this budget are dealing with the fact that the 
main things that I see are going to hurt rural Saskatchewan. 
 
All the departments that I see are going to be taking their big 
cut-backs are things that are going to hurt the people in my area 
very badly. And I’m talking about the Agriculture budget; I’m 
talking about the Highways budget, the Municipal Government 
budget, and even the Sask Water budget. They’re all things that 
are down and they’re all going to be hurting rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My concern with representing my area and a lot of people in 
rural Saskatchewan is, by passing . . . when we pass this we 
have taken the first step towards saying yes, it’s okay to further 
decimate our area and our way of life. 
 
That isn’t what we want to have done, and that isn’t the 
message we want to send to our people. It’s very important for 
them to know that in order to retain the type of . . . the lifestyle 
that they have out there, we need to not only keep this funding, 
we have to actually increase it. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan’s . . . the way of life out there, is what you 
as members living in the cities want. And by doing things like  
  



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

cutting the Highways budget, we’re going back to a way of . . . 
going backwards. We’re not going forwards. I want to . . . 
looking specifically at Economic Development, I see that this is 
downsizing from last year, and I don’t agree with grants to 
businesses but I do see that by doing this, we’re cutting back on 
some of the small programs that have been helping to keep rural 
Saskatchewan alive. 
 
I wonder if the minister will tell me, in this budget, what 
economic . . . the downsizing for Economic Development, can 
you tell me how you see it’s going to hurt or will it help rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to make 
some general comments in response to what the member says. I 
in no sense believe that rural Saskatchewan is taking a hit from 
this budget. In fact I think there are many things in this budget 
that are going to help rural Saskatchewan. One of the things that 
farmers need is they need some assistance in developing new 
crops, developing new uses for their crops, and promoting value 
added processing. 
 
What this budget commits to, is over the next four years we’re 
going to spend more than a quarter of a billion dollars in 
promoting exactly that. So what we’re concerned about there is 
the long-term future of farmers, that they have as much 
assistance as the government can provide to diversify, to 
develop new crops, and to develop new uses for all of those 
crops. 
 
Now with respect to highways, in fact the money being spent on 
the roads in this province is increasing. We’re spending more 
on roads than we traditionally have spent. And we’re doing that 
by cutting back on administrative costs. The Department of 
Highways has done an excellent job of saying we don’t need all 
of this infrastructure to provide the services. And therefore 
we’re going to get rid of some of the administrative costs and 
put that money into highways, which is exactly what people in 
rural Saskatchewan are telling us to do. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite, my pre-budget tour 
this year was probably the most extensive I’ve ever done, 
almost all of it in rural Saskatchewan. And I find people there 
. . . first of all, I found farmers prouder of themselves than they 
have been in years. They actually feel they have made the kinds 
of changes they require to make their operations viable into the 
next century. I found them very, very open to change and 
believing that change is required. 
 
And you talk about municipal government. Do we believe that 
there have to be changes in municipal government? Yes. Did 
people at our meetings believe there had to be changes  
meetings in rural Saskatchewan  do they believe that there 
have to be changes in municipal government? Yes. 
 
I would say with respect to Economic Development that one of 
the reasons the money for Economic Development is dropping 
is people also told us that they do not believe in direct grants to 
business. And so we have phased out direct grants to business. 
This government will no longer be providing direct grants to 
business. 

But what we are providing funding for are things like REDAs, 
regional economic development authorities, which again help 
smaller communities, because a whole region of the province 
can come together, take the best advantage of all the pluses they 
have going for them and then use that to sell their advantages 
beyond their region to other parts of the province and other 
parts of Canada. 
 
So I would say to the member opposite, when the Department 
of Economic Development is here, you can go into some of this 
in greater detail. 
 
But in terms of the general policy of the government, there are 
two reasons why the grant for Economic Development is down. 
One, grants for business are being phased out; and 
administrative savings  we have consolidated a number of 
different branches and saved that way as well. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I notice that the grant for 
things like Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation has 
actually gone up by over a million dollars. And when I try and 
look at these, I see that it is basically in the administration part, 
and that again is something that isn’t going to help rural 
Saskatchewan, and it basically doesn’t help small businesses as 
a whole. Because that’s actually helping individual businesses 
and allows the government to pick and choose again. I’m very 
. . . I guess I’ll wait for your comment on that. 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again the member opposite 
needs to not do what the member from Thunder Creek seems to 
do: jump to conclusions on a very narrow, little piece of 
information. You’ll have . . . the department will be here and 
you can ask in more detail about SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation). 
 
But I will say as the general principle, what the government 
funds from SOCO is a loan-loss provision. So as it becomes 
more active and actually begins to loan money out there, the 
government  not wanting to be like we were in ’80s where 
you lend money and you didn’t set aside extra funds in case 
some of those loans were not repaid  has on the advice of the 
auditor put aside loan-loss provisions. 
 
So that one of the reasons why SOCO’s grant goes up is 
because it’s actually beginning to do what it was mandated to 
do. And because we are fiscally responsible and do as the 
auditor says, every time you make a loan, you set aside a loan-
loss provision to ensure that you are protected and the taxpayers 
are protected. 
 
(1130) 
 
So again, what I would say to the member opposite, because it 
becomes a problem; it becomes a credibility problem. And I 
don’t want to get into this in great detail, but I do mean it in a 
friendly way. 
 
When you have within a very few months of a new legislature 
coming together, you have companies, like major companies in  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

this province employing over a thousand people saying the 
opposition is making reckless comments which are a problem 
for the company, that’s a serious issue. So I would just ask you 
to be a little bit more careful in jumping to a conclusion because 
when you get SOCO here, you’re going to find that the answer 
is not as you’ve portrayed it. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I’m lucky to live in the part 
of Saskatchewan where we have more manufacturing 
businesses and industry per capita than any other place in this 
province. The Schultes and the Bourgaults and the Dyna-Fabs 
and the Westlands and the Doepkers create lots and lots of jobs. 
 
And every one of those people, I can say I call them my 
personal friends, the owners and managers of these businesses, 
and they are telling me that the policies that are directed and the 
direct impact of this budget on their business, is going to be 
bad; it’s not going to be good. 
 
I want to know, things like the highways problem, with the fact 
that they’re not going to be building them up, so that it costs 
people like Bourgault thousands of extra dollars just to have to 
have their equipment repainted before they can get it to their 
customer. I’m asking you, if you actually believe that the 
number one priority of your government is job creation, then I 
don’t see why there isn’t more emphasis put on the details that 
are needed so that we can actually have some job creation. 
 
I’m sorry I’m losing my voice, Ms. Minister. But I need to 
understand how you think that we should be able to pass this 
when I think it’s going to be a detriment to not only rural 
Saskatchewan, but to business people. I’ll ask for your 
comment. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I would say two things to the 
member opposite. First of all, the manufacturing and processing 
tax credit which we introduced in the last budget was developed 
in consultation with exactly those industries. We sat down with 
them . . . in fact Kirk McGregor sat down with them and said, 
now what kind of tax break would be affordable to the 
province, wouldn’t cost 80 or $90 million, and would work for 
your industry? And they were very receptive to the result. 
 
I would also say, on roads, we haven’t reduced our spending on 
roads. The spending that is going to occur, building highways 
. . . And again it’s what I’m warning the members about 
because credibility, once you’ve lost it, you can’t get it back. 
When you have people making reckless comments that you’re 
not reliable  I’m not mentioning you in particular  I’m just 
saying you can’t get it back. 
 
We are spending more money than we have in our base budgets 
in the past, on fixing people’s roads. We are spending less 
money on administering the roads, which is what people want 
us to do. People in your constituency don’t want us to be 
spending money on administration in government. They don’t 
want us to keep something operating out there just because it 
provides a job for somebody but it doesn’t really help with their 
road. They want us to cut our administrative costs and to put as 
much as we can into roads. 
 

And I would say to the member opposite, you’re not being 
asked to pass the budget here. We’ve had the budget debate and 
you’ll be going through the estimates and at some point we’ll 
have another vote. What you’re being asked to do here is to 
agree to give third parties enough money so they can continue 
operating and to give the government departments enough 
money so they can continue to operate. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m concerned about companies like . . . or 
corporations like the Sask Water Corporation. I’m wondering, 
when I look at the press release that came out yesterday and 
they talk about the second highest run-off ever, if this is taken 
into consideration that there’s going to be major problems like 
we had at Englefeld last year. We had to actually cut No. 5 
Highway. 
 
I’m wondering if the highways’ crews that are no longer in 
Wadena there to help our people out in a hurry . . . Wadena and 
Humboldt. Last year when we had to cut the highway at 
Englefeld, we had to find somebody who knew the minister 
personally and knew his home phone number so we knew how 
to cut the highway at Englefeld. I’m just wondering if this isn’t 
the kind of thing that happens when we don’t have hands on to 
people that are actually affecting our lives. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I’m not sure what the member 
opposite is asking me. Is she saying that we think that the 
Minister of Highways’ telephone number should be available 
all across the . . . Oh, okay. Maybe I should ask the member 
opposite to ask me that question again. 
 
Ms. Draude:  These cut-backs to places  to the Highways 
department, for example, does it cause closures at Wadena, that 
depot is going to be closed down there? There’s further closures 
in Humboldt. And what happens when we have a problem 
specifically. I don’t need to talk to the Minister of Highways 
because he’s not probably going to go fix the . . . allow us to cut 
the highway off at that time. 
 
Who are we going to get a hold of and where are these people 
going to come from? We were in Englefeld the last year when 
the water was running over the highways, and there was major 
chances for terrible accidents. Where do crews come from? 
Who has the responsibility at the last moment there when 
there’s nobody left, unless I go to Saskatoon or Regina? I need 
somebody closer. Our people need somebody closer so we can 
actually have some hands on, somebody to talk to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I’m sure the Minister of Highways, 
when he’s here, will tell you exactly what’s going to happen in 
your area. As you can imagine, I can’t tell what is going to 
happen in your particular area. But I can tell you this. I can say 
that the Department of Highways has assured us that the 
changes being made will not affect the service that people will 
get with respect to their roads. In fact they’re saying that these 
changes are required in order to ensure that you do have 
adequate funds for roads. 
 
And again, I don’t want to sound harsh with the members 
opposite, but they only look at part of the equation here. If we 
have a problem, I don’t know if . . . there was a report today on  
  



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

roads. If there is a major, major problem with respect to roads, 
the main factor right now is the Crow benefit and the fact that 
the federal Liberal government cancelled the Crow benefit and 
what that is going to do with our highways. 
 
Those are the sorts of things that really do loom as big and 
important issues. And what I’m saying to the member opposite 
is, you need to be balanced. If you’re concerned about roads, 
and that’s fine, we’re saying we’re spending more on roads. 
 
I think you also need though to join with us and to say to your 
federal counterparts, you cancelled the Crow benefit; you took 
hundreds of millions of dollars each and every year out of this 
province. You now have an obligation as a national government 
to not give up on transportation, to not just throw out a little bit 
of money one time, but an ongoing commitment to help us 
provide an adequate transportation system in this province. 
 
So I mean that’s also a big part of the equation. The major 
threat to our roads is the cancellation of the Crow benefit and 
what strains and stresses that’s going to be putting on our road 
system. And that simply cannot be ignored. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m pleased to know that it’s okay that I don’t 
have a problem with the highways in my area, because I do 
have a big problem with them. And the concerns that are 
happening with the condition of our highways isn’t something 
that’s going to be either fixed or happened in the last two years. 
It was a great big . . . it was a big problem. 
 
My problem is that right now, tomorrow morning if there’s a 
problem with these depots being closed, there’s nobody there. 
Now it doesn’t matter how philosophizing you want to get, if 
there’s nobody there to call on, that’s not going to help the 
people out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The other question I have, I see on that third line down, 
Economic Development has an estimate of 36,559, and down 
further there’s also another Economic Development for 4,600 
 I guess that’s in thousands of dollars. Could you explain to 
me why there’s two different lines on Economic Development? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What I would say to the member 
opposite is one is spending and the other is loans. 
 
But I really cannot let the record show that there is simply 
nobody going to be there for your highways. The member 
opposite knows that that will not be true. The member opposite 
knows that there may be some changes as to where the 
particular truck is located or whatever, but there will be 
somebody there for the highways of this province. 
 
And again I’m saying to the member opposite, she needs then, 
if she doesn’t agree with what happened, to give us an answer. 
Should we have across this government say, it’s okay, 
administrative costs don’t bother us. I know you can find 
savings in administration in Department of Highways; don’t do 
it, because people really care about administrative staff and 
costs being in place, not about their highways. 
 
When they say to us, we can provide the service better by  

changing the way we provide the service, surely it’s our 
obligation . . . people out in exactly the areas you’re talking 
about in rural Saskatchewan said, cut administrative costs, put 
more money into front-line services, which is what is happening 
in Highways. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I don’t know if you’re aware 
out in rural . . . even in my constituency it can take me three and 
a half hours just to get from one end of the constituency to 
another. And the way that the depots are set up right now, that’s 
how long it would take a truck to get to places that have various 
problems. 
 
Also, I don’t know if you’re aware that in my constituency 
there is 11 different rural telephone exchanges. We don’t know 
everybody in the backyard. We don’t know the people that are 
in charge of things. I think that before there should be any more 
of these major cuts, people have to have an opportunity to be 
educated and to know what’s happening and not to make the 
same mistakes that were made in the health districts. 
 
I guess that’s my comments to the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again I would say to the 
member opposite, you really don’t want to become associated 
with, everything’s got to stay the same. The current 
maintenance system that exists right now was put was in place 
in the 1960s. So it’s been in place for over 30 years. 
 
The Department of Highways didn’t just sort of wake up one 
day and say, well I think we’re just going to change it. They did 
an extensive review of what would happen if it was changed 
and how the level of service would be affected. 
 
And they concluded, after an extensive review, that in fact it 
needed to be changed. It was over 30 years old. It no longer 
applied to the conditions as they exist. And by making these 
changes, they could in fact provide more money for actually 
preserving the roads that exist, which is what the people of the 
province would like them to do. 
 
People may not like change. They might very well like 
everything to remain the same. I don’t, by the way, believe 
that’s true, people in rural Saskatchewan. I think they are quite 
prepared to accept change. So as I say, this was something that 
was done after a lot of work, a lot of study. The equipment has 
changed. The equipment that we had in the ’60s is not the same 
equipment we have today. And it is our view that the service 
will be maintained. It will be delivered in a different way. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister is promising me that the 
service will be maintained or even upgraded, and of course 
that’s what the people out in rural Saskatchewan want to hear. 
 
I guess I understood from maybe speaking to the Chair, that I 
can’t ask specific questions on specific programs. Am I correct 
in that assumption? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The member’s correct. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I promise you I’ll be the last guy up here on  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

this side. Oh sorry, there might be one guy closing off. 
 
Just two quick questions, Madam Minister. I want to also 
welcome your officials here today. But in the interim supply 
that you’re now giving to the third-party organizations, the cuts 
to the budget will be reflected in these third-party grants, is that 
correct? 
 
Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 
it’s one-twelfth of all the spending of the government, so 
whatever was going to be spent over the 12 months, it just takes 
one-twelfth of it and allows the departments to spend that. So it 
reflects everything that is in the budget. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So just in the cash flow perspective on this 
interim supply deal  of course we don’t want to tie matters up 
any  but just for the question. Does one-twelfth of the 
funding pose any particular hardship for any group out there 
that does receive funding? By hardship, I mean interest on 
overdraft charges, outstanding account interest, and so on and 
so forth. Is there any particular group that might be adversely 
affected by this one-twelfth scenario? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To our knowledge, it doesn’t. But 
that’s why we want to get this interim supply passed as quickly 
as possible, so that third parties are not having to go out and 
borrow money or extend lines of credit and pay interest because 
the government is not in a position to provide them with 
funding. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just think it’s 
important here, when the government is requesting interim 
supply, that we do just take a moment just to talk again about 
what’s fair and responsible and accountable in terms of 
spending. Last year the government chose not to take millions 
of dollars that were left in the liquor and the gaming fund, as 
well as they avoided taking $60 million that was offered as a 
dividend from the Crown corporations. Instead this government 
chose to take $188 million that it originally had planned to use 
in the gross revenue insurance program. And obviously the 
VLTs (video lottery terminal) and the Crown corporations are 
more important than our families. 
 
Mr. Chair, the taxpayers of the province are the shareholders of 
these Crown corporations. While the government insists upon 
being terribly aggressive with our farmers in sending out bills, 
it’s not nearly as aggressive with its Crown corporations. 
 
I would say to the members opposite that I think we’ve found 
another example of their contradictory ways. The members 
opposite feel it’s okay for the government not to collect 
dividends from the Crowns even though they rightfully are the 
property of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. At the same time the 
Minister of Agriculture tells us how unfair it is for us to suggest 
that he keep his promise with reference to the GRIP bills. 
 
Mr. Chair, there’s a double standard here. This government  

wants to make sure its family of Crowns keep all the money 
they need, but it has a different standard for the rest of our 
families. 
 
Mr. Chair, the motion before us today asks for certain sums of 
money. This government wants money out of the taxpayers for 
taxes while it isn’t willing to take the same from its Crown 
corporations. While the government doesn’t get the taxpayers 
the sums that rightfully belong to it, they continue to let the 
Crowns waste our money. 
 
However, Mr. Chair, at this point, we do feel it appropriate that 
we would end this debate unless the members of the third party, 
the members of the Tories, or the independent member, have 
anything further to add to the debate. We are at this time 
prepared to end. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I certainly cannot let 
this stand on the record. Mr. Member, your comments reflect 
the problem I’m trying to alert your caucus colleagues to, I 
mean, and I’m saying this in a friendly way. 
 
When you’ve been in politics for a few months, and you have 
major corporations saying your comments are reckless, not 
properly founded, and you have similar comments coming in 
from the press, you need to think carefully about the statements 
you’re making. 
 
Now I don’t know if it’s the member from Wood River who 
puts you into this mindset. I mean this was all rhetorical 
nonsense that you just came out with there. Absolute nonsense. 
And as I say, I wouldn’t know why you would do that sort of 
thing. I don’t even know how to go back and start to correct 
what you said here. 
 
Let’s start with the money from GRIP. That was taxpayers’ 
dollars from taxpayers across the province. Let’s go back to the 
Crown corporation dividends. Why have the . . . well you know, 
if the members would listen maybe they would find out what 
the answer was. I don’t think it’s reasonable to ask a question as 
you’re doing and then when I’m trying to give you the answer, 
as you do all the time, you just keep talking. 
 
Why have the Crown corporations not been able in the past to 
pay dividends? It’s because in that whole Crown sector are the 
megaprojects which we inherited from the previous 
administration. And things like SEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation) have been there in the 
past. So we’ve been having to write-off bad debts from the ’80s 
 not your responsibility; not our responsibility. 
 
But please don’t try to use this rhetoric that we don’t like 
families therefore we take GRIP money, and we do like Crowns 
therefore we don’t. This is past. This is Grant Devine rhetoric. 
This is the stuff that Grant Devine said in 1982. 
 
Please try to focus on some basic facts. If the Crowns have been 
unable to provide dividends in the past it’s because of the 
megaprojects and the need to write off debts there. With respect 
to the Liquor Board, we were very upfront with the press in the 
previous year. We said look, we’ve had a very, very, very good  
  



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1996 

year  ‘94-95  we’re reserving this money for unexpected 
circumstances. 
 
And they expected us to spend the money during the election. 
They said, well that’s your election kitty. We said, you just 
watch; we won’t spend it. And we didn’t. And in fact the 
unexpected circumstances was losing over $400 million in 
equalization, in which we then use that extra money to ensure 
we can continue to balance the books. 
 
You know your own person in Ottawa, the one you speak for all 
the time, Paul Martin, has established a contingency fund to do 
exactly that  to say in case there’s an unexpected emergency, 
here’s money we set aside for that so we can continue to 
balance the books. 
 
But I would really, honestly say to the member opposite: we 
should have good debates in this House, but they should be 
elevated debates. They shouldn’t be at an old-fashioned 1982 
rhetorical level that the member from Wood River seems to 
like. The public is tired of that. Let’s lay some honest facts on 
the table and let’s debate them. And let’s elevate them. 
 
And I really, really wish  because it reflects on all politicians 
 that the members opposite would begin to act like Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition and elevate the debate to the level 
that the public would like to see it at. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I hereby move resolution 2: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1997 the sum 
$339,045,000 be granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

The Speaker:  When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Right now, sir. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 66, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service and for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1997, be now introduced 
and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By leave of the Assembly and under 
rule 55-2, I move that the Bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
(1200) 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I shall at the 
conclusion of my comments move a motion with respect to the 
adjournment of the House. 
 
Let me just make a couple of comments first, one of which is I 
gather that the proceedings were completed somewhat in 
advance of what, on my instructions, the staff of the Assembly 
had advised His Honour. I think we had told him 12:30 at the 
earliest, and I think that’s probably the earliest he’s going to get 
here. And to the extent that there’s a delay, I would take 
responsibility for it, but there may be a delay. 
 
Perhaps while there’s a demand for a speech, I do recall a 
couple of old speeches on potash expropriation we could bring 
up. The other alternative, Mr. Speaker, would be to take an 
informal adjournment, just an informal recess. Before doing so, 
however, I think I will deal with the motion for adjournment. I 
just ask members to think, and your honour, to think about it. 
 
I want to begin by wishing everybody a happy Easter. I think 
during this session we’ve made a good deal of progress. We 
have introduced most of the Bills  not entirely all of them  
but most of them are introduced. The budget debate is over. 
And I think members now have the opportunity to go back to 
their constituents and make good use of the three or four days in 
consulting with their constituents and getting a read on where 
the public sit on the issues which are I think now almost 
completely before the session. 
 
I want therefore to wish all members of the Assembly a happy 
Easter weekend, and their families. 
 
And with that I will move, by leave of the Assembly, seconded 
by the Minister of Agriculture: 
 

By leave of this Assembly and notwithstanding rule 3(4) of 
the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, that when this Assembly adjourns on April 
4, 1996, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 10 at 
1:30 p.m. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, before I agree to leave, I would just 
like to make a comment regarding the special weekend and 
certainly reiterate the sentiments expressed by the Government 
House Leader, that I extend to each and every one of the 
members in this Assembly, a very happy Easter. And trust that 
they will certainly enjoy this time, this special season, with  
  



April 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

their family, as I’m sure many of them are going to gather with 
family members, and appreciate the significance of the season, 
and extend to you and yours and the members of this Assembly 
a very happy and a pleasant Easter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Government House Leader and House Leader of 
the third party, best wishes from our caucus for the upcoming 
holiday and hope you enjoy the break with your families, and 
the fact that it was the official opposition ensured the House 
worked in a very smooth and quick fashion to deal with the 
business at hand and so that this break would be enjoyed by all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to suggest that we  I 
think I need leave for this  with leave, that we recess until 
called by the Speaker. And you could perhaps sound the bell for 
a 5-minute warning; we’ll return. Perhaps that’s the best way to 
do it is to . . . I move we recess. With leave, I move we recess 
until summoned by the Speaker with the bell. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 12:32 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No.   7 - An Act to repeal The Industrial Incentive 

Program Act 
Bill No. 25 - An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 

1990 
Bill No. 26 - An Act to amend the Statute Law 
Bill No. 30 - An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 
Bill No. 16 - An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 
Bill No. 28 - An Act to provide for the Establishment, 

Development and Maintenance of Public 
Libraries 

Bill No. 29 - An Act to enable Co-operation among all 
Types of Autonomous Libraries for the 
Provision of Library Services 

Bill No. 23 - An Act to amend The Archives Act 
Bill No.   9 - An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 
Bill No. 10 - An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, 

Consumer Products Warranties and Unsolicited 
Goods and Credit Cards 

Bill No. 31 - An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance 
Act 

 
His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 

Bill No. 66 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1997 

 
His Honour:  In the name of Her Majesty, I thank the 
Legislative Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to 
this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:35 p.m. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker:  Before adjourning the House, I want to wish 
to each of you that over this weekend and from now until we 
return on Wednesday, that the joy of the Easter season is 
something that you will know in your hearts, and in your 
families, in your homes, and your home communities. Have 
yourself a very happy Easter. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:37 p.m. 
 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 763 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 763 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 
  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 764 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 
  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 771 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 18th Annual Powwow 
  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 764 
 Easter Greetings 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
 Agri-Food Trade Mission 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
 Passover 
  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 765 
 Goohsen-Nystuen Nuptials 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
 Genesis Community Conservancy Incorporated Launched 
  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 766 
 Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Contract 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 766 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Districts Funding 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 766 
 Tax Relief 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 767 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 768 
 Job Creation 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 768 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 768 
 Teachers’ Collective Agreement 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 769 
  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 769 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 770 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
Motions for Interim Supply 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 771 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 771 
  Aldridge ............................................................................................................................................................................. 772, 779 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 774 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 774 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 775 
  Belanger ............................................................................................................................................................................. 775, 778 



 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 775 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 780 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 780 
MOTIONS 
Hours of Sitting 
  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 780 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 780 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 781 
ROYAL ASSENT ............................................................................................................................................................................. 781 
 


