
















































May 14, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1591 

 May 14, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the closure 

of the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Vibank, 

Kronau, and Montmartre. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of names of concerned citizens from 

throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre 

closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Yellow Grass 

and Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan residents 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

Pelly, Gravelbourg, Grenfell, Redvers, Ogema, and a number 

from Regina. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Regina. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today as 

well to present a petition from the people of southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

This petition is signed by the residents of Regina Beach, and as 

well from the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 

petitions of names regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

centres such White City, Balgonie, Edenwold. We have Pilot 

Butte on here, Odessa, Kipling, as well as a number from the 

city of Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we rise 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Regina. They’re from Biggar. They’re from Abbey. 

They’re from all throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. Thank 

you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 

Corporation, provide a list of the following: (1) all Crown 

projects contracted pursuant to the terms of the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement in the past year, and  



1592  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

the cost of each contract; (2) all Crown projects contracted 

outside the terms of the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement in the past year, and the cost of each contract. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Indian and 

Metis Affairs Secretariat regarding the employment of first 

nations people in the public sector: (1) how many first 

nations people are employed by the Government of 

Saskatchewan; (2) could you please provide a breakdown 

of the department, sectors, and Crown corporations in 

which these people work? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to introduce to you and to the other members of the 

Assembly, 54 grade 5 students from McLurg School in the 

constituency of Regina Sherwood. They are accompanied today 

by their teachers, Carol Grant and Verna Taylor. They’ll be here 

in question period until 2 o’clock and then going for a tour of 

the building, after which time I’ll be joining them for a question 

and answer period. And I’d like you to join with me to welcome 

them all here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my very great pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to the members, a group of 52 students who are seated in your 

gallery. These students are in grades 4 and 5 at St. Augustine 

School in the constituency of Regina Victoria. 

 

They are accompanied here today by their teachers, Mr. Doug 

Devernichuk and Mrs. Edith Seiferling. And I can tell you from 

a recent visit to the school and meeting with these students and 

judging from their good information about the legislative 

process and their excellent questions, Saskatchewan’s future is 

in good hands. And I look forward to meeting with them later. I 

would ask all the members to join with me to welcome these 

students here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Child Care Week 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to offer recognition 

of this week’s designation as Child Care Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The importance of child care workers in our society cannot be 

overlooked because they are helping to mould Saskatchewan’s 

future. Thousands of Saskatchewan mothers and fathers go to 

work every day, leaving their children in the hands of 

care-givers. These child care workers are trusted to keep the 

children safe, to encourage and enhance the personal growth of 

each child in meaningful ways. 

Many Saskatchewan child care associations are seeking support 

in their efforts to establish accessible yet affordable child care. 

We salute their efforts for the job that they do every day when 

they provide care for Saskatchewan’s children. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

week of May 12 to the 18 has been proclaimed Child Care 

Week in Saskatchewan. As part of that week, Tuesday, today, 

May 14, has been proclaimed Care-giver Appreciation Day. 

 

Affordable, high quality, and reliable child care is a critical 

necessity today for most parents including both of my 

daughters. Some parents choose day care for their children 

believing the presence of motivated and trained child care staff 

to be beneficial to their child’s well-being. Others prefer the 

more home-like atmosphere of licensed day care homes or 

private babysitters. 

 

Because we recognize a very important role played by trained 

and knowledgeable, front-line staff, we allocated $500,000 in 

the recent budget to improve wages for child day care workers 

across the province. Subsidies are available to qualifying 

working or student parents who place their children in licensed 

day care homes or day care centres. 

 

Because quality child care is so important, I encourage parents 

throughout the province to take a few moments on Care-giver 

Appreciation Day or at some point during Child Care Week to 

express their appreciation to those who care for their children. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Endeavour Archery Club 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have recognized 

many sporting groups during the past few months. Today I 

would like to recognize the Endeavour School Archery Club. It 

successfully competed in their first Saskatchewan Junior 

Olympic Provincial Tournament in Martensville. 

 

This club was formed in January, 1996 by Rod Steciuk, 

principal of Endeavour School. These enthusiastic archers met 

Tuesday and Thursday after school to practice. 

 

Craig Galiz took first place in a competition in junior bowmen; 

while fellow teammates Evan Steppan took fourth place, and 

Jonathan Belesky took sixth, and Kyla Dolton was seventh. 

Selene Dolton placed seventh in the yeoman class. 

 

In the class of bowmen 12 and over, Gordon Steppan came in 

second and Derrick Palagian came in fourth. Clinton Belesky 

competed in the Olympian class. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the members of the 

archery club and their coach for their success at the 

Saskatchewan Junior Olympic Provincial Tournament. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

Child Care-givers 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join the other members of this Assembly who have 

recognized Child Care Week and certainly extend a hand on 

behalf of our caucus to each and every one who offers care, 

whether it’s through a day care program, a 

government-subsidized program or private care program. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s one group in our society that 

we continually neglect to recognize and that’s the mothers, and 

the parents and the families who choose to remain at home and 

offer that day care, that personal day care, and personal service. 

 

So while we acknowledge the work and the fact that there are 

people in our society that have to look to other people to look 

after their children while they’re providing for themselves, let’s 

not forget that a segment of our society who has made that 

choice as well, because they’re able to, to provide that care on 

their own, personally. And I extend my hat and hands off and 

congratulations to all the care-givers, especially the mothers of 

our society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Business for Regina 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 

opportunity Friday last to cut the ribbon officially opening a 

new business in Regina. Scott’s Concrete Garden is located on 

Victoria Avenue East. It’s the fruit of many years of labour for 

Daniel Scott, a young entrepreneur from Southey, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Daniel is an immigrant from Alberta and tells me after two and 

a half years of looking for a job there, he tells me now the place 

to be is in Saskatchewan; that’s where everything is happening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Scott’s garden ornaments are just that  garden 

ornaments. But they’re made of solid concrete, and his business 

is a family effort. Daniel and his father Donald make the forms 

and pour the cement, while his mother Millie does most of the 

painting. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate Daniel 

and the entire Scott family, and to wish Daniel and all the 

family the very best in their new ventures here in Regina. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

WestJet Service 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The travelling 

public in Regina and southern Saskatchewan got some good 

news the other day. The news applies to those increasing 

numbers coming to Regina. WestJet Airlines has announced 

that it will begin service to Regina on June 13 with daily, 

non-stop flights between here and Edmonton. 

 

WestJet is a no-frills discount courier, and its announced  

one-way fare to Edmonton will be approximately $69. I have 

not yet checked the schedule, but for those planning to attend 

the Roughrider-Eskimo game this fall, this is good news indeed. 

As a matter of fact, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy has 

her green and white sweatsuit packed already. Other flights will 

be available to Vancouver, Victoria, Calgary, and Kelowna, and 

more destinations are being considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any new venture, especially one in a very 

competitive passenger business, faces stiff challenges before it 

succeeds. This will be true for WestJet. But two things are 

worth noting. First, since it began operating out of Calgary this 

February, WestJet has carried more than 100,000 passengers, an 

indication that it does have a solid business plan. Second, the 

confidence WestJet is showing in Saskatchewan by establishing 

itself is further evidence that here is a place to come rather than 

to pass over. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan German Language Contest Winners 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, six 

winners were selected at the Saskatchewan German language 

contest held recently at Aden Bowman Collegiate in Saskatoon. 

 

Of the 40 German language students who entered the 

competition in one of two categories  students from 

German-speaking homes and students from 

non-German-speaking homes  12 made it to the Saskatoon 

finals, one of whom I’m proud to say was my son, Jay. 

 

The students demonstrated their written and spoken German in 

an interview, an essay, and a set of multiple-choice questions 

focusing on grammar and vocabulary. The winners of the 

non-German-speaking home category were Chad Sieverson, 

Susan Nase, and Mary Davies, all of Saskatoon; while the 

winners of the German-speaking home category were Natallie 

Kossmann of Lumsden, Marcus Reinkens of White City, and 

Petra Benson of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, der deutsche Sprachwettbewerb wird jährlich 

abwechselnd in Saskatoon and Regina von dem Verband 

Deutscher Sprachlehrer in Saskatchewan veranstaltet. Der 

Sprachwettbewerb steht den Schülern aller High Schools und 

Samstagsschulen offen. 

 

The language contest was organized by Jeff Black and Sigrid 

Hansen, German teachers at Aden Bowman and Walter Murray 

collegiates, under the sponsorship of the Saskatchewan German 

Council. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Nurses’ Collective Bargaining 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan nurses’ union is at the bargaining table today 

seeking a new contract on behalf of 6,700 employees. As the  



1594  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

Minister of Health is aware, safe patient care is one of the 

priority issues SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) has taken 

to the negotiating table. Nurses’ union president Judy Junor 

says this is because, and I quote: 

 

Safe care is being jeopardized every day by too few nurses, 

no nurses on call to cover emergencies, and nurses are not 

being replaced if they are ill. Combine this with more cuts 

and we’ve got a health care system in crisis. 

 

Will the minister explain how his government plans on 

addressing these concerns at the bargaining table? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the Leader of 

the Opposition is aware that the government will not be at the 

bargaining table. The bargaining will be between the union of 

nurses and the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations. 

 

And some comments are being made in the context of the 

collective bargaining between the nurses and their employer 

organization, and I’m confident that the safety of patients and 

health care workers is a major consideration for those parties, as 

indeed it is for the government. 

 

And I’m also quite confident, Mr. Speaker, that those parties 

will come up with an appropriate resolution to any differences 

they may have in their bargaining. And the bargaining table is 

the place where these issues should properly be addressed, and I 

know that the member will respect that process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do respect that 

process. It’s just a matter of who does control the purse-strings. 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s chief negotiators indicated that 

any salary increases arising from these contract talks will come 

out of district health board operating budgets. 

 

As a result, health districts, many of which have already 

received a reduction in funding from this NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government, are poised to cut and slash even 

more services and staff to meet their bottom line. In Weyburn 

yesterday nurses protested to bring this fact to the attention of 

this government, which appears to be totally ignorant of the 

severity of this issue. 

 

Will the minister explain what has to happen before his 

government acknowledges there is a serious problem and 

begins addressing it? Hopefully, it does not take a loss of life to 

underline this serious crisis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I would say that we have 

some challenges in the health care system. I would not describe 

them as crises. If we wanted to look at a crisis, Mr. Speaker, we 

would look at what’s happening at the moment in the Liberal 

Party. But the member talks about funding for health care. 

I want to remind the member, Mr. Speaker, that the party with 

which the member has associated himself, namely the Liberal 

Party, has cut back on health care spending in this province by 

approximately $50 million this year. But for every dollar that 

the Liberals have taken out of health care, we have put a dollar 

back in, Mr. Speaker, because the New Democrats are 

committed to our public medicare system. 

 

And I want to say that I think it was put rather well in a recent 

edition of a publication called Prairie Voice which is put out by 

the Voice of People with Disabilities. But in that publication a 

Michael Huck writes: 

 

Reduced federal financial commitment for human services 

under the CHST block-funding arrangement translates into 

increased provincial government financial responsibilities 

and a greater competition for resources. 

 

The problem comes from Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Information Network 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health was questioned in this House recently about 

the development of a health information network. When asked 

about the cost of this network the minister indicated that $70 

million will be spent to develop and implement this system over 

a four-year period  all of this to eventually save about $5 

million annually. 

 

Will the minister explain how he can justify this cost, given the 

fact that it will be 14 years before an outdated system can be 

paid off? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member 

the last time he raised, I think, essentially the same question, 

there has been no decision arrived at as to the Saskatchewan 

Health Information Network. This is a matter that the provincial 

government, the Department of Health, is exploring in 

conjunction with the health districts and SAHO (Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations),the organization that 

represents the health districts. Anything that is done will be 

done in conjunction with those parties. It will not be done by 

the government alone. 

 

But I want to say to the member that he should bear in mind 

that there will not only be savings from an enhanced 

information system, but the health districts presently spend 

money on information management, Mr. Speaker, and part of 

that money would be saved if indeed there was a different 

system. 

 

But in any event, all of the parties will be involved in that 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, this health information network 

will take a minimum of $70 million to develop and implement, 

yet the minister continues to skirt the real issue here. And when 

he’s questioned about the obvious fiscal concerns related to this 

project, he dances around this very issue. 

 

There’s only so many dollars in the health care system, and as 

my colleagues have pointed out regularly in this House  with 

a great deal of evidence, I might add  the NDP government 

has left gigantic cracks which our sick and our elderly continue 

to fall through. 

 

Will the minister indicate where the funds for this network will 

come from and what the impact will be on health district 

funding, given the tight financial rope that many of these people 

are walking? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I know one thing for sure, Mr. 

Speaker, the money for health care certainly isn’t going to come 

from Ottawa and it certainly isn’t going to come from the 

Liberal Party. 

 

But I want to say to the member that, if a decision is made to 

make a better health information system, a province-wide health 

information system for the people of the province and 

especially the rural people, Mr. Speaker, it will be done in 

conjunction with the health districts themselves. It will not be a 

unilateral decision made by the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the challenges we have is surely to have an 

information system that allows us to have somebody in rural 

Saskatchewan get assessed fairly quickly by somebody in 

another centre, perhaps a specialist, who may want to have 

information about that person, which would be a great benefit 

to some of the people that the member represents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Service Districts Act 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the less than positive view that 

rural communities have about this NDP government is very 

evident at a conference taking place this week involving RM 

(rural municipality) administrators. Besides the issue of 

offloading by this government, they continue to be wary of the 

proposed legislation which could force them into 

amalgamation. 

 

The minister is charge of Municipal Government has indicated 

to this group that such legislation, and I quote: “is on the back 

burner, and I’ve suggested to my cabinet colleagues that it 

should stay there.” 

 

Madam Minister, I couldn’t agree more. Will you make then 

that commitment, in this House today, to withdraw The Service 

Districts Act and provide local governments with time to arrive 

at their own decisions regarding amalgamation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, what we are trying to do 

is to consult with the municipal organizations and individual 

municipalities to explain to them the intention of the Act. 

 

And as long as we keep having misleading headlines and 

misleading media reports which says that The Service Districts 

Act is about amalgamation . . . The Service Districts Act, for 

anyone who would care to read it, is about everything but 

amalgamation. We are trying to make sure, before we pass the 

legislation, that municipalities have the correct information 

about what the legislation is designed to do for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

for the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. Minister, we 

now have a copy of the leaked document your officials prepared 

for you, advising you against the union-preference tendering 

policy. And it’s amazing how you ignore the facts when they’re 

staring you right in the face. You keep saying this policy 

doesn’t drive up the costs, even though you know that’s not the 

truth. 

 

The chamber of commerce says the union preference tendering 

drives up costs. The Saskatchewan Construction Association 

says union preference tendering drives up costs. Even your own 

officials say that union preference tendering drives up costs. 

And yet you stand in here and deny it. 

 

Mr. Minister, with so much evidence staring you in the face, 

how can you refuse to admit that union preference tendering 

drives the cost of Crown construction projects up? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the members have 

uncovered a document that most of the world discovered 

yesterday. This is an amazing piece of research that the 

members opposite have done. 

 

And I thought one of their members was quoting from it 

yesterday, and I thought we had answered the question 

yesterday. And I think the members opposite understood what 

we described yesterday, that in the process of government 

decision making, officials within our departments write things 

to inform ministers before we make decisions. 

 

At the end of the day, we debate issues and come to conclusions 

and accept that some information is more relevant than others. 

And I can tell members that in this case the information they are 

suggesting is true has been proven by experience not to be true. 

And I would suggest to the members opposite they stop trying 

to create division between successful industry and labour in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact we 

discovered this document on Friday and we’re bringing it up  



1596  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

again today because of your nonsense answers yesterday. The 

fact is no one believes your figures, Mr. Minister. And why 

should they, because they change every day. On March 18 you 

said that there was $15 million worth of projects tendered under 

the union preference policy and yet yesterday the Minister for 

Economic Development said there was $30 million. You seem 

to be pulling numbers out of the air. 

 

Mr. Minister, nobody believes you when you say this policy 

isn’t driving up costs. The construction association has 

examples proving that this policy is more expensive, but you 

refuse to listen. We simply can’t believe your figures or the 

figures of the Economic Development minister because they 

have more to do with politics than they do with reality and 

truth. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you commission an independent audit of the 

projects tendered last year under the CCTA (Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement)? Will you allow an 

independent auditor to look at the figures and tell this Assembly 

how much costs were driven up by your union preference 

policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, before the members opposite 

can believe figures they need to stop long enough to listen, to 

understand what the figures are. It was clearly reported to this 

House that in the first construction season the Crown Tendering 

Agreement . . . under the Crown Tendering Agreement, $15 

million worth of contracts were done. And that’s true. And by 

the time the members asked another question in the House, then 

the Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline had been tendered, and that was 

another $15 million. And that makes $30 million. 

 

Now I know the members opposite aren’t very good at math, 

but I will go through it again for them if they want to ask the 

question again. 

 

Now what I want to say to the members opposite is that they 

who created a relationship of animosity and discord in the 

construction industry in Saskatchewan, disrespecting the basic 

rights of workers that are recognized in every country of the 

world under the United Nations agreement, they who created 

that circumstance surely ought not to complain when a 

government comes into power that wants to try and re-establish 

a sound relationship and a sound working relationship between 

workers and business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well one thing 

we do know is when we’re being overcharged, which is what’s 

happening under this policy. 

 

In fact this leaked document contains CIC’s (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) communications 

strategy for the union preference policy. And as part of that 

communications strategy, CIC is directed to prepare an article 

on the union preference policy for The Commonwealth, the 

NDP’s party newspaper. And I have a copy of that article right  

here, Mr. Speaker, as it appeared in the April ’95 

Commonwealth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CIC is supposed to be working on behalf of all 

people in Saskatchewan, not just NDP partisans. 

 

My question is for the Premier, the leader of this government 

and the Leader of the NDP. Mr. Premier, do you think it’s 

appropriate that CIC, a government Crown, is doing 

communications work for the NDP? How many other 

government departments and Crowns use taxpayers’ dollars to 

prepare communications items specifically for the NDP, and 

will you put a stop to this partisan practice immediately? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat to the 

member opposite that the nature of the policy, which they insist 

on trying to undermine, is a policy that’s meant to work 

cooperatively with the working people of the province and the 

construction trades. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite who questioned this 

policy yesterday and are questioning it again today, that as was 

said a week ago and as will be said today and will be said again 

in the future, that we have undertaken the review of the policy. 

We have heard many comments from many people. We are 

going to be meeting with the construction association in a 

couple of . . . in another week, and we will take the comments 

under advisement about the policy and discuss it with the 

partners to the agreement. 

 

I can say that last year the construction association was 

unwilling to participate in the discussions, and I want to 

congratulate the construction association for saying they’re 

willing to sit down with us and talk to us about it. We’re going 

to try and work for a cooperative solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Independent Prosecutor’s Report 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, in April of 

last year, just prior to the election, your department secretly 

referred the Dean Mattison SaskTrust case to an independent 

prosecutor in Alberta. As we all know, Mr. Mattison is the 

former law partner of the Premier and the former minister of 

Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have now learned that taxpayers paid over 

$43,000 for this independent review which you are refusing to 

release. Mr. Minister, this case has caused a lot of controversy, 

particularly in Saskatoon, and taxpayers have paid a lot of 

money for this secret prosecutor’s report. Don’t you think they 

have a right to see the results of this report? Mr. Minister, will 

you release this report today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for that question. This matter relates to public prosecutions. 

And there are many situations where matters are investigated  



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

and no charges are laid. Our policy is not to release that 

information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well a follow-up question, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister has just said that reports of this nature are not usually 

released. Well, Mr. Minister, that is simply not accurate. 

 

You released the Milgaard report. You released the Phoenix 

Advertising report. You released the report on the former 

minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, why won’t you clear the air 

and release this report? What are you trying to hide? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank the member for the 

further question. The policy in the department is that when 

matters are investigated, we do not normally release the 

information. In this particular case the matter had some other 

aspects so we sought some outside advice. And in that situation 

it’s been decided that we would not release the report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is also for the Minister of Justice. 

 

On April 23, I raised some grave concerns in this House about 

the child prostitution problem in Saskatchewan. The minister 

assured me that he recognized there is a problem, and that the 

Health, Justice, and Social Services departments were working 

with community groups on the child prostitution problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have received copies of correspondence and 

proposals sent to me by the Egadz street outreach program in 

Saskatoon. The same correspondence was sent to the Justice 

minister, Social Service minister, and the Premier, requesting a 

meeting with someone in government. 

 

These requests have been going on throughout the last year. Mr. 

Speaker, Egadz workers talk to and assist troubled young 

people on the streets every night. This group has developed a 

proposal to help child prostitutes off the streets and into 

transition shelters. The government received initial 

correspondence one year ago and has neglected to take further 

action on these requests. 

 

How can the Minister of Justice say he is working to fight child 

prostitution if he won’t even listen to detailed proposals from 

groups who work with street youth every night? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for that question, which is a follow-up from what was discussed 

in April. There are a number of groups that are working in the 

area of child prostitution. I met in Regina with the group that’s 

involved with the Children Off The Streets program. We are 

looking at some of the issues there. 

 

I have had discussions, and I know members of the department 

have had discussions, with the people in Saskatoon who are 

reviewing all of the recommendations that came from the report 

that was presented to the city council in Saskatoon. The Egadz 

group are part of all of these discussions, and there have been 

some discussions that relate to some of the proposals that the 

Egadz group has. 

 

We are working on this area. It’s a very difficult problem. It 

involves many aspects of the Justice system, the Social Services 

system, the Health system, and all of these things are being 

looked at very carefully. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

outreach workers helping Saskatoon’s street youth with Egadz 

are trying to get these kids off the streets now. As their letters 

inform the minister, they want a better system put in place to 

shelter these youths until Social Services and the Justice 

officials can deal with their cases. Ignoring the issue won’t 

make it go away. These young people are our future, and we 

cannot in good conscience minimize the impact of our actions 

or lack of action on their lives. 

 

Will the minister commit to meeting with the people from 

Egadz so that some of the problems facing street youth and 

child prostitutes get immediate attention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for the further question. The people in the Egadz group are part 

of the overall discussion in Saskatoon, and if they aren’t, they 

should be. But I know that they are. What is happening here is 

that we are trying to deal with an overall problem, and we’re 

dealing with it with the community where they identify the 

concerns. 

 

One of our great difficulties obviously is that we have fewer 

dollars this year to deal with some of these problems because of 

what’s happened with the federal government withdrawing 

from many of the social areas that they should be involved in. 

And we think that there may be some very positive things that 

the members opposite could do by encouraging some of the 

people in the federal government to recognize that they need to 

respond to the community in the same way that we do here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have met 

with Regina’s Steering Committee on Child Prostitution and 

Egadz in Saskatoon, who are both proposing the establishment 

of transitional safe houses for child prostitutes. They tell me 

that they have not met with government officials yet, even 

though they have made many requests. 

 

Calgary already has such a transitional safe house, and the 

Alberta government now is setting up a task force to study child 

the prostitution issue. Saskatchewan groups lack coordination 

on this issue. They are looking to this government to take the 

leadership role. Child prostitution is a complex problem that  



1598  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

involves communities and the government. 

 

When will this government take the leadership role on this issue 

and bring all the stakeholders together to construct a plan to 

keep our young people from selling their bodies and their souls 

on the streets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to respond to that by 

saying that our department, along with officials from Social 

Services, have been taking a leadership role on this issue, both 

through the membership in the Saskatoon task force on child 

prostitution where we have one of the members from the 

Department of Justice, and also we’ve been funding a research 

project on child prostitution in Regina. 

 

Both of these endeavours have resulted in a number of 

recommendations being made concerning community and 

government responses. There’s a need for further discussion 

with the community, because it’s in the community that these 

problems are going to be solved. 

 

I invite the member opposite to be involved with that process, 

and we will work with them as well as others. Their role that 

would be very helpful, would be to seek further federal 

involvement from their confrères in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Housing 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, my first question is for the 

Minister of Northern Affairs. Mr. Minister, you have seen 

firsthand how desperate the housing situation is in northern 

Saskatchewan. I’m sure you, like I, have visited many elders 

who are forced to spend their golden years in overcrowded or 

run-down housing. Many elders don’t even have water or 

sewage, which many in the South may find inconceivable. 

 

And the thing is, Mr. Speaker, we owe our elders much more. 

They deserve decent and safe housing, but this government has 

no program in place to help ensure housing standards are met. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you tell this Assembly what your government 

is doing to make sure that northern seniors, and seniors across 

the province, have a safe, warm, decent place to live? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca 

again should be directing his question to, not only the minister 

in charge of CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation) housing in Ottawa, but also the Minister of Indian 

Affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the federal government has done is this. 

They have completely cut 100 per cent funding in regards to 

housing. The last 15 houses in northern Saskatchewan were 

cost-shared this past year in Cumberland House and also in La 

Loche. The housing, which was mostly built . . . 60 per cent of  

the housing in northern Saskatchewan was a 60/40 cost-shared 

program over the years from the 1970s to now. It was now gone 

from the federal Liberals. 

 

What we’re saying is that indeed the Liberal government should 

be coming out with a new program to be helping out in regards 

to the needs, not only with the seniors in the North, but the 

children of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

instead of coming up with a long-term solution for your 

constituents and people across this province, and especially in 

northern Saskatchewan, you react by attacking the federal 

government. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, it’s time for the provincial government to 

dig deep down and to find some compassion. Whether its health 

care, whether it’s roads, or whether it’s housing for children or 

for seniors, it’s time for a made-in-Saskatchewan solution. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you promise the people of the North that you 

will lobby your government to develop a long-term plan for 

northern housing that will meet the needs of families, single 

people, and especially elders  that you’ll persist until they’ve 

addressed this very, very serious issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll reiterate. Prior to the last 

election, the federal Liberals were dancing up a jig in a storm in 

northern Saskatchewan saying they will help people in the 

North. What we saw was devastating cuts in regards to $114 

million in education, health, and social services. We saw 

housing cuts  off-reserve housing in that regard, absolutely 

nothing. 

 

And when you’re seeing the member  the MP (Member of 

Parliament) from Churchill, Prince Albert-Churchill, Mr. 

Kirkby  that person made all kinds of promises. The Liberals 

make all kinds of promises when they’re opposition, but they 

never keep them when they’re in government, Mr. Speaker. We 

put in on government in our four years in regards to sewer and 

water, $20 million in our term this past time, Mr. Speaker. 

Nothing from the Liberals. And I would say this is what the 

NDP government stands for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I would like to table, 

pursuant to section 222 (1) of The Elections Act, a report 

respecting annual fiscal returns of registered political parties for 

the fiscal year 1995, as provided by the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my privilege today to introduce to you and through you to 

all members of the House, a person who is no stranger to this 

place. I’m pleased to introduce Mayor Don Cody from the city 

of Prince Albert. Mr. Cody was a member of the legislature 

until 1982, at which time the people of Saskatchewan called for 

his retirement. 

 

They changed their minds and asked him to come back and 

serve as the mayor of Prince Albert. He’s been doing a great job 

for us up there and I’d like to have all members give Don a very 

warm welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Bill C-68 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 

my debate I will be presenting the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to confirm its 

commitment to retain provincial control of the enforcement 

of federal Bill C-68 and its regulations, to administer these 

laws and regulations in the interests of Saskatchewan 

people, and to act on behalf of responsible firearm owners 

by acting singly or participating with other provinces in a 

court challenge of federal firearms laws and regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been involved in this debate now for 

approximately two years. And in that time, there have been a 

significant amount of work done by the people of 

Saskatchewan, by the legislature of Saskatchewan, to present 

our point of view in dealing with this particular piece of 

legislation. And there has been general unanimity amongst the 

people of Saskatchewan and in this legislature in our opposition 

to federal Bill C-68, the Firearms Act. 

 

In fact this House has twice sent members to Ottawa to make 

presentations. The first time was to the House of Commons 

committee when the Bill was moving through the House of 

Commons. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, as a participant of 

that delegation that went to Ottawa, I was particularly offended 

by the actions of the Liberal members of that committee who 

personally attacked the credibility and the integrity of those 

people that made presentations there. They attacked them to try 

and discredit their points of view, to validate and support their 

own position on Bill C-68. And I believe that is a totally 

wrong-headed, pig-headed way to run a committee, Mr. 

Speaker, where you are simply there defending your point of 

view rather than listening to what any presenter may be giving 

to you as information and as ideas from the general public. 

 

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, once that committee held its  

deliberations, there were very, very minor amendments made to 

the Bill, and that was all. The Liberals rammed it through the 

House, and it moved on to the Senate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it was interesting when Bill C-68 hit the Senate. The 

senators there were much more willing to listen to what people 

had to say in regards to Bill C-68 and to the impact it was going 

to have on the lives of people across Canada, not just those 

people who live in major metropolitan areas such as Montreal, 

Toronto, and Vancouver. But they were prepared to listen and 

hear what people had to say from northern Canada, from 

Saskatchewan, from Newfoundland, from all parts of Canada. 

 

And in fact again I had the opportunity to participate in a 

delegation that made a presentation to the Senate committee 

along with the Minister of Justice. At that committee, the 

members of the committee asked us valid questions as to what 

our points of view were, why we supported that particular point 

of view. 

 

Although I must say that one particular Liberal senator was 

particularly offensive in that he accused all five of the attorney 

generals of western Canada  from Alberta, Saskatchewan, 

Manitoba, Yukon, and Northwest Territories  of being 

incompetent because they failed to support Bill C-68. 

 

An Hon. Member:  He was from Quebec. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  That particular senator, as my colleague 

points out, was from Quebec. Indeed, Senator De Bané was his 

name. And he was particularly rude and offensive to the point 

where the chairman of the committee demanded he apologize. 

When he refused, the chairman apologized on his behalf and on 

the committee’s behalf for his actions while we were there 

making our presentation. 

 

Once the committee reported to the House of Commons and it 

went to a vote, unfortunately the results were not such that we 

would like to see. In fact the senators from Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I found to be particularly attentive to the needs and 

concerns of Saskatchewan. They were wholeheartedly in 

support of the presentations made by this legislature to that 

committee. It didn’t matter whether they were Liberal or 

Conservative; they were all in opposition to Bill C-68 and voted 

accordingly. 

 

But when the vote came to the Senate, Mr. Speaker, those in 

opposition or those who favoured amendments to Bill C-68 lost 

that vote 47 to 53 because seven Conservative members  five 

of which were from Quebec, one from New Brunswick, and 

one from Manitoba  sided with the Liberals in support of that 

Bill. 

 

Four of the Liberal senators, including Senator Herb Sparrow 

from Saskatchewan, voted for the amendments on Bill C-68. 

And I would publicly like to thank all of the Saskatchewan 

senators for their support on that issue. 

 

But where did that leave us today? We have seen the 

regulations that have been presented by Allan Rock and Jean 

Chrétien when it comes to dealing with this particular piece of  



1600  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

legislation, and I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that those 

regulations are totally unworkable  totally unworkable when 

you look at all of the alternatives that were presented by 

reasonable people from across Saskatchewan, including the 

members of this legislature. 

 

Allan Rock and the Liberals simply ignored all of those 

recommendations and bowled ahead and passed the legislation 

as they had originally presented it. They wrote the regulations to 

be even more onerous than what the Bill had outlined. They 

were virtually impossible to administer, Mr. Speaker, if not 

totally impossible to administer. 

 

I won’t get into all of the small details of the Bills, but simply 

to say that in a rural area it would be totally impractical to deal 

with the regulations. If you’re out on the trap line and your 

home is a tent, how can you possibly carry a specific storage 

unit for storing your firearms overnight? It simply is not 

practical and would not work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So anyone out on a trap line with a firearm, and most trappers 

carry a firearm with them, would be criminals the day they left 

home to go out on their trap line. And I don’t believe that any 

government in Canada should simply be making a citizen of 

this country a criminal in carrying out their legitimate 

occupation, and an occupation which the government sanctions, 

Mr. Speaker. There was no compromise and no 

accommodations coming from the federal government and the 

federal minister on Bill C-68. 

 

When you look at northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, people 

borrow and lend firearms back and forth. Not everyone in the 

community may have a firearm, but virtually everyone in a 

community is a hunter. When they wish to go hunting, they 

simply go and borrow a firearm from a relative or a neighbour 

and proceed out to do their hunting. 

 

Under Bill C-68, Mr. Speaker, that would be illegal. Each and 

every one of those people who wish to go hunting would have 

had to have passed all of the hoops, jump through all of the 

legalities, the tests, the written tests, the demonstrations, 

everything pertaining to this regulation, and, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

simply not practical. A large number of these people who hunt, 

particularly across northern Saskatchewan, do not read and 

write English and would have a great deal of difficulty in 

passing those written tests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In rural Saskatchewan also, it’s not practical. Fact is most 

farmers keep a firearm on hand for the control of predators. 

This spring on my own farm our dog got tangled up with a rabid 

skunk and my wife had to call a neighbour over to deal with the 

skunk because I wasn’t available to assist her on that matter; 

and my wife is a city girl and has never had the opportunity to 

learn how to deal with firearms. 

 

My children, because I wasn’t there, are not allowed to deal 

with a firearm . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member 

from across the floor hollers that some city girls do know how 

to use firearms, and I agree with you  they do. My particular 

wife does not though, however. But I’m working on that. I’m 

working on that. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan the regulations, as 

outlined by Allan Rock initially, would not work. 

 

Storage is another problem. It doesn’t matter whether or not 

you’re in rural or urban Saskatchewan because the regulations 

say that you have to store a firearm in a specific room designed 

for the storage of firearms or a specific container designed for 

the storage of firearms. 

 

A bank vault, Mr. Speaker, would not qualify. It may have a 

foot-thick steel wall and a combination that only Houdini could 

break, but it wouldn’t qualify because it wasn’t built 

specifically for firearms. And I think that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the things that we have seen in this particular Act is a 

total lack of common sense. There has been no attempt to inject 

any common sense into this particular Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this motion calls on the provincial government 

to reaffirm its commitment to a court challenge, to stake out the 

ground of Saskatchewan in regards to Bill C-68. 

 

And I believe it’s very important that we do so because we’re 

talking about the cultural heritage of Saskatchewan, something 

that . . . Firearms have long been a part of Saskatchewan that 

we have learned to work with and deal with, and it’s as unique 

a part of Saskatchewan culture as French language is for 

Quebec. And yet we see in the Quebec situation a number of 

specific exemptions put in place or rules changed to 

accommodate the cultural heritage of Quebec. And I believe 

that we need the same sort of considerations in Bill C-68 for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Another reason for a court challenge, Mr. Speaker, is to defend 

our native treaty entitlements and rights. These entitlements and 

rights are being abridged by Bill C-68, and in fact I believe that 

they may very well be able to gain some benefits out of 

challenging Bill C-68 under those grounds. I believe the 

province should participate in an intervener status on that kind 

of a challenge. 

 

It also infringes on our provincial jurisdiction under section 92 

of the constitution, property rights, that clearly lays out that the 

registration, regulations, and fees regarding property are a 

provincial jurisdiction and not a federal jurisdiction, and we 

need to push and reaffirm our jurisdiction in that area. It’s an 

area that we have failed to protect adequately and I believe that 

we need to move ahead and do exactly that. 

 

Now a number of the groups around Saskatchewan are saying 

that we should opt out, that we shouldn’t participate in the 

administrations of this Act. And I would like to point out that 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) is a federal police 

force. The Court of Queen’s Bench is a federal court. So these 

are federal agents that are already active within the province of 

Saskatchewan, and the federal government has the ability to 

appoint a chief provincial firearms officer if we fail to do that. 

 

So I would ask the minister not to behave like Pontius Pilate 

and to wash his hands of this issue, but rather to reaffirm his 

commitment to a court challenge and to the administration of 

this Bill. 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

This Bill can be administered provincially for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan people. We have seen in the past that the Chief 

Provincial Firearms Officer has mitigated the law on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people, and I believe that is a positive role for the 

Minister of Justice to play in this area. 

 

The idea of opting out, Mr. Speaker, from the administration, I 

believe should only be considered as an absolute last resort 

when everything else has failed, when the federal government 

has simply refused to make any accommodations or give any 

considerations to Saskatchewan’s needs and our particular 

circumstances. 

 

So in final . . . in closing, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s extremely 

important that the province carry ahead with a court challenge 

to protect Saskatchewan’s rights, property rights, native 

entitlements. Also, that we must continue to administer the Act 

to protect Saskatchewan people from the most onerous parts of 

the regulations, and that only as a last resort should we opt out 

of any administration of that Act. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by 

the member from Rosthern: 

 

That this Assembly urges the government to confirm its 

commitment to retain provincial control of the enforcement 

of federal Bill C-68 and its regulations, to administer these 

laws and the regulations in the interest of Saskatchewan 

people, and to act on behalf of responsible Saskatchewan 

firearms owners by acting singly or participating with other 

provinces in a court challenge of federal firearms laws and 

regulations. 

 

I so submit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 

privilege to be able to speak on this behalf. I know it’s an issue 

that is very important to the majority of people in 

Saskatchewan, urban and rural. And especially in my 

constituency, I know this is a very critical issue. 

 

We have come many miles down this road since the federal 

government began discussing firearm regulations approximately 

two years ago. But if we look at the regulations that were 

recently issued by the federal government, it’s understandable 

that they really haven’t heard anything that was said in 

Saskatchewan about the concerns that are raised by the people 

of this particular province. 

 

The member from Cannington, the mover of the motion, 

reviewed the legal background of these particular matters. I 

would like to review some of the facts and opinions on gun 

control in general, which the federal Liberal government seems 

to have been intent on ignoring and has ignored in their 

regulations. 

 

Gun owners are a very easy target for public frustration with  

crime problems in urban areas. They are also a very easy target 

because they tend not to have organized themselves in the past. 

They’ve seen themselves as people with an individual sport and 

have done things on an individual basis with their friends and 

their families. And so they haven’t been . . . had a collective 

voice as such and has made them a very easy target for the 

federal government to go after. 

 

However to go ahead and decide that just because you can try 

and pass some regulations that are going to ban firearms  and 

I think the regulations indicate that with some of the things they 

have in there that by about the year 2001 there will be no new 

applications allowed for ownership of firearms  that that is 

going to indeed end any kinds of tragedies with firearms, that is 

totally a ridiculous way of going about it. 

 

It makes about as much sense as having banned, in the past, 

Oldsmobiles from Regina just because we had a group that 

thought stealing Oldsmobiles was a thing to do. It would have 

been an illogical kind of a thing to do, and yet the federal 

government is going down that same road. 

 

Another analogy might be saying, well we have people that 

steal grain from grain bins so maybe farmers, if they didn’t 

grow any grain, there wouldn’t be any problem with grain theft. 

Sounds utterly asinine. It is. And so is the federal gun control 

regulations that they’re putting in place. It makes no more sense 

than that does. I don’t think the ears of Saskatchewan people 

have to be pointed in order to understand the lack of logic in 

what they’re doing. 

 

The federal government knows well that the causes for crime go 

a whole lot deeper than access to weapons. It comes from a 

breakdown in the values of society. It comes from a breakdown 

of resources that individuals and families need to survive. And 

it’s the cause of that frustration that often causes some other 

things to happen. 

 

Recently someone smuggled a crossbow in to a dinner where 

the Prime Minister was speaking. Crossbows are not small 

things. To be able to smuggle that into that sort of a situation 

indicates how totally impossible it’s going to be to control that. 

Which means that only those people that have some evil intent 

in mind and intention of harming individuals, will be the ones 

that have any access to gun control. 

 

Incidentally, machine guns have been a prohibited firearm in 

Canada for years, and many people think, well that’s a very 

sophisticated weapon. A machine gun can be made from as 

little as four parts and a magazine; that’s all it takes to make a 

machine gun. They can be made in any basement. They can be 

made very easily. So the access to guns will only be there for 

the criminal element if this legislation goes through. 

 

The federal government is ignoring the real roots of crime, as I 

said earlier on, which are things like poverty, abuse, alcoholism, 

drug abuse, gambling that leads to desperate measures — and 

then people look for some tool to carry on those desperate 

measures. Instead they have chosen to play cheap politics 

against the law-abiding citizens. The parts of that particular Bill 

that deal with extra punishment for those people  



1602  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

who use firearms to commit crimes, we support. But most of 

that legislation is to create new criminals out of present 

law-abiding citizens. 

 

As members from all parties have affirmed on numerous 

previous occasions . . . and I think that’s the exciting part of 

this, of this legislation, and what’s happened is that people in 

Saskatchewan have worked together, regardless of party 

affiliation, to go ahead and oppose this, and I think it’s exciting 

to work in that kind of an area. 

 

The real reasons for crime are the issues of poverty and social 

problems. Instead of developing real policies to deal with these 

problems, the federal government has just chosen to find a 

scapegoat, and I said a scapegoat that is not very well 

organized. 

 

Guns are not the main problem of violent crime. More violent 

crimes involve knives than guns. Recently, a year or two ago, 

Star-Phoenix on the front page, every time there was a murder 

committed, had a picture of a handgun. And I, as a handgun 

owner, rather objected to that, so I phoned the city police in 

Saskatoon. And I said, I want to know what weapon was used 

in the last five murders that happened that year in Saskatoon. 

Interestingly enough, not one had involved a firearm. They were 

knives and clubs and all kinds of weapons that people had 

found easily at hand. I contacted the Star-Phoenix, and they’ve 

been moderately polite on this and at least pictured weapons 

that were used in crimes since then. 

 

Out of 54 firearms-related accidents last year, only three were 

homicides or manslaughter that involved firearms. The federal 

government is swatting a fly with a baseball bat in this, and I’m 

afraid we’re getting hit, and the flies are being missed. 

 

It would perhaps be more useful to review other, positive ways 

that firearms are used in Saskatchewan to see that we aren’t just 

concerned about the crime, that firearms also have a positive 

aspect in Saskatchewan. 

 

Having grown up with firearms in my home and have firearms 

in my home at present, and all members of my family are very 

adept at handling them, I realize some of the positive aspects 

that develop from that. Just like any other sport when people do 

things together, build relationships together, that happens with a 

lot of the firearms sports as well. 

 

Hunting is an important part of Saskatchewan way of life, an 

important contributor to both internal and external tourism 

economy. If that legislation goes through, that whole aspect will 

be taken away from people of Saskatchewan. It destroys that 

opportunity for fellowship that can be created. It also will create 

a lot of difficulties in the area of tourism, wildlife management, 

and these sorts of things. 

 

The incident of the rabid skunk was just mentioned a couple of 

minutes ago. Saskatchewan, when it has an overpopulation of 

some animals, has the kinds of things that are involved, things 

like mange attacking the coyotes. We can choose to let those 

animals run around and starve to death, which is a very cruel 

way of doing it, or dispatching them in a very humane way with  

the use of firearms. All this is removed from us with this 

legislation. 

 

Gun shows, an important part of the Saskatchewan economy. 

You go to any of the gun shows — and I’ve been a displayer at 

some of those — there are people from all over western Canada 

and the northern United States come together, and it’s quite an 

industry in the Saskatchewan situation. 

 

Many Canadian sport pistol shooters have won distinction at the 

Olympics. The new legislation puts some very serious crimps 

on some of the firearms that have traditionally been used in 

those sorts of activities. And as a pistol shooter myself, I object 

to having someone say that the sport that I’m participating in, 

and I would participate in very safely, is something that they 

want to ban. 

 

The federal legislation is driven by an urban bias. And I think 

we’ve talked about that. It seems to originate in eastern Canada 

with some of the large cities. And in spite of his fine words 

about consulting with rural gun owners, the federal Justice 

minister, Allan Rock, is still ultimately a Toronto lawyer and he 

carries that bias with him. 

 

The problems of Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver are going 

to lead to legislation that negatively affects the rest of this 

country. And one of the things that is unique about Canada is 

that we are a regional country, and I think the uniquenesses of 

those regions need to be recognized, and maintaining the gun 

legislation in an acceptable format is important to that regional 

bias that exists in Canada. 

 

What’s happening is the federal government is in fact pitting 

country against the city. It is important to remind members that 

the previous round of firearms restrictions brought in by Kim 

Campbell have not proven to be effective. So to go ahead and 

do more of the same will create more of the same  

non-effective legislation. 

 

The previous provincial minister of Justice once noted in 

relation to the last round of regulation that as far as 

Saskatchewan was concerned, it was just a pain and really 

accomplished very little of any importance. And I think that 

explains what this legislation does — and that is nothing, 

except create a lot of hassle, and it is a pain. 

 

The Auditor General of Canada himself contends that no one 

has done any serious assessment of the effectiveness of this 

legislation or of the cost of this legislation. And so we’re going 

to have some legislation that is very expensive and 

accomplishes very little. 

 

Any objective study of firearm legislation would conclude that 

the previous round of gun laws was more than adequate to 

protect the public interest of safety. If we want to . . . if we’re 

dealing with safety, I think an issue that was mentioned from 

across the floor a minute or two ago was very important. We in 

Saskatchewan have one of the best . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 

 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member for 

Saskatoon Southeast, an urban riding or primarily urban  it 

gives me great pleasure to join in in the debate, because as the 

member from Rosthern so very eloquently pointed out, this 

debate has unfortunately been played out and been seen to be an 

urban and women’s issue versus a rural and men’s issue. So as 

an urban woman  and an urban woman who considers herself 

a feminist  it gives me a great deal of pleasure to join in in 

this debate and to commend our provincial government and all 

parties in this House for the very clear stand they have been 

taking for the Saskatchewan people, the Saskatchewan lifestyle, 

and Saskatchewan livelihood. 

 

This is not only an urban issue or a rural issue, and we should 

not allow it to descend into that kind of divisive politics. And 

it’s not an issue that really ought to pit men against women. 

Unfortunately far too many people have tried to characterize 

Bill C-68 as some sort of a panacea that will somehow 

magically, overnight, as soon as the regulations are in place and 

every evil person registers their evil little guns, then we will 

have an end to all domestic violence in this society. 

 

Well we know that that simply isn’t true. That’s pie-in-the-sky 

dreaming. It diverts attention away from the real issues  as 

the member from Rosthern pointed out  the real issues of 

poverty, family breakdown, alcoholism, and all the other woes 

that are attendant upon the issues of poverty in this society. So 

we have to be very clear, as a government and as opposition 

members as well in this House, in what we are saying to Justice 

minister Allan Rock. I believe our Justice minister in 

Saskatchewan has been very clear about that, and he has clearly 

indicated to gun owners and to the attorneys general of Canada 

that this provincial government will not stand by idly and watch 

Bill C-68, with all its attendant costs and offensive regulations, 

simply come in easily. We need to continue fighting it even 

though it has passed the House of Parliament. 

 

This is Battered Women’s Week, Mr. Speaker, and it would be 

very easy for me to simply be quiet on this Bill and to assume, 

as unfortunately many people do, that gun control will 

automatically equate to fist control or violence control. 

 

Now it is very sad that 1 in 4 women in this country report 

domestic violence. At the same time, we need to recognize that 

only 5 per cent of those  unfortunately way, way too high  

incidents of domestic violence actually involve firearms. What 

is even more unfortunate though, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

proposed solution, Bill C-68, and all its attendant regulations, 

address only 5 per cent of the problem of domestic violence. 

And they do it in an indirect way that simply will end up being 

very ineffective and will not work. 

 

(1445) 

 

It would be much better, as the member from Rosthern has 

pointed out, if we were actually dealing with the reality of 

domestic violence, rather than some myth. We need to have 

direct solutions to the problem of domestic violence, and a 

universal registration system is not a direct solution to that. 

 

I’m very proud, Mr. Speaker, that this government pioneered  

legislation, The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, that do give 

an initial response to this very difficult issue of violence against 

women and children. I hope and I expect as a government we 

will be introducing more measures that will deal effectively 

with the issue. But the measures that Allan Rock has 

introduced, the Bill C-68, will not deal effectively with it. 

 

It seems to me that what he has done is taken a problem, the 

high-publicity issue of some shootings and the high-publicity 

issue of many, many firearms being smuggled into this country 

and being used in criminal activity, he’s blended those two 

issues and brought in a Bill that is extremely offensive to many, 

many Canadians, particularly western Canadians. 

 

He wants to deal with smuggling. I applaud him on that. I think 

that if he would actually deal directly with the smuggling issue, 

we would see much of the criminal use of firearms totally 

stopped in this country. Instead, what he seems to be doing is 

loading the costs of an anti-smuggling program, which needs to 

occur, onto the backs of responsible, safe, individual firearms 

owners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I am very concerned because when he initially 

talked about this registration process, he was talking about 

perhaps it would be $10 a gun and why should anybody be 

concerned about that. Well as time goes on, typical Liberal 

math, the numbers seem to be getting higher and higher. 

They’re expanding exponentially, and now there’s an indication 

that it could cost as much as $60 per firearm. Some of my 

members on this side of the House indicate that they’ve heard 

that it could even be as high as $75 per firearm. 

 

What an irresponsible use of resources, to ask people  people 

who make their living as trappers, hunters, outfitters  to ask 

them to take their money . . . to take money away from food for 

their children and instead spend it on propping up a federal 

bureaucracy that will do nothing effective to stop the smuggling 

of firearms into this country. 

 

Now I realize that it is desperate times for the federal 

government right now. But that is absolutely no justification, 

Mr. Speaker, for them acting like desperadoes. In the 

Maritimes, if any of you read The Globe and Mail yesterday, 

you will see that there’s a report that the federal government is 

now going to extend itself into even the registration of row 

boats. They figure that they can get some money from the 

registration of row boats. In the Prairies, they want to register 

rifles. 

 

What’s next? Maybe some day they’ll waken up in Ottawa, and 

they’ll start levying fees on themselves for their rhetoric. 

Because clearly what they are doing now is not going to be a 

responsible use of financial resources, is not going to result in a 

cessation of violence against women and children, is not going 

to result in a cessation of smuggling of firearms into this 

province. 

 

I would think that we should all be very concerned about the 

regulations because it seems to me what they are doing is  



1604  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

extending, in a tentacle-like fashion, the federal government 

involvement  their legitimate involvement in criminal justice 

 into matters that are more properly provincial matters. And it 

seems to me there is where the basis for a constitutional 

challenge could indeed occur. 

 

The regulations, the few regulations that we’ve seen . . . 

because admittedly we don’t know what the regulations might 

possibly be, dealing with the aboriginal situation or with the 

fees. We’ve only seen a part of the regulations. But those 

regulations regulate even the conduct of gun shows. 

 

Now tell me how anyone could possibly consider that a gun 

show is criminal activity. And yet this is the basis that the 

federal government is using, by saying they are legitimately 

involved in enforcement of the Criminal Code of Canada. This 

is the basis that they are using to extend their tentacles into the 

Saskatchewan lifestyle, into enforcing that everyone who dares 

to own a firearm and who conducts themselves responsibly and 

safely, that they will now potentially be a criminal if they fail to 

register their firearms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this legislation, Bill C-68, is almost 

Fascistic in its nature. And I agree that we need to continue the 

fight against Bill C-68 . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. The member’s time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m certainly glad to 

add my voice to this very important debate. And I’m glad as 

well our friends in the Conservative Party are here this late in 

the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debate over gun control has certainly become 

heated in this province in the last couple of years. The advent of 

the first — Kim Campbell’s — gun control legislation, then the 

coming of Bill C-68, has caused much division in our country. 

 

Let me begin today by stating clearly, that as a one-time police 

officer in this country, I know the good that effective gun 

control can have. A gun policy that is based on effectiveness 

can in fact save lives. One need only look at our neighbours to 

the South to see what the lack of effective gun control can do to 

a society. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the gun control legislation that has been 

passed into law by our national parliament, in my view, is 

seriously flawed. Like much of the legislation we see passed by 

the NDP government in this province, I believe the crafters of 

Bill C-68 want to appear they are doing more than they really 

are. I don’t want to go into all the specifics. The other members 

of the House here have done a lot of that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we can lose sight of the fact that 

there are some good things in this Bill as well. Good things 

such as tougher penalties against those who illegally import 

guns into our country. Tougher penalties against those who 

commit crimes using firearms. I don’t think anyone could argue 

against those provisions. 

As all members of this House have probably come to know by 

now, I believe we have to get tougher with all criminals. This 

business of letting them free after serving one-sixth of their 

sentence is absolutely unacceptable. I don’t care if you’re a 

white collar criminal or otherwise. As the old saying goes: you 

do the crime, you do the time. 

 

Unfortunately our justice system has gotten far astray from that 

point of view of late. Criminals are back on the street before 

you know it  in one door and out the other. This type of lax 

latitude towards crime is an insult to all law-abiding citizens in 

our country. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously the most contentious portion of 

Bill C-68 is the registration clause. This has caused 

considerable upset throughout the province and right across 

Canada. Because like too many cases, this aspect does not 

penalize criminals. It goes after those who follow the law, and 

those people are mad  and they have every right to be  

because let’s face it, Mr. Speaker, registration will do nothing 

to curb crime in our country. And right here in Saskatchewan it 

will do less than nothing. 

 

So far in this grand debate I have not heard one logical 

argument for registration that has told me how in fact it will 

curb crime. It just won’t. The criminals are not going to be lined 

up to register their weapons. I’d be willing to wage a dollar or 

perhaps two on that. And if a stolen gun is used in the 

commission of a crime, that won’t help police find the 

perpetrator of that offence  not any faster. 

 

All this clause will mean is an increased expense for the 

government, the law enforcement officials, and for legitimate 

gun owners. That’s all. And until someone tells me how gun 

registration will cut down on crime, I’ll remain opposed to this 

aspect. 

 

So why was this registration added to the Bill? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve seen in this House daily, governments often 

craft legislation without talking to the real people it will affect. 

In this case, the federal government appears to have talked to 

too many people in downtown Toronto and Montreal, but didn’t 

get to Melville or Yellow Grass or Shaunavon, or anywhere else 

outside of our major urban centres, to ask the people in these 

communities what they thought. It sounds kinds of familiar, 

doesn’t it? 

 

The people in our large, mostly eastern cities have been fooled 

into thinking that gun registration will do something to protect 

them. I don’t blame them for supporting the Bill. If they think it 

will help protect them and their families, that’s fine. Who 

wouldn’t support that kind of legislation? But, Mr. Speaker, 

much of this support is born out of sheer emotionalism with 

logic swept aside. Mr. Speaker, in this type of very important 

debate, one would hope that logic will always prevail. 

 

The prairie provinces have done a good job in trying to get our 

government to see the light. I was pretty proud to be part of an 

all-party committee from Saskatchewan which travelled to 

Ottawa to speak against gun registration. We were joined by 

representatives from Alberta, Manitoba, and the Northwest  



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

Territories. We had what I felt to be a productive session in 

Ottawa. Then last November, senators held hearings here in this 

very building. Again I felt some valuable input was added. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what our friends in other parts of the country must 

realize is this country is not a uniform monolith from sea to 

shining sea. There are differences as you travel across Canada. 

Those differences are no better spelled out than with Bill C-68 

because, Mr. Speaker, what is perfectly acceptable in downtown 

Toronto is not necessarily acceptable in Saskatchewan. 

 

While guns are seen as nothing but weapons of destruction in 

larger urban centres where crime is more of a problem . . . our 

farms in Saskatchewan, guns are a necessary tool. And used 

responsibly, guns do not have to be something to be feared. 

Responsible firearms users, owners, and collectors in 

Saskatchewan should not have to pay the high price for crime 

committed on Yonge Street, and that’s precisely what this 

aspect of Bill C-68 does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because we share the same party name with our 

federal counterparts, other parties in this province have tried to 

paint the official opposition here as supporters of this Bill. 

We’re getting kind of used to paying for the sins of the federal 

government, so that’s all right. We accept that. But I think it’s 

also important to note that this Bill also had to be passed by the 

Senate. And like I said, Mr. Speaker, last fall many of us 

appeared before a Senate committee in this building to discuss 

the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that committee of course was made up of 

Conservative senators. And, Mr. Speaker, if memory serves, the 

Tories still had a majority in the Senate when this Bill came up 

for a vote. And, Mr. Speaker, if memory also serves, when 

those Tory senators had a chance to block or amend Bill C-68, 

they chose not to. It was all a matter of choices. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if the 10 of us in this opposition have to 

answer for our federal counterparts, let the Tories also answer 

for their federal counterparts. 

 

Of course at this point I’d also like to say something about the 

federal New Democrats, except of course there are no federal 

New Democrats, or very few anyway. So they’re safe there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seriously however, I’d hoped the federal 

government would have listened to Saskatchewan residents in 

their opposition to this Bill, but unfortunately that did not 

happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the feds have got to be made to realize that 

these laws must be enforced differently in different provinces. 

That’s the only way this law is going to be acceptable to all of 

Canada, not just those special interests in Montreal and 

Toronto. 

 

Just before I close, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this  this 

opposition has asked the provincial government to stop 

insulting the people of this province, and the greatest insult is to 

break election promises. 

(1500) 

 

Since this government was elected, it has broken one promise 

after the other. It’s to the point where people don’t even expect 

them to honour their word any longer. But, Mr. Speaker, if they 

did carry through on all their promises, we would have no need 

for this discussion here today. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, this provincial government and in 

particular the former minister of Justice promised they would 

do everything in their power to challenge the validity of this 

gun law and especially gun registration. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

should expect them to honour that promise as we should expect 

them to honour all of their election promises. 

 

So for that reason alone, we would support this motion because 

we are just asking the government to do what they said they 

were going to do. That, along with the other reasons I’ve listed 

here, causes our caucus to support this motion. 

 

Thank you. And I’d also like to thank those senators from 

Saskatchewan who did in fact join in expressing their concerns 

about that aspect of this legislation. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, the gun law that came out of the 

federal government, in my mind is a law that was conceived in 

a very quick hurry, probably in the dark as the member opposite 

indicates. But it was conceived in order to meet the large, 

urban-centred fear of crime and of not feeling comfortable in 

their own neighbourhood or feeling that they would be under a 

case where they would be victims of one type of abuse or 

another. 

 

This law then was passed on the heels of a law that came in 

under the previous government before the impact of the 

previous government’s laws on what was really taking place in 

the society were felt or would be able to be felt. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has always interested 

me is to take a look not at the opinions that people hold about 

what is going on but rather to go and dig up the statistics and 

take a look at exactly what the case is. And one of the things 

that it shows . . . if you take and look at the Juristats, you can 

look at the public perception of crime, volume 15, no. 1, and go 

through that. And you will see that the perception is in the 

public that the crime rate is going up. Where if you look at the 

stats related to the crime rate, they indicate that they are either 

holding very level or actually going down. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you have in this instance the reality versus 

what people perceive to be the case. And this particular law is 

aimed at perception. And because it was aimed at perception 

and not based on what was actually taking place, it aims its 

solutions out into the wind where it will not in any way succeed 

in achieving what is wanted. 

 

You can take a look at what’s coming up in the papers by 

individuals who have written about it. And under the headlines, 

the answer to gun control is, don’t license the deranged. And 

that’s the situation. We have a licensing system in place for the 

individual that has the gun or wants to have the gun, and we  



1606  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

have not been using this particular piece of legislation to limit 

access of guns to individuals who might at some future date or 

very quickly thereafter, use them to create a disaster. And if you 

want to look at that, you can find most of the major incidents of 

homicide that has occurred in large numbers, you will find that 

these individuals have acquired all the legal registration and 

that, that they needed in order to purchase the guns when it was 

fully understood and known why they shouldn’t be given a 

weapon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that in this particular regard, in 

saying that the federal government in putting forward this Act 

and trying to establish this law . . . have indicated that they were 

doing it not for what is actually taking place but in order to try 

and get out in front of a perceived problem, is how they reacted 

when they brought in the regulations. 

 

I have in my hand here some documents from The Globe and 

Mail. And they show that on May 3 the Justice minister, Allan 

Rock, put some flesh on the gun control law by tabling 

regulations regarding the license and use of firearms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these regulations, which will be analysed, as it 

says there, by the Commons Justice Committee for 30 days, 

deal with licensing of gun owners, storage, display and 

transportation of firearms, the purchase of ammunition. And 

Mr. Rock said he would be open for comments and 

recommendations before the changes to the firearm Act came 

into effect. 

 

But what becomes more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that six 

days later, in The Globe and Mail  that’s on May 9  it says: 

 

Justice Minister Allan Rock has scrapped a first set of draft 

regulations dealing with his controversial gun control law. 

The new set of regulations will be presented soon, said a 

statement from Rock’s office yesterday. Mr. Rock was 

unavailable for comment. 

 

Indicating to me that when the regulations came forward, and 

because they were written to meet the perceived problems in the 

society and not written to meet what is actually the case, and 

somebody started to pin down the minister about this, the 

Justice minister, about the things on it, it became rapidly very 

apparent to him that he was standing out over the water on a 

very narrow plank and there was nowhere to go but down. And 

that’s why the minister withdrew the draft regulations. And I 

believe that if he continues to look at the regulations, that there 

may be a federal government reviewing the legislation that they 

put in on their own in order to come up with something that 

more or less meets what is really the problem in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated by members who have spoke 

on this side of the House, that the reality is is that there are 

other things that have more to do with what is taking place in 

the society than whether or not someone owns a gun. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to refer to volume 15, no. 11, Homicides in 

Canada, 1994, and it’s the last one that I could get a hold of, 

just to indicate some of the strange things that remain, I think, 

very consistent over a number of years. 

 

One of these is the number of people who are . . . the number of 

people per million homicide rate for a province. For the 

province of Saskatchewan, where more than half of the people 

in the province of Saskatchewan live in homes where firearms 

are available, the province has a rate of homicides of about 2.72 

as compared to the Canadian average of 2.42. That’s not very 

far from the norm. In fact it’s very close. 

 

But if you take a look at places like Alberta, British Columbia, 

where the percentage of firearm ownership . . . homes that have 

ownership of firearms, they both have a larger average number 

of people where homicide is committed in that particular 

province  2.73 and 3.23. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this indicates that if you’re looking at why people 

are being murdered in Canada, there’s got to be other reasons 

than just simply the ownership of guns. In fact that shows up 

very clearly if you take a look at spousal homicides, as they 

compare to female or male. 

 

In New Brunswick and Quebec, the ratio of wives as victims 

per husband as victim is 6.5 in Quebec . . . no, 6.4 in Quebec, 

6.5 in New Brunswick. But, Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at 

Saskatchewan, it’s 1.7. Or you can take a look at the Northwest 

Territories, which has a large number of guns available, it’s 1.7. 

Newfoundland at 1.8; Nova Scotia at 2.3. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

the only place that is even close to the over six wives . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The member’s time has expired. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly my 

pleasure to enter into this debate. And as has been the case for 

the last couple of years, it’s very curious that all three parties 

are on the same wavelength on this  opposed to Bill C-68. 

 

And many of the comments opposite were very appropriate, 

except for the official Leader of the Opposition in his 

comments about us not doing our job. Your comments up until 

that point were very valid and we certainly still are committed 

to fighting this Bill with everything that we possibly can. 

 

The problem again, Mr. Speaker, is the federal government has 

pulled the regulations off the table again, gone back to the 

drawing board. So obviously they were having trouble 

convincing themselves that this Bill is going to be of any use to 

anyone. 

 

On a personal basis, Mr. Speaker, I grew up on a farm. I grew 

up with guns. Guns were a tool, as was an axe and a hammer, 

on the farm. And I used to hunt when I had time and trap and 

we grew up with firearms on the farm like many rural 

Saskatchewan people have done over the years. 

 

I was one of the first graduates of a firearm safety course back 

in 1963. The course was first offered in 1961. And both my 

children, who are now teenagers, have also completed the 

firearm safety course. The firearm safety course was instituted 

because we endorsed the responsible use and safe use of 

firearms. And this course was introduced in 1961, and in that 

year there was over 100 firearm accidents in the province. 

 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

And since that time we’ve graduated over a hundred thousand 

students through the firearm safety course. And last year, with 

the similar number of hunters afield, our firearm accidents was 

reduced to less than 10. So we believe in doing programs 

through education which will produce positive results, not 

through fearmongering and such like. 

 

Firearms are important in a wildlife management perspective. 

We don’t need to tell too many people that we have a very high 

deer population in the province. Even though we harvested 

52,000 deer last year, there were many cases where deer were 

causing problems, which is unfortunate. 

 

But we need firearms for hunting, and not only to control 

wildlife populations and manage them, but as also as a revenue 

generator. Hunting itself has generated over $50 million 

annually for the last several years, with around 77,000 licences 

sold that year. Last year a lot of people within the province as 

well as visitors to the province come here to hunt. And of 

course there’s all the spin-off values  hotel rooms and the 

purchases in stores and so on and so forth. 

 

What we really need, Mr. Speaker, is crime control. That is 

what people want. And some people, who may not ever see a 

gun except on the late night news with another 7 Eleven store 

held up, figure that guns are the problem. Well people are the 

problem and until we address the issues, it’s going to continue 

to be a problem. 

 

And the real issue is crime control, not eliminating every gun in 

the country. It simply will not work. What we have seen in 

Saskatchewan as a result of this Bill is about two years of rallies 

across western Canada at least  fund-raisers to generate funds 

to fight this legislation; hearings both in Ottawa, as the member 

opposite indicated, as well as here on the Prairies; petitions and 

so on and so forth. 

 

(1515) 

 

Well we wish to inform Mr. Rock that the feelings and 

resentment and the opposition to this Bill has not reduced one 

bit in the last two years. People are still vehemently opposed to 

it and will continue to be so. And as I referenced earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, the federal government itself does not seem to know 

what they’re doing as they have recently pulled the regulations 

off the table again. 

 

More recently, the provinces of Ontario, Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and the two territories  the Yukon 

and the Northwest Territories — are firmly entrenched opposed 

to this legislation and are looking at all options to oppose it and 

will continue to do so as a united front. 

 

The gun control potential . . . the national registry associated 

with the firearms control, gun control, is going to cost tens of 

millions of dollars to the Saskatchewan taxpayers. It’s going to 

be very destructive in that many gun collections, firearm 

collections, antiques, collectible items, are destined to be 

melted down and this investment made by collectors will be 

lost. 

 

The red tape and restrictions that will discourage new firearm 

owners, new hunters coming into the field, is going to be 

detrimental in us controlling and . . . and work against us in 

controlling big game numbers and wildlife populations. Young 

people will also find it very difficult to acquire firearms and 

simply become discouraged and not participate in hunting. 

 

Dealers are losing business, and some of them have already 

gone out of business. Gun shows, which have generated a lot of 

money to local communities, will be also severely impacted to 

the point where people will give up. And even our Olympic 

shooters who consistently win medals in the Olympics will also 

be discouraged or basically phased out of the sport. 

 

At the same time, the infringement and inconvenience and cost 

to law-abiding people will do nothing to reduce crime. This is 

the sad and tragic part of this legislation. The simple fact is that 

criminals will not line up to register their guns. And whether the 

gun is registered or not, somebody intent on committing a 

crime, the gun will still shoot whether it is registered or not. 

 

We need to get back to the root of the problem, Mr. Speaker, 

which is the social and education aspect of it, as our hunter 

safety program has proved over the years. There can be positive 

results. But what we see is our federal government making cuts 

to these programs  health, and education, and social programs 

 at the same time wanting to spend tens of million dollars to 

register everybody’s guns. It’s totally non-productive and 

contrary to what could produce positive results. 

 

Again people want crime control, and the aspects of the Bill 

which deal with stiffer penalties certainly we agree with totally. 

We do agree with crime controls and prosecuting criminals. 

Whether they commit a crime with a club or a knife or a gun, a 

crime is a crime and people should be dealt with accordingly. 

 

So we need to get back to the root of the crime, and as I said, 

which is often related to lack of education possibilities and 

social programs. 

 

It is extremely unsettling, as I said, to see that the federal 

government chooses to cut funding in important areas like 

education and social programs, when at the same time, come up 

with tens of millions of dollars to spend on a useless registry 

which will simply impact law-abiding citizens. What many 

people have called upon, including ourselves, is an evaluation 

of our gun laws. We have among the strictest gun laws in the 

world and there’s no evidence that gun registration, gun control, 

has reduced crime or will reduce crime. And we are thoroughly 

convinced that Bill C-68 will do nothing to reduce crime and 

we are certainly committed to fighting this Bill C-68 with 

everything that we have. 

 

We have recently convened a committee to work with the 

Minister of Justice and provide input on this issue and will 

continue to do so. And we are looking at all of our options, 

including court action, and we’ll be working in consultation 

with other provinces as well. 

 

So after two years of rigorous debate, there is still no evidence 

that a costly gun registry and restriction on law-abiding people  



1608  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

will do anything to reduce crime. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, I certainly confirm that we are 

opposed to Bill C-68. We will continue to work with the 

Minister of Justice and our colleagues across the way as well on 

this important issue, as well as the people of Saskatchewan, as 

we try to bring some sense to this bizarre piece of legislation 

and deal with the real issues at hand. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to have 

an opportunity to add my thoughts also to this debate. I myself 

have never been a gun owner and actually I was raised on a 

farm in Saskatchewan in which we never did have a gun. But 

our farm was located close to a marsh in a small lake which a 

lot of gun enthusiasts used. We had hunters there. We also had 

bird-watchers there and we also had good farm land there. And 

we saw all those interests not in conflict. We saw it as a 

balance. 

 

And balance is what is important. Gun legislation must balance 

 recognize the seriousness of the issue relating to violence in 

our society with the need and responsible use of firearms. 

Legitimate, responsible gun owners are the first to promote 

safety and the proper use and handling . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The 65 minutes for the debate 

 Order  has expired and we’ll now proceed to 10 minutes 

of questions and comments by members. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the member from Melville. I was quite interested to listen to his 

comments. And obviously with his own personal experience, 

both running in federal and provincial elections, I’m wondering 

whether he advocates us pursing this issue at the ballot box 

when the federal election comes in 1996-97, and if so, how 

should we go about pursuing that? 

 

Mr. Osika:  I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker; the last part of the 

question kind of tapered off. I didn’t get it. Would you mind . . . 

could I ask you to repeat it if you can remember it, please? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  My apologies. I didn’t mean to mumble, Mr. 

Speaker. But my question to the member from Melville was that 

as a candidate both in federal and provincial elections he 

understands, no doubt, the power of the ballot box. And given 

the importance of this issue in some areas of the province, I’m 

wondering whether he thinks this is an issue we should be 

promoting when the federal election comes around in ’96 or ’97 

 at the ballot box as an issue to bring home to federal 

candidates? And if so, how does he propose that we should do 

so? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that there will be 

no need for concern if the government of the day lives up to its 

promise and challenges that very Bill. That should have been 

initiated some time ago. We wouldn’t be having this discussion. 

That question wouldn’t even need to be asked. 

Mr. Thomson:  I’m not sure I completely understand the 

answer that the member from Melville is giving me. This is 

clearly a federal issue. The province is committed to 

undertaking what it has to through the courts, but this is really 

an issue that the federal legislators need to deal with. 

 

Does he think that perhaps there’s a better mechanism to go 

after this, by having this Bill repealed through the federal 

House in the case their court challenge fails? And if so, which 

party do you think is best able to do that federally? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to that, once 

again I’ll just have to say if in fact the government lives up to 

its promise, that is the first step to take. We’ll cross that other 

bridge when we get to it. But I would suggest at this point in 

time there should be some commitment to keep the promise that 

was made to challenge what’s happening. 

 

We went on . . . Perhaps the member doesn’t remember that 

there was an all-party delegation. We all stood together on this. 

And I’m not sure whether perhaps he’s changed his mind or 

not. 

 

But the first step is to keep the promise, initiate the challenge at 

this point. The next step we’ll come to later on. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, I have a question for the member from 

Saskatoon; I’m not sure of her riding. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Southeast. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Southeast. She mentioned something about 

the gun law and the violence and the whole bit. Certainly in 

northern Saskatchewan, in reference to the gun law, you know, 

we’re opposed to it as it is because many people in the North do 

indeed borrow guns off their relations, and it’s just not practical 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

However, I think the Bill is more appropriate in the larger 

centres, in terms of the Torontos and the Quebec City and the 

Vancouver where violence is rampant. And I wanted to ask her 

how she felt about the larger centres where gang violence and 

guns are a fact of life and if she feels that this gun law is not 

going to curb that certain problem. 

 

Again, there is some differences here. The gun law does not 

work as proposed for northern Saskatchewan but it may work 

for Toronto and for the larger centres. So how does she feel 

about that? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I totally agree with the member from Athabasca 

that the proposed gun regulation system, registering long guns, 

simply will not work for northern Saskatchewan. I take issue 

though when he says that perhaps it will work for even southern 

Saskatchewan or urban areas. I do not think it will. It will not 

work at all. 

 

And I would say with respect to your concern about the larger 

urban centres, the Torontos, the Montreals, the Vancouvers of 

this country, that we have had handgun registration in this 

country for 60 years. That has not stopped criminal activity and  



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

criminals using handguns. 

 

Primarily, those handguns, Mr. Member, are smuggled 

handguns. They come in from the States and they are used 

illicitly. And that is why I say we have to deal with the issue of 

smuggling and not have . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Next question or 

comment. But before doing so, I want to remind all members 

that the rules of the Assembly do require that you direct debate 

through the Chair, and I want to ask for the cooperation of all 

members in doing that. Next question or comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Yes, my question is directed through you, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Melville. The question is in 

regards to his experience in the police and the idea of 

registration. The analogy is in relation to registration, you 

know, of vehicles and also on the registration of guns, you 

know, as a comparative view. 

 

In the registration of vehicles, whether you drive on northern 

Saskatchewan roads or whether you drive in the city or you 

drive in the rural area, a vehicle is registered, but it still does 

not prevent criminal activity  drunken driving — in northern 

Saskatchewan, in the rural area, or in a city. 

 

So the question is, on your experience, is that the same type of 

experience that you’ve seen in regards to registration. When 

you said that the gun law registration was flawed, was it flawed 

in this regard? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition is that 

the registration will not solve what the root of the problem is  

the concerns as far as preventing criminal activity. The 

registration of the firearm will not prevent that, and that’s the 

point that we’re making. 

 

I’m not sure what the hon. member is suggesting, or the analogy 

between the vehicle and the gun. The vehicles are a provincial 

responsibility. So in that respect, the point made . . . registering 

a firearm will not prevent that firearm from being involved in 

the commission of a serious offence. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you, I would 

like to ask a question of the member from Cannington. The 

member from Cannington stated in his remarks to the House 

that he wants to see us retain provincial control of the 

enforcement of federal Bill C-68 and its regulations. 

 

My question is, since we have seen the province having had 

offloaded onto it many of the costs of administering the Kim 

Campbell Bill, which was brought in after the Marc Lepine 

massacre, and we still have not seen adequate compensation for 

the costs of administration of that Bill by the federal 

government, I would like to know why he would want to have 

provincial control of the regulations of Bill C-68, and why he 

would not see that the better option is, as the provincial Justice 

minister has already said, to simply opt out of the 

administration of Bill C-68 regulations? 

 

(1530) 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the 

monetary side, the federal RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) already enforces the law within Saskatchewan, and we 

pay provincially 73 per cent of that cost. And that cost will not 

change to the province if we do not administer this Act. We will 

still maintain our 73 per cent cost. And so that will continue no 

matter whether we’re opting in or out of the administration of 

this Act. 

 

I believe that if we do maintain the administration of the Act, 

we can better mitigate on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. I 

look at the actions taken in the past by our chief provincial 

firearms officers in their interpretations of the Act and the 

regulation . . . have been to the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 

I look at that happening in other jurisdictions, and those 

benefits have not accrued to the people of those provinces. And 

I believe that we can do that within Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the 

member from Melville this question: what have you done to 

convey your displeasure of Bill C-68 to your federal cousins in 

Ottawa? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Evidently the member 

opposite has not been aware of our all-party participation in 

making representation to the Senate committee hearings in 

Ottawa and making presentations here in this building. I mean 

what more would the member expect us to do other than to join 

with the other parties in this province in presenting our views 

on that particular legislation? I don’t know what else we could 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, in asking the member from 

Melville in what he is able to show that he has done in getting 

this issue across to his federal counterparts, a couple of 

suggestions would be: has he written the member . . . the Justice 

minister, Allan Rock, a letter indicating his absolute 

disagreement with it? Has he asked his association, the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Association, to put forward a motion . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  What’s so special about the Liberal 

association? 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Well they could hold it . . . I understand that 

they could hold it very quickly in a small location. 

 

But if they had asked to put forward a resolution opposing this 

legislation, or something of that particular nature, would be two 

examples. And I ask the member whether he’s given any 

consideration to that. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to answer that. I’m not 

sure what more people can do other than commit to the 

presentations before senators  live people  to the member 

opposite. 

 

What the biggest problem here is, is that the government will 

not live up to its promise to challenge that legislation, which we 

agreed we would support. I’m not sure what more they want us 

to do. 

 



1610  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

The Speaker:  The time for the seventy-five minute debate 

has expired. Order. Order. 

 

Order. The Speaker is pleased to see that members have 

enthusiasm for debate. And there will be another opportunity 

for a seventy-five minute debate in two weeks. 

 

Order. We will now proceed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 9  Commitment to Young People in 

Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 

was a lively debate and I do hope that this motion brings 

forward some debate also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to bring forward the following motion, 

seconded by the member from Athabasca: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its lack of 

commitment to the young people of this province for 

failing to provide and properly fund adequate youth 

rehabilitation facilities that are in drastic need due to 

increasing social problems facing the young people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, I am asking all members of this 

Assembly to stand up and to fight for our young people. I am 

asking them to take a serious look at the problems facing our 

youth, and to make meaningful commitments to providing the 

tools they need to build the future of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s lack of commitment to youth is 

painfully obvious. It is manifested in some disturbing figures. 

The teen pregnancy rate in Saskatchewan is 36 per cent higher 

than the national average. Child prostitution is becoming more 

prevalent. And our young offenders’ facilities are crowded with 

kids who desperately need help; ongoing, comprehensive help 

that deals with their needs, with those needs that are lacking in 

their lives; physical, spiritual, emotional, and psychological 

needs  help that this government seems not to understand and 

thus has not even given consideration to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find the various statistics associated with youth’s 

social problems particularly troubling, given the words of this 

government when they were in opposition. Premier Romanow, 

who was the opposition leader in . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I think the hon. member 

recognizes that she’s not permitted to use proper names of 

current sitting members of the Assembly. And I’ll simply 

remind her of that and ask her to proceed without violating that 

rule of the House. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize for that. 

The Premier, who was the opposition leader in 1989, said: 

 

The real measure of our province is the quality of life that 

we provide to our people, and especially the quality of life  

of those least fortunate and the opportunities that we 

provide for those youth who seek to live meaningful lives 

 to contribute, to foster and to develop; to expand and to 

progress in this struggle of building society, of building 

values based on independence and dignity and human 

worth and freedom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are strong and powerful words. It’s just too 

bad that our Premier has reneged on his commitment to children 

and to this province, and that his policies are falling far short of 

meeting the needs of our youth. Our young people could have 

benefited from a Premier who believed in them, and who had 

more to offer than hollow words. 

 

The Premier said what he thinks people want to hear at election 

time. He doesn’t seem to care if he can keep his promises. He 

believes that as long as he acknowledges a problem, he has 

done his job. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you this job is far from done. Our 

young people need solutions, and until the government realizes 

this, they have no right to pretend that their work is done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I brought forward this motion because I feel that it 

is time for someone to hold the government accountable for the 

lack of facilities available for youth in our province. And the 

actions of this government in the past five years have given me 

no hope that things will improve. 

 

The closing of the Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre is only 

one example, but it is an example that clearly underlines how 

little concern this government has for young people. 

 

The Whitespruce centre was established in 1986 and began 

admitting clients two years later. Since that time, the centre has 

helped over 1,500 children. That’s 1,500 people who will shape 

the future of this province. But the government obviously 

doesn’t think that they matter because last month they 

announced that this vital institution would be shut down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how could this government ignore the protests of 

people who are so deeply concerned about this facility? But 

they did ignore those protests, and with no thought for the 

young people. They stubbornly carried out their poorly planned 

decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a portion of a letter printed in the 

Leader-Post on April 26, 1996, written by a member of the 

citizens’ steering committee to come up with a recommendation 

for the use of the Whitespruce centre. The author, Wally 

Austman, writes: 

 

I feel doubly betrayed by the government’s decision to 

move this successful program to Calder Centre. It is 

nothing more, or less, than a politically expedient decision 

taken at a point in this government’s tenure that will reflect 

the least adverse effect on the next election results. This 

decision is being taken by a government that has never 

been too pleased to see a program initiated by the Tories 

become even halfway successful. 

 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

I speak as an ex-long-time CCF/NDP supporter, and I 

make no apologies about still believing in most of the 

social principles espoused by the party. But, sadly, I have 

come to the conclusion that this government has lost touch 

with a lot of the principles that Tommy Douglas and his 

peers worked hard to develop and initiate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is this government disappointing the 

youth of this province, they are also disappointing long-term 

party supporters, many who believe in our young people. 

According to Mr. Austman, and to the many people who have 

contacted my colleagues and me, the decision to close 

Whitespruce was both impetuous and poorly executed by the 

government. 

 

For example, staff were not even told the facility was closing 

until they heard it on the media. Is this the kind of respect the 

government has for the people? Do the members opposite think 

that this is an acceptable way to tell workers that their jobs are 

either disappearing or being relocated  on the media? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not acceptable, and I hope the members in 

this House today will tell the Health minister that his actions 

completely lack in compassion and consideration. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is not only the former employees of the 

Whitespruce centre who were treated poorly by this 

government. It is the kids who relied on this centre that are 

losing the most. Mr. Speaker, this government’s answer is to 

ship them off to the Calder Centre in Saskatoon. Ironically, 

Calder Centre is in the Premier’s riding, so I guess we know 

why the decision was made to close Whitespruce and to keep 

Calder open. According to reports, Whitespruce was in better 

condition, had far more room, and far more amenities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying that that move should have 

happened either. I believe that the youth should have a facility 

that is separate from the adult facility. By moving the youth to 

the Calder Centre, the government has chosen to put troubled 

youth in the same facility as troubled adults. 

 

Mr. Speaker, adolescents have very different problems than 

adults, and they need very different approaches to treatment. 

This is something the government should have considered 

before they decided to shut the doors of Whitespruce, a $10 

million facility strategically positioned in an environment 

conducive to safety and security and trust  basic needs for 

healing. Then again, this government has continually failed to 

understand this concept. It’s a simple concept, if only they 

could grasp it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre is 

not the only facility placed in jeopardy by this government’s 

indifference. I have had several meetings with administrators 

from youth facilities throughout the province, and I have visited 

those facilities on different occasions. 

 

For example, a few months ago I visited the North Battleford 

youth centre. For the members of the Assembly who are 

unfamiliar with the facility, it is a minimum security institution 

for troubled teens. Unfortunately since it’s opened in 1985, it  

has had many troubled moments, often chaotic moments  so 

much so that Marion Jackson was commissioned to investigate, 

and she issued a report. With the report, she put forward some 

recommendations. The question is, were those 

recommendations met? There continues to be an inordinate 

number of staff on stress leave at this institution. There 

continues to be a grave problem at this institution, problems 

that are not addressed by this government. 

 

When I visited the North Battleford youth centre, it reminded 

me of a dungeon-like facility, archaic and very cold. I had to 

ask myself the question, how can healing take place in a place 

like this? I talked with some of the young people there, and they 

had hopes, when being released from that facility, of going back 

and getting their education. Unfortunately, after the one 

particular person I talked to was released, he said that he could 

not get an education in Saskatchewan; no one would have him. 

So he talked about going on to Alberta to look for work. 

 

Many of the youth that leave this facility, because there is no 

ongoing treatment for them after they leave, end up returning to 

an environment that is detrimental to their well-being. And so 

what happens? They get in trouble again, often returning over 

and over again. Mr. Speaker, kids in our province are crying out 

for help, but this government is refusing to listen. 

 

Let’s look at some statistics about community and custody 

programs. As of September last year, 55 kids were in temporary 

detentions; 131 kids were in open custody; 168 kids were in 

secure custody; 434 court reports were in progress; 1,633 youth 

were under probation orders; 476 were under community 

alternative dispositions; 112 were under intensive supervision; 

and there are only 21 group home spaces for children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are shocking statistics, and still this 

government sits back and pretends that all is well. Well if all is 

well, why are so many of our children in trouble? Why is child 

prostitution seen as a form of income for some? Why is our 

teen pregnancy rate over one-third higher than the national 

average? Doesn’t this government care? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in question period today I raised some concerns 

about Egadz, a program designed to help young people living 

on the street in Saskatoon  high-risk children. Maybe the 

government wants to pretend that it isn’t a problem. Maybe they 

think that our cities are not big cities like Vancouver, Toronto, 

or Calgary, and so we cannot have problems that are as big as 

those ones at Vancouver, Toronto, or Calgary. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that there are young people who 

believe they have no other options but to live on the street. And 

I don’t have to tell the members opposite that this means they 

trade in the innocence of childhood for a hard existence filled 

with pain and fear. These children are more susceptible to drug 

abuse and to being dragged into prostitution. They are more 

prone to abuse, to violence, and to suffering from low 

self-esteem. In other words, Mr. Speaker, kids as young as 10 or 

11 are selling their bodies to support a substance addiction or 

an addiction of their pimps. 

 

It is sickening and tragic and heart-wrenching, but it’s also  



1612  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

preventable. Mr. Speaker, Egadz is only one group that is trying 

to prevent children from becoming tangled in a web of poverty 

and abuse, but the government has cut off some of the vital 

funding to these places. They are not at all funded adequately 

for what the need is out there. 

 

(1545) 

 

When I addressed these concerns in question period today, they 

were in response to some of the concerns given me by the 

outreach workers from Egadz. These workers have said that 

every month last year they tried to get in touch with different 

representatives from this government, either the Premier, the 

Minister of Justice, the Minister of Social Services. And 

basically their plea was tossed around in government from one 

department to the next department. And here we are, one year 

later, and we still have no response from any one of our 

ministers that they will in fact sit down and discuss some of the 

proposals put forward. 

 

The proposals are quite simple. They ask for safe houses. 

Edmonton has done this. Edmonton, the city sold the houses for 

$1 to government. Governments must maintain them to a 

certain degree. But none the less, with a problem this 

magnitude, we need to do these kind of things and take into 

consideration fully the proposals put forward by these 

concerned groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the programs that we need are crucial. Someone 

has to help our youth. The problems that we are looking at here 

are horrific, and they need to be addressed. This government 

can’t keep pretending that their deep cuts and their lack of 

appropriate funding choices won’t affect young people in this 

province. It’s time they open their eyes and they open their 

minds and their hearts and started to create realistic, long-term 

solutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those long-term solutions start with a strong 

economy and with education, both of which are under the 

control of this provincial government. With education, kids can 

be taught skills they need to live productive and healthy lives. 

I’m not only talking about specific subjects like math or 

science. I am talking about communication skills and coping 

skills, self-confidence, self-respect, self-worth, and self-esteem, 

because a lack of these values and skills are at the root of so 

many problems in our society. 

 

Unfortunately many young people are living in family situations 

that are unhealthy, abusive, or unbearable. Living in these 

conditions can chip away at self-esteem. If children are not 

taught coping skills, they may feel a pressure to drop out of 

school and to find a place where they are not abnormal. We 

must work to keep them in school, and we must provide schools 

with the support they need to help young people develop into 

healthy, well-adjusted adults. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education is not the complete answer. When our 

youth graduate from school, they need options. Unfortunately 

this government has been unable to stimulate the economy, so 

our young people are faced with unemployment, and this is a 

crisis. Young people need jobs. They need to feed themselves,  

clothe themselves, and house themselves just like anyone. But 

what they are seeing right now is a bleak future. Statistics in 

February show that unemployment rates for young Canadians 

was 17.1 per cent or twice the national average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, citizens of this province must be aware and do 

their part. The provincial government needs to do its part. It 

needs to take a good, long, hard look at the problem and to start 

taking steps towards finding a solution. They must take a 

leadership role. Our young people deserve no less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government continues to deflect blame back 

to the federal government, and they will continue to deflect 

blame as long as they think someone is listening and that 

someone actually believes them. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

excuse that has long since worn thin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberal government has recognized 

that our young people need help, and they are taking positive 

steps. For example, they have established a ministerial task 

force on youth to help young Canadians build a better future. 

The task force will be looking at ways that government can help 

with the transition from school to work. This task force will be 

in Saskatoon this week, inviting all to participate. 

 

Besides looking at real and perceived barriers to employment, 

they will study the special circumstances surrounding 

disadvantaged youth, drop-outs, and aboriginal youth. If the 

provincial government truly wanted to honour its commitment 

to youth, it would support this task force in any way possible. 

 

But the NDP government must do more. It must take 

responsibility for the youth living in this, our province. How 

many times have we seen statistics that show our young people 

are leaving this province in droves. Many of them want to stay, 

but see that there is no future for them here. Instead of listening 

to their concerns and making a serious attempt to change this, 

the provincial government watches them go and waves 

goodbye. 

 

Well the mass exodus of our young people is just one more 

indication of how indifferent this government is to our youth. 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on. I could talk about the other 

facilities in this province which are trying to help youth 

overcome the obstacles despite the government’s lack of 

commitment. I could talk about specific examples of youth who 

have fallen into the cracks widened by this government’s 

callous disregard as to the magnitude of problems of our youth 

at risk. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if it will do any good. The 

government must have realized by now that these deep chasms 

do exist in our society. I can only hope that this government 

will reconsider its position on facilities for our youth. And I can 

only hope that the members in this House today make a 

commitment to our young people and help them build a future 

that we can all be proud of. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m  



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

seconding the motion that it’s condemning the government for 

its lack of commitment to young people for failing to provide 

and properly fund adequate youth rehabilitation services and 

facilities in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

To begin my statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact is there is 

a lack of service centres in northern Saskatchewan that’s 

specifically addressed for the youth. The rehab of the youth that 

are in trouble in northern Saskatchewan is very, very much 

needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When we look at the various centres that exist in northern 

Saskatchewan, look right across the board, and compared to the 

rest of the province there are very few, if one that I’m aware of 

in my particular area that is specifically dealing with the youth 

of northern Saskatchewan, and I think that’s the Alex Bishop 

home care centre in Green Lake. 

 

And aside from that centre in Green Lake, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there is no other service that I’m aware of  whether it’s in 

Buffalo Narrows, La Loche or Uranium City or Stony Rapids, 

there are no centres that specifically deal with the youth of 

northern Saskatchewan. And what kind of centres, might you 

ask, in terms of dealing with the youth? It could be anything 

from drug and alcohol abuse; it could be anything from family 

abuse; it could be anything from lack of opportunity. 

 

And really, there is a lack of funding in general for northern 

Saskatchewan, as we have been for many, many years. And if 

you look at the dynamics of these northern communities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we see that the youth are indeed falling 

through the cracks. There’s no economic opportunity for them. 

The educational level and educational challenges are very . . . 

are there. And you’ve got family breakdown, and as a result you 

have a lot of social problems. 

 

And not to say that the northern Saskatchewan people are a 

hopeless people. They are full of hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And where they’re severely lacking is attention to this particular 

problem and this particular matter. 

 

The family is under a great amount of stress because you have 

larger families in the North and you have young children, with 

teenagers in the same house. And the teenagers are bored out of 

their minds with nothing to do, and no program, no services, no 

support system in place. And obviously that’s just a recipe for 

problems. 

 

So you look at the whole family structure; it’s under attack 

when you’re not directly dealing with the youth. And the youth 

of course, of today, are the leaders of tomorrow. And in 

northern Saskatchewan this thing will only simply snowball 

into a major problem because the youth of today have got to be 

shown that they are responsible people; that they are a good 

people and they are a worthy people. And so far we haven’t 

seen any effort of that nature being undertaken anywhere, and 

especially in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I further alluded to the fact that several days ago, that in 

northern Saskatchewan there’s a huge amount of our population 

that are under the age of 24  a tremendous amount. And you  

look at the school system. You look at the family structure. You 

look at the lack of opportunity. 

 

And again you look at all them factors, and it shows that the 

youth of the North and especially youth of the province have 

got to be respected. If you do not respect your youth, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, then you’re in deep, deep trouble, not only as a 

northern part of Saskatchewan, but as a country and as a 

province and as a person. 

 

The youth need our respect and they need our support. Because 

much like us, at one time . . . it’s hard to believe some of us 

were 15 or 16. And you know, at that time many of us enjoyed 

strong family ties. Many of us enjoyed recreational facilities. 

Many of us enjoyed opportunity. And we certainly had a lot of 

strong parenting skills, you know, available to us. And not to 

say that there isn’t today. Every parent in the world with a 

teenager knows that it is a challenge raising children. 

 

But the thing is that the economic opportunities and the 

economic situation that many communities find them in, 

obviously social problems are going to happen. And then when 

you have family breakdown, the ones that generally react to this 

are the young teenagers and the youth. 

 

I guess in La Ronge they do have an alcohol and drug treatment 

centre. It’s still far away from the north-west part of our 

province. And having one centre in La Ronge is certainly not 

going to solve the problems of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I think we need to have more role models in northern 

Saskatchewan. We need to have more aboriginal case workers 

to help youth get through the court system, to understand the 

impacts of law, and to understand the impacts of charges 

against them. And many of these youths go to the court system. 

They get sentenced, and they’re off to jail. And really there is 

no effort to stop them from going to jail. 

 

And you look at the average cost to corrections Canada, and 

housing a criminal, an adult criminal, is roughly $58,000 per 

year. Now if we were to put one-tenth of that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, 5,800 into a youth today to teach him, to help them, to 

support them in some kind of initiative at the community level, 

be it recreational or social or economic opportunity, then that’s 

money invested into the youth. 

 

And I go back to our point. You’ve got to respect these youth 

because if you don’t, if you think you’re there every day for 

your own purpose and that they will behave themselves, we 

don’t pay attention to them, then we’re all dead wrong. 

 

And in northern Saskatchewan having the high, high percentage 

of young people that we do have, it’s asking for more costs in 

your justice system. It’s asking for more costs in your social 

services system. It’s asking for more costs in your social 

housing program services. It’s all going to add up to more and 

more costs. That train must stop. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan people do not want to be a dependent 

people. We want to be an independent people. And the only 

way we are able to accomplish that, if we have educated,  



1614  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

motivated, but above all else, disciplined young people that can 

take over for some older guys. 

 

I guess in northern Saskatchewan the small effort that is being 

taken is . . . what you’re seeing is caseworkers are so 

overworked in the North to handle many of these youth 

problems is that they are fast reaching a level where they just 

can’t take it any more. 

 

Where do these care-givers or where do these people that help 

out the youth, where do they turn for help? Many of the people 

that work in this field also have families. Some of them may 

have teenagers. They’ve got families at home, they’ve got 

problems at home, they’ve got problems at work  just a 

non-stop cycle of problems. 

 

So really, if there are going to be any efforts, look at the 

caseworkers as well. These are the people that are front-line 

people; they’re the ones that see the problems every day. We 

don’t see it in the House every day. But certainly the people that 

are out there, the people that care about the communities, the 

people that deal with the youth  they’re the ones that we 

should be appreciating and they’re the ones that we should also 

be supporting. 

 

(1600) 

 

I guess in essence you look at Indian, Child and Family Services 

Agreement that has been signed between the government and 

the Saskatoon Tribal Council. Certainly we support every effort 

to involve the native community in designing new ways of 

helping their youth and the young people. And it is good news 

for the province. It’s good news certainly for the youth of the 

area. 

 

But we need to expand that certainly to other regions, into other 

areas as well. And northern Saskatchewan is again calling for 

the government to do something with the youth, do something 

phenomenal, something exciting, something innovative with 

their youth, because we cannot continue to ignore them. 

 

Just for some of your stats sakes, 56 per cent of the inmates in 

the Saskatchewan penitentiary and 72 per cent of the inmates in 

provincial jails are aboriginal. But then the aboriginal people 

only represent 10 to 15 per cent of the Saskatchewan 

population, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And what does that say to everybody here? Obviously that is 

where the problem areas are. And the things that they’ve been 

saying for many years is watch what you do in northern 

Saskatchewan when it comes to their youth. Make sure that you 

are able to service what their needs are, to listen to what they 

have to offer, and above all else, respect them and do something 

about it. 

 

So again, you look at the situation with the stats I’ve just 

mentioned, and what we see is all of a sudden the aboriginal 

people do become one of the largest employers in 

Saskatchewan. We look at Social Services workers, you look at 

guards at the jail, you look at the social workers, you look at all 

the different service industries that do service, you know, the  

aboriginal people. We see that many of the people that work in 

that field are not aboriginal. So we’re certainly creating jobs but 

certainly not for the aboriginal people themselves. 

 

So again, there needs to be emphasis on developing native 

caseworkers, native social workers, and native programs for the 

youth of the North. 

 

Again the stats that we’re giving to you are stats that we picked 

out of many magazines. The government is aware of these stats. 

If they say they’re not, then obviously they’re misleading the 

House. But certainly the national unemployment rate, 70 per 

cent of aboriginals living on reserve and 50 per cent of the 

aboriginals living in urban reserves. So what that says to me is 

that half the people of some of the . . . the Saskatchewan Indian 

people are having a severe problem with unemployment. And 

there’s been other work being done to try and increase this 

employment. 

 

So if you have people that are competing for jobs, and many of 

these people may be older, more experienced, family people, 

then obviously you’re going to see that the youth are being 

forgotten. You’re obviously going to take somebody that has 

more experience, somebody that has a family over a youth 

that’s trying to break into the market. 

 

So if you have the astounding facts of a 70 per cent 

unemployment rate on the reserve, and 50 per cent of the urban 

reserves, then obviously you’re going to see that the aboriginal 

youth will be severely underemployed. 

 

Again the social assistance rates I mentioned amongst the 

aboriginal people should not be as high as they should be. They 

should certainly try and look at a better use of that dollar to try 

and generate and stimulate an economy that does not penalize 

the working people, an economy that respects the family 

structure, and an economy that involves the young people. 

 

And many young people that come out of our school system, 

they tend to want to work, but then you have to have experience 

before you work. The big question to ask is how in the heck do 

you gain experience when nobody ever hires you? 

 

So the workforce out there want experienced people, but how 

do these young people get experience. They get experience by 

getting employment. And really again you go back to the point, 

is there are a lot of troubled youth in the North and throughout 

the whole province, but the one thing we have to do is we have 

to have dialogue with them and you have to go to the table with 

respect. If you don’t go to the table with respect, they know 

that, they sense that, and you have to really start to adjust for 

that. 

 

La Loche, for example, it’s one of the largest communities in 

the North; they have severe problems in terms of the need for a 

new approach when it comes to their youth. When you have 

3,000 people crammed in one small community with a high 

unemployment rate and the other problems we speak about, 

then again you look at, it’s a recipe for major problems. 

 

Their hospital is a wreck. There is no respect in that essence. So  



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

when a youth goes to the hospital there, he doesn’t feel all that 

great about something that he’s done. And if he’s not going to 

the hospital then he’s obviously, you know, he’s probably going 

to be going to the RCMP because many . . . the violence results 

in a visit to the hospital or a visit to the RCMP. And the 

hospital there should not be something that we’re all proud of, 

it’s something that we should be embarrassed of. 

 

Again you go back to the desperate need for more social 

workers in that community. We see a brand-new state-of-the-art 

liquor board store, and a brand-new jail, but no new social 

program services for the youth. And what does that say to me? 

That says that unless and until we do something that 

specifically deals with that problem, we’re going to let the 

problem continue to fester. We’re going to let the youth for the 

next five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten years continue to disrespect 

us and we’ll disrespect them, and they’ll continue breaking the 

law and continue making major problems. 

 

So unless and until you are able to show the people of the North 

that you really do indeed respect them, and unless and until you 

really plan on getting aggressive when it comes to the youth 

services and youth support and youth respect, then the problems 

will persist. 

 

Again you look at the northern situation. It makes up half the 

land mass of this province  half the land mass. And in that 

population, we only have 3 per cent of the entire provincial 

population, Mr. Deputy Speaker  3 per cent. But of that 3 per 

cent and half the land mass of Saskatchewan, at least 60 to 65 

per cent of them are under the age of 25 years old. 

 

So if anything, the North needs specific programs and specific 

projects that will really address this problem. Because I’m 

really getting tired, and many of my constituents are getting 

tired of all the negative issues that are being placed in the 

media. And any media we get from the North is always 

negative. 

 

But much like you and I, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the members 

of this House, the families of these young people have dreams 

and aspirations for their young people. Young people are prone 

to making mistakes. I’ve made many, many mistakes in my life, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I know that we had systems in place 

then to help overcome these problems. 

 

And nowadays we see all the necessary cut-backs that all levels 

of government are doing, but again we’re missing the point. We 

must invest in the youth. And in northern Saskatchewan, you’ve 

got to treat these people the same because these are 

Saskatchewan youth as well. Northern Saskatchewan isn’t 

different from us. It’s part of this province. 

 

Again many of the stats are not flattering to the northern 

Saskatchewan people. We look at the problems that the lack of 

education poses, and the fact that many people feel powerless to 

change things because they don’t control the systems. And the 

youth basically get in trouble because they have no one to turn 

to and then they end up into facilities like your penitentiary or 

your correctional centres. And without proper funding in these 

centres, and without proper support, we will see again that these  

problems will persist. 

 

In the Athabasca constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is 

roughly 15,093 aboriginal people. And the northern 

communities are expected to increase in terms of population 

over the next 30 years. We see in northern Saskatchewan we’ve 

had a population increase of 5.5 per cent compared to a 

provincial decrease of 2 per cent. So really in northern 

Saskatchewan the population is growing. 

 

But again do we, in spite of the revenues that are derived out of 

the North, do we put anything back for youth services where the 

problems are? Do we look at what we can do differently for the 

youth in northern Saskatchewan? Do we consider the La Loches 

and the Stony Rapids and Ile-a-la-Crosses and the Pinehouses 

with their tremendous population of youth when we talk about 

new programs and new ideas and innovation? 

 

No, we don’t. We tend to forget about them  out of sight and 

out of mind. But again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these problems 

will persist, and in 10, 15 years from now if you don’t think you 

have problems in northern Saskatchewan, then you’ll see that 

the major problems will come then. 

 

I guess the aboriginal population again expected to increase 

over the next 30 years. And that’s the message . . . is that there 

are many young people that are now becoming family members 

and would have to be . . . they have to take care of their 

children. So that the children now we look at . . . when you start 

seeing the fact that these young people are starting to have 

children, the important thing we need to do is to emphasize at a 

greater extent, and I go back to the point that we talk about. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan, volleyball must compete with drugs. 

In northern Saskatchewan, hockey must compete with alcohol. 

In northern Saskatchewan, good solid programs must compete 

with crime and vandalism. That, Mr. Speaker, is what northern 

Saskatchewan is all about. We’ve got to put alternatives in 

place for these young people, so they don’t become lost and 

stuck in a system that is costly to you and I and to the rest of the 

Saskatchewan population. Let’s put an ounce of prevention into 

the system as opposed to funding a pound of cure for the 

creation of jobs in other areas besides northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Again we look at the increasing amount spent on social services 

in northern Saskatchewan. And I look at the unemployment 

stats, and what does that say . . . is a lot of people are really 

feeling bad about how things are working. We look at the fact 

that for economic development in northern Saskatchewan, half 

the land mass, and we have 34,000 people. We put in 4 million 

 $4 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker  nothing about social 

programs, nothing about the new and innovative exciting ways 

to do things. 

 

But the northern development fund they say, you have to have 

an industry or a business that the northern industry of mining or 

forestry can use in their, you know, for their needs. 

 

Well it’s high time we take a different approach because again, 

you go back to the point I raised earlier . . . is you must have 

direct funding for social development agencies and economic  



1616  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

development groups. Unless and until you direct fund these 

communities, the problems will persist. The costs will rise. And 

then with vandalism and unemployment, nothing changes in 10, 

15 years. We as residents of Saskatchewan and as members of 

this Assembly can only look to ourselves because certainly as 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Athabasca, I’m 

going to be consistently raising this issue over my term, so 

people here cannot say that the northern youth problems were 

not heard. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the big problem the people of the 

North have when you look at the whole challenges facing the 

youth is that we require long-term planning. We don’t require a 

band-aid. We don’t require a quick-fix solution. We don’t 

require government coming to these communities and saying, 

this best for you. 

 

The key thing that we want to point out is we all know what 

needs to be done as residents of this province, and certainly as 

the leaders of the northern communities know what needs to get 

done. Leave the “how” to them, but simply support them with 

the financial means and give them the technical and the 

expertise that they require, and they will come up with their 

own solutions. 

 

There’s some very, very exciting plans that they have out there. 

They have a lot of aspirations for their youth. But again, the 

point to be raised is that we don’t tell them what to do. We 

don’t give them restrictive guidelines. We don’t give them a 

quick-fix solution. We don’t tell them this is what we want to 

put in place for you. 

 

We say, can we help in financing and developing your plan, so 

you are in charge, and you ultimately come up with the ideas, 

and you ultimately refine these ideas and come back one year or 

two years from now and see how things are going out. The 

thing is quick fixes are not going to work. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in quick summary here, northern 

Saskatchewan youth are in trouble. Many of them are in trouble 

with the law. Many of them are in trouble with alcohol and drug 

abuse. Many of them are in trouble with family violence, and 

these are problems and symptoms of a larger problem in 

northern Saskatchewan. There’s a lack of jobs, a lack of 

continuing education, a lack of social programs, a lack of 

extracurricular activities in school, a lack of drug and sex 

education, a lack of hope for the future. 

 

Now you tie all those things in; there’s not one single youth in 

this province that will succeed if he’s facing these seven or 

eight or nine challenges. And in northern Saskatchewan, these 

challenges are faced on a daily basis by many of our youth  

every day. Even a grown man would not be able to make the 

challenge of meeting every day if he had to face these problems. 

And the youth of northern Saskatchewan and many youth 

throughout this province are facing these particular challenges. I 

understand that and respect that. 

 

The big thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that I have a strong belief 

that in every single individual there is a God-given gift or talent 

that you have. And I’ve been involved with about seven or  

eight different sports, and I know my God-given talent is not in 

the sports field. 

 

(1615) 

 

But when you look at the youth, one particular youth is really 

excellent at music. One’s good at education. One’s good in 

sports. One is good in entertainment. Each one of them have a 

special gift, and it’s very important that we nurture that gift and 

raise the self-esteem of some of these youths. And this is the 

whole thing is that if you do that, if you assist in the breakdown 

of these barriers for the youth, they will not turn to drugs to 

escape the reality of everyday pressures. Criminal activity and 

problems with the youth directly is a result of the lack of 

respect and the lack of attention. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government would get moving and 

provide the environment for sustainable jobs and provide an 

environment to foster continuing education and social 

programs, then maybe some of our youths would not be in 

trouble that they are in today and continue having problems 

five, ten years from now. We need to aggressively work now to 

find solutions to these problems before it is too late. The youth 

need facilities and programs in northern Saskatchewan and the 

rest of the province now, not five, ten years from now. 

 

And the excuse that, well, Ottawa cut us back is not good 

enough. I mentioned earlier today we need a Saskatchewan 

solution. We’re in charge. Or 58 of us here can make laws, can 

put services and programs in place that could invest in our 

youth. 

 

And the only way that we’re going to defuse the future 

problems is if we invest in the population, in the young 

population of the North now. Places like the North Battleford 

youth centre have major problems when dealing with the youth 

of aboriginal ancestry. There are no programs in place for 

native inmates. Ninety per cent of the inmates at the Battleford 

youth centre are native, yet there’s a low ratio of native to 

non-native staff members working in North Battleford youth 

centre. There’s all kinds of problems with abuse in the centre. 

 

And again, we talk about the people in the North that need to be 

empowered to help themselves. First nations have looked into 

taking and running the North Battleford youth centre, and I 

sincerely hope that there is some effort to support that because 

they’re the ones that have most of these people, in terms of the 

aboriginal population, in these places. We want to get them out. 

We want them to become productive. We want them to become 

self-confident and disciplined people because, if we don’t have 

that as native people, then really we don’t have a future. The 

youth clearly are our future, and we recognize that we have to 

make major investment in that particular area. 

 

I feel the government is failing in its attempt to make this North 

Battleford centre a place where youths who are in trouble with 

the law can rehabilitate and become functioning members of the 

society. 

 

Again we talk about social health being a large picture of health 

care. We talk about cultural awareness. We talk about role  



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

models. We talk about self-esteem. We talk about spiritual 

needs and its holistic approach that many of these northern 

communities want to incorporate in their approach to the youth. 

And this is what many centres in the South are simply not 

picking up as well as they should. 

 

Certainly funding, by whatever department, is needed. And we 

can see that Social Services is involved. We can see that health 

care is involved. We can see that Northern Affairs is involved. 

There’s all kinds of different departments. And really there is 

no comprehensive plan to make these departments work in 

conjunction with each other and to streamline operations so that 

we can maximize the dollar right directly to where the problem 

is, which is of course with the youth. 

 

Other youth facilities, such as Whitespruce and Ranch Ehrlo, 

work with youth and educate them about the world in which 

they live. And the northern youths are just simply saying the 

same thing . . . is we need the same type of facilities. We cannot 

ignore these problems because they just won’t go away. 

 

In fact, in 1987, this NDP party recommended that, and I quote: 

 

The provincial government put a high priority on the 

expansion of preventative services in northern 

communities. 

 

And that: 

 

The long-term objective of the Department of Social 

Services should be to make all its services as accessible in 

northern Saskatchewan as they are in the remainder of this 

province. 

 

This was a report on Social Services in Saskatchewan in 1987. 

And the question we ask is, what has this government done 

with these recommendations, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Nothing. 

These recommendations, like so many of the government’s 

promises to northern Saskatchewan, have been quickly 

forgotten. There is a drastic need for preventative services in the 

North. The question is, where are these services? 

 

I’m not going to sit here and argue all day with the members 

across the House about these services. The fact of the matter is 

the facts speak louder than anything else. And I challenge them. 

Check your facts. We can sit here all day and argue about 

philosophical differences between the government in power and 

myself, but the facts are the ones that will speak from now and 

for all eternity. 

 

Again we talk about La Ronge, you know. I appreciate the fact 

that they worked hard for their hospital. They got their services, 

great. You know, I think it’s a very positive move for the 

community. But how about the western half? How about the 

small communities? How about all the far northern 

communities that need this type of service? They’re the ones 

that need it, and they continue putting these services and 

facilities in areas that probably don’t need it. So really you got 

to start reaching out to the smaller communities and the other 

communities in northern Saskatchewan that don’t have any 

access. We’re basically forgetting them and leaving them where  

they are in an isolated, quiet community. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly as an aboriginal person, 

I’ve mentioned time and time again in this House that I’ve been 

through the ropes. I’ve lived in the North for most of my life. I 

was educated in the North, and my family and friends and my 

heart’s in the North, and I’ll continue living in the North till the 

day I go to see, you know, the main guy upstairs. But the main 

thing is I’ve quickly realized is that we need to make our 

children our number one choice. Our children have to be the 

priority in our life. 

 

And I’ve got three young daughters of mine as well as a 

godchild that’s staying with us, and the thing I tell them every 

day is, have confidence in yourself. Every day I tell them, we’re 

here to support you. Every day we tell them, get educated. 

Every day we tell them, look after yourself, brush your teeth, 

and do the whole bit. Right till the time that they’re 18 years of 

age, I hope to do that. 

 

And the big problem is many of us do that already. But many 

times, Mr. Deputy Chair, there are other families and other 

children and other youth that don’t have that support system. 

And I will work very hard to continue to provide that support to 

them. So the key thing here is that the same opportunity that we 

are allowing our children . . . And the northern people are 

learning. We must remember that other people don’t have the 

same opportunity. Other people don’t have the same benefits 

that many of us enjoy. Always remember. 

 

I’ll ask this government to commit to working with northern 

communities in order to come up with programs and facilities 

that will be beneficial to the youths at risk in the northern part 

of the province. I ask them to do it now, do it immediately, and 

do something about it, so we can come back a year from now 

and saying, yes I applaud the government’s action in terms of 

addressing the youth problems of northern Saskatchewan. And I 

challenge every minister of the House to do that  a year from 

now. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I second the motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its lack of 

commitment to the young people of this province for 

failing to provide and properly fund adequate youth 

rehabilitation facilities that are in drastic need due to 

increasing social problems facing many of our youth and 

young people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting against 

this motion put forth by the member from Humboldt and 

seconded by the member from Athabasca. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  I’m actually shocked when I listened to the 

member from Humboldt. I mean, inexperience and not having  



1618  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

the knowledge can only go so far. She has been elected nearly a 

year now and I expect a better analysis of what we have been 

doing as a government than I have received in this speech 

today. 

 

Never once has this government said that our work is done. Our 

social problems were not created in the past four years, and they 

won’t be solved in the next four years. Only through 

cooperation, compassion, and targeted funding will we slowly 

and steadily cope with our social problems. 

 

Does the member from Humboldt or the member from 

Athabasca think that they have the corner on caring and 

compassion? I taught children for 23 years. Do you think that I 

would be a part of a government that was not progressing to 

help youth in this province? That would be a direct insult to me 

and my philosophy as a person who cared for people. Not only 

my own children, not only the hundreds of children that I have 

taught, but all the people that I know and whose children I 

know. 

 

We are committed to Saskatchewan youth. For instance, this . . . 

We are committed to drug and alcohol treatment services that 

they need. This motion was so far-ranging, I didn’t know 

exactly what they were getting at, but I’ll try to address each of 

the areas. 

 

No one that requires these services in Saskatchewan will go 

without treatment. Saskatchewan Health is working directly 

with district health boards and community referral groups to 

ensure adolescents and their families receive necessary services 

during the transition period. 

 

And to condemn facilities that are already operating and trying 

their best . . . for instance, alternative in-patient programs such 

as the Thorpe Centre in Lloydminster, where I live  an 

excellent program; an excellent service. Can be expanded? Yes, 

we could always use more facilities like the Thorpe Centre. But 

to condemn the people that are already working and trying their 

best is not a positive way to approach the youths’ problems in 

this province. 

 

The Pine Lodge in Indian Head, the Angus Campbell Centre in 

Moose Jaw, and the Metis Addiction Council centres in Prince 

Albert or Regina  these people are trying their best, working 

with us and with people in the community to provide the 

services that the youth in this province need. If in-patient 

services are required, cases will be managed by the Whitespruce 

admissions counsellor in cooperation with the community 

referral agent. 

 

And we are combining the services into the Calder Centre, the 

goal of the renewed health system in providing the best possible 

combination of community-based and institutional programs. 

We are looking at efficiencies in all of our health programs for 

many months, and the case of Whitespruce and Calder much 

longer than that. 

 

The consolidation allows for an interdisciplinary approach to 

recovery as well as the significant sharing of staff resources and 

expertise, both within Calder Centre and within the allotted  

health community. This is consistent with looking at 

efficiencies in all of the provincial health programs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

A 1994 review of residential treatment programs indicated that 

consolidation of Whitespruce and Calder and strong 

community-based support would result in enhanced treatment 

services. The consolidation of adult and adolescent programing 

at Calder Centre allows for greater access to specialized 

adolescent psychiatric services in Saskatoon. It creates more 

opportunities for adolescents to access community-based 

resources and recreation and education as opposed to all 

programing done in a segregated institutional setting. As well, 

the facility design of Calder allows for decreased operating 

costs while still maintaining a separate youth program. 

 

Saskatchewan Health, the Public Service Commission, and the 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union, the union which 

represents Whitespruce and Calder employees, are working 

together to minimize any impact the consolidation will have on 

employees. We have to look to new solutions. After all  and I 

will be addressing some of the funding cuts that we have 

received and the huge debt that we carry  this is realism. 

 

I mean you can hide your head in the sand and just promise the 

world to people, or you can face your problems and dig in and 

do the best that you can with what you’ve got. And that’s what 

we’re doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  We’re committed to the Saskatchewan action 

plan, and it is the children’s action plan, and it is in its third 

year. Working in partnership with communities over the past 

three years, government has provided support to many 

innovative projects across the province. 

 

As I said in my introduction, targeted money for help to youth 

and children in this province, because that is what we can do 

right now. Despite the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  And where did the Liberals stand on 

that? They voted against it. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  At first they voted against it. 

 

Despite challenging fiscal times, the government has 

maintained its commitment to children, youth, and families. 

And as I said before, nobody on that side of the House has a 

corner on caring and compassion. Most of us that were elected 

on this side of the House wouldn’t be here if we didn’t care 

about the people that we represent and the youth that we 

represent. 

 

Every year since its inception, funding has increased for 

programs and services under the children’s action plan. This 

government . . . this year government funding of 6.3 million 

will rise to more than 10.5 million. And what have the Liberal 

provinces and the Tory provinces, what have they done to 

programs like this? 

 



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

(1630) 

 

The action plan is a provincial strategy to enhance the 

well-being of children, youth, and families. The collaborative 

process, beginning in 1993 with the release of a public 

discussion paper and consultation with various groups, 

individuals, and organizations, has a common approach to . . . a 

common sense approach to children’s issues, and were 

developed, and significant provincial and community actions 

were followed. 

 

Many of these developments are summarized  and I would 

suggest that the member from Humboldt read this  many of 

these developments were summarized in the second public 

report released in July of 1994. It’s called Saskatchewan’s 

Action Plan for Children; One Year Later. 

 

What about 1996-97? Again, a budget that is balanced. We’ve 

held . . . we’ve been . . . had to hold the line because of 

cut-backs from the Liberal federal government. What are we 

doing in 1996-97? Community schools and the IMED (Indian 

and Metis educational development) program expansion, $2.35 

million put into that program this year. Because of the success 

of the community schools . . . and I have visited them with the 

Minister of Education last year. They are successful. And the 

Indian and Metis educational development programs at meeting 

the social and learning needs of the at-risk children, these 

programs will be enhanced by $2.35 million. 

 

Increased support to students with special needs  $1 million 

in education. The amount of a million has been directed to 

targeted behaviour recognition. Enhanced measles 

immunization program  $124,000 from Health. Saskatchewan 

Health will be contributing 124,000 towards an enhanced 

immunization program. How about child care initiatives  

500,000 to Social Services. 

 

What about teen parents using teen infant toddler centres  

$105,000 to Social Services. And I can tell you that I visited a 

school where teen mothers had their children in Saskatoon 

where they were able to stay in school and further their 

education, where they were encouraged through planning not to 

have more children than they could take care of. I can tell you, 

talking to those teen mothers, they told me that if that program 

was not in place they would have gone . . . had to quit school 

and take care of their children instead of continuing on. And 

they were very grateful. And they weren’t saying that in front of 

their teachers. We met with them separately. 

 

There are programs and we will be doing as much as we can. 

Post-adoption programs  $60,000. Successful mothers’ 

support program  Saskatchewan Health provided $320,000 in 

the 1995-96 to health districts for successful mothers’ support 

program. 

 

Saskatchewan Social Services dedicated in-kind resources to 

support the development and implementation of this new, 

collaborative initiative in 10 areas of the province. 

 

Treatment services for adolescent offenders. Saskatchewan 

Health provided $108,000 in 1995-96 to two health districts for  

treatment services for adolescent sex offenders. Saskatchewan 

Social Services redirected resources to develop and implement 

this collaborative, three-year pilot project in two communities 

 a rural project in the Yorkton area and an urban project in 

the Saskatoon area of the province. 

 

And addressing family violence. A number of community-based 

agencies have joined together with Saskatchewan Justice to 

help children deal with the effects of domestic violence. The 

Regina YWCA, Prince Albert Catholic family services, the 

Saskatoon family service, and Catholic family service bureaux 

hold sessions to provide children and young teenagers with 

information and coping tools that help them avoid becoming 

victims or predators of domestic violence. Sessions are also 

provided to give custodial parents information and support on 

the effects of witnessing abuse, appropriate discipline, and 

parenting skills. 

 

Assessing child victims and their family. Saskatchewan Justice 

has helped introduce a number of community-based victim 

service programs that operate in conjunction with police 

agencies across this province. They use trained volunteers to 

help child victims of crime and their families by providing case 

information and supporting them through the court process and 

referring them to additional sources of support. 

 

Remote housing development. Saskatchewan Municipal 

Government participated in a one-time initiative called the 

remote housing program. Designed to meet urgent housing 

needs in remote communities, the program was cost-shared with 

the federal government. 

 

So working with partners, together in communities, the federal 

government, the provincial government, we are trying to do 

what we can to help the youth of this province. Is it enough? 

No, it’s not enough. Can it be done in a year or two? No, it 

can’t be done in a year or two. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Flavel:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I see 

seated in your gallery today some acquaintances from the 

Craven area. They lived out in Strasbourg for a while, close to 

Bulyea  Glen and Elaine Samuelson and their son, Michael. 

And I would like to ask everyone to make them feel welcome 

here today. And we’re glad to see them here and I hope they 

enjoy the proceedings. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 9  Commitment to Young People in 

Saskatchewan 

(continued) 



1620  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

Ms. Stanger:  I just want to turn to another area and that’s 

the cuts that we’ve received from the federal government. And 

the thing is this. They had to deal with their budget and their 

deficits in the same way as we had to. That, I can’t blame the 

federal government for; what I do, is the way that they did it. 

 

We, when we were doing cuts in the first few years, we cut 8 

per cent totally to the health, education, and social services, and 

we cut 25 per cent to the rest of government from ’91 to ’95. 

 

The federal government did exactly the opposite. They cut 8 per 

cent to the rest of their government and 25 per cent to the areas 

that people in this province value the most  education, health, 

and social services. 

 

I’m sorry that was their decision. And not only that  after all 

the pain that they have caused all of the provinces, guess what? 

They haven’t balanced their budget and they don’t intend to 

balance their budget for another three, four years after all of this 

pain. 

 

So I’m saying to you, yes, I understand that they had to make 

adjustments with the debt that they are having and producing 

every year, but it’s the way that’s the priorities and the way that 

you use it. 

 

You don’t have to take my word for it. Read the analysis from 

other people. We have done it the compassionate, caring way. 

And I don’t appreciate people saying that we have no feeling 

for the youth of this province when we do. We have not cut 

social services one dime since we got elected. But the Liberals 

have, and they will. 

 

You know it’s funny, when they’re in opposition they talk like 

New Democrats, but when they’re in government, they govern 

like Tories. My dad told me that 35 years ago and it’s absolutely 

the truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  The federal government is eliminating CAP  

that’s the Canada Assistance Plan  at the end of ’95-96 and 

replacing it with the new CHST. The CHST will combine 

federal transfer payments for health, social services, and 

education. The federal government has stated that the CHST 

will give provinces more flexibility in designing social 

assistance program. But actually what it does is give us a 

hundred million less this year. 

 

And yes, they do have some flexibility across Canada to design 

programs. But I’m sorry  the health and social services and 

the education and the quality of it is the glue that has kept 

Canada together and has made us different from our American 

cousins. And guess what? When everyone is doing their own 

thing, do you think we are going to have the high standards in 

every province or consistent standards? No, I don’t think so. 

 

Those are the things that have made Canada different and those 

are the things that make me so sad. Even though we have to 

adjust; we can’t just blame. That’s right  we have to adjust. 

But it makes me sad to see the things that have held us together  

as Canadians being eroded slowly, slowly over the last five 

years. This is just one of them. 

 

So when I sit there and I listen to this poor, ill-conceived 

motion based on ignorance, it made me angry this afternoon. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Sounds like it. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Here’s another program that we are working at. It’s called 

intensive community-based services for youth. Intensive 

community-based services for youth and the youth offender 

program will provide additional support structure and 

supervision to certain high-risk youth, while taking into 

account, for instance  some of the things that the member 

from Athabasca are talking about  the normal adolescence 

need for some structure, guidance, and supervision; the need for 

youth to be held accountable for their behaviour; and the issue 

of community safety. 

 

Intensive community-based services provide the youth court 

with a realistic option in the community for youth who are 

otherwise likely to receive a custody disposition, remain in 

custody, reoffend, or fail to comply with the order of the youth 

court. 

 

Services will also be provided to youth who are on probation in 

lieu of custody, have been released to probation from custody 

as a result of a court review; are on a temporary release from 

custody; or are referred to a youth worker who believes a youth 

is likely to commit further offences or receive a custody 

disposition. 

 

So I guess what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker  and I have many 

more notes but I know the member from Regina South would 

like to say a few words, and I’d like to give him some time to 

do that  what I’d like to say is that have we done as much as 

possible? Maybe no. Have we made some mistakes? Maybe 

yes. But are we trying hard and are our priorities on education, 

health, and social services? Definitely yes. And as a private 

member I’m committed to work towards these things. 

 

I’m concerned with, for instance, with counselling services. In 

the rural areas I would like to see more counselling services. 

I’m working with the . . . right now talking very often with the 

CEO (chief executive officer) of the Twin Rivers Health 

District and the CEO of Lloydminster. We’re going to be 

working towards these things. 

 

Has every dream that I ever had in 1991 been realized? No. It is 

a difficult time to be in government because of the debt that we 

have to carry. What we could do with $850 million every year. 

It’s just amazing when you stop and think about it. 

 

It’s also changing times, and times are changing very rapidly. 

And also we have to deal with not only the things that are 

happening to us provincially, we’re dealing of course with the 

federal cuts. 

 

So all of these things combined doesn’t make it an easy time,  



May 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

but you know what? It makes it a challenging time. And I 

believe that people who are optimistic, people who have a 

common philosophy, can work together to make this a better 

place to live in. And it’s going to be, and remain, the best place 

in the world to live in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in joining 

in this debate brought forward by my hon. colleague from 

Humboldt, I’d like to just focus on some of the detrimental 

effects, in broad terms, that crime has on our society, which 

includes our youth crimes. 

 

It doesn’t matter who commits those crimes, and regardless of 

the fact that there’s some arrogance and disdain from members 

opposite with respect to the motion, Mr. Speaker, the simple 

fact of the matter is that people have the perception that our 

province is not as safe as it once was. They no longer feel 

secure, even in their own homes. And heinous crimes once 

thought to be confined to the city are moving into our once 

peaceful rural communities. Just down the road from where I 

reside in the Qu’Appelle Valley, there have been some crimes 

committed that have shocked and horrified the entire province. 

 

Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that people no longer feel safe? 

Now the issue of crime committed by youths and the penalties 

they should pay for committing those crimes is a very tough one 

to consider, and this in the whole scheme of things of programs 

and punishments. 

 

We as a society must find the right balance in responding to our 

youth who commit crimes and at the same time show them the 

proper path to follow. It’s simply not good enough to give them 

a light punishment and hope they straighten up. Nor is it good 

enough to simply give up on these young people. 

 

 (1645) 

 

While there are many schools of thought when it comes to 

rehabilitation of convicted criminals, if there are any people 

who can be rehabilitated  I have to believe, and I want to 

believe  it is our youth. These are the people with their lives 

ahead of them. Too often I’ve seen kids in their early teens or 

perhaps a little bit older ruin their lives through their actions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I believe, if treated properly, most of our 

young offenders can turn their lives around and become 

productive contributors to our society. So then how do we do 

this? I don’t think any of us have the right and true answer, but 

collectively we, as legislators, along with citizens of the 

province and country have to work together to ensure we find 

that answer so more of these young lives can be saved. 

 

I have seen young offenders  juvenile delinquents as they 

used to be called  who have gotten off on the wrong path and 

have straightened up. But so too have I unfortunately seen the 

opposite side  young criminals who have not been shown any 

other way, young criminals who spend their teen years in youth 

facilities. As unbelievable as it may seem to many of us sitting 

here today, for some of these young people, their goal when  

they become adults is to move up to provincial jails and to 

penitentiaries. 

 

I don’t think there’s anything more tragic than a young person 

who has given up on life unless it is a society that has given up 

on its youth. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we have to steer 

away from. We simply cannot give up on them so easily. 

 

Now before members accuse me of being soft on crime  

believe me  nothing would be further from the truth. I think 

youth criminals, like all criminals, should be treated fairly but 

harshly if necessary. Everyone must or at least should pay the 

price for their crimes. That includes our youth. A slap on the 

wrist sometimes does more harm than good with young 

offenders because they do not learn the consequences of their 

actions. 

 

Punishment must always fit the crime. And speaking of crime in 

general, I don’t think that’s often the case anymore in 

Saskatchewan as we see criminals released earlier and earlier 

from prison without having any regard for the consequences of 

their action. I think that’s wrong, and I also think that that’s 

harmful. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s perhaps a topic for debate on 

another day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we are to save our youths from themselves or 

from uncaring and unfeeling families that put them on the road 

to crime, we have to ensure we have adequate facilities and 

programs in our province that help our kids. We have to make 

sure they receive proper education, proper counselling, proper 

life skills training. I can’t think of any greater investment our 

government, our society, could make. As is often said, our 

youth is our future. That, Mr. Speaker, includes all of our youth. 

Every young person we can put on the right path will help our 

province as a whole. 

 

I realize incarcerating these youths is an expensive proposition. 

I’m informed it costs upwards of $40,000 to keep one youth in 

a provincial facility for one year. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is a lot 

of money. But I think when we consider costs, we have to also 

consider the costs of not doing anything. 

 

How much will it cost us years down the line when this youth 

becomes an adult and continues breaking the law? Because 

that’s what happens when they aren’t taught a lesson, given 

some opportunity for help. And I think without adequate 

funding for youth facilities in our province, that lesson will not 

be taught, and we’ll all be the poorer for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my area, the youth facility near Yorkton has 

been cut. As my colleague from Humboldt can tell us, there are 

problems in the facility in North Battleford. In the North, as my 

deputy leader can attest to, there are just not adequate facilities 

to detain our youths, to help them, so they can be put on the 

straight and narrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at almost every turn this government tells us how 

poor financially they are. They tell us there is no money for 

hospitals. There is no money for schools. There is no money for 

local governments. Yet the government finds money for 

union-preference policies. Yet the government finds the money  



1622  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1996 

for increased staff. Yet the government finds the money for any 

number of other things the people of Saskatchewan would not 

list as priorities . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Order. The hon. 

members all understand it’s not appropriate to be shouting 

comments across the floor  order  nor to be commenting 

when the Speaker is on his feet. 

 

I’ll ask all members to give the hon. member for Melville the 

courtesy of listening to his remarks. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Ask for leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to the Assembly today a friend of mine who was a deputy 

mayor of Ile a-la-Crosse for one term. And he’s a great hockey 

player as well. And he’s here doing some work. 

 

I’ll ask the Assembly to join me in welcoming Mr. William 

Caisse, who is in the visitor’s gallery, to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 9  Commitment to Young People in 

Saskatchewan 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Priorities, Mr. Speaker, is what I was talking 

about, and that’s what it is all about. You have to target the 

dollars to where they are most needed. We all wish there were 

more dollars to work with, and there would be if it were not for 

Grant Devine bankrupting the province and Brian Mulroney 

bankrupting the country with their extravagance, dishonesty, 

and downright stupidity. 

 

But that is the reality, Mr. Speaker. It just doesn’t matter who’s 

to blame. All that matters is that we do have to have money, to 

spend the money, that we do it in the wisest possible fashion. 

And I can’t think of a better place to start than with our youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, crime statistics are easy to digest. They are 

numbers on paper, intangible figures without any real meaning 

for any of us. But until you’re one of the people, the one 

arresting a young man or woman, knowing their life is probably 

ruined, you don’t see the reality that is youth crime. And it is 

real, Mr. Speaker. The men and women who abide and respect 

the law can only tell you too well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, without providing adequate rehabilitation 

centres for youths, we are not only failing them; we are failing 

everyone in the province. A small investment now can pay big 

dividends in the future. Yes, make sure these kids are punished,  

harshly if necessary, tough love perhaps, for their actions, but 

also make darn sure they are given all the tools necessary to 

rebuild their life. Make sure they have a future filled with a 

bright outlook on life and hope and opportunity. 

 

To do anything less, Mr. Speaker, we are failing everyone. To 

simply look at today’s needs or today’s balance sheet is simply 

not adequate. We have to remember always to govern our 

province with an eye towards the future. What will make our 

society a better place for our kids and grand kids? What can we 

do to make this a better place for future generations? These are 

the questions cabinet ministers on that side of the House should 

be asking themselves with every decision they make. 

 

But I don’t think the future is always kept in mind when the 

government makes it’s decisions. Oh yes, they talk a great deal 

about moving the province into the 21st century, but, Mr. 

Speaker, their actions . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I’m going to ask the 

members on government side to restrain themselves. It’s clearly 

out of order to be shouting across the floor, and I’m going to 

ask for cooperation of all members of the House to allow the 

hon. member from Melville to put his remarks. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our Minister of Health 

continues to tell us about the future, and in the next breath he 

holds up a 30-year-old newspaper clipping to justify his actions, 

actions that I might say are not moving the province to the 

better future but rather condemning much of Saskatchewan to a 

less secure and less safe future. But again, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

topic for debate on another day, and it is a debate we will 

continue having with this government, Mr. Speaker. I can 

assure you of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing today, I want to say I will support the 

motion made by my colleague from Humboldt because in 

moving such a motion, I want to impress on the government 

that to solve the problems of our province, it takes more than lip 

service and photo opportunities, something the members 

opposite have thrived on since 1991 and probably long before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our youth population is not a political issue. It is 

an issue that directly affects every man, woman, and especially 

child in Saskatchewan. If we fail to address these issues with a 

wise and well thought out plan with the future always in mind, 

we are failing future generations. 

 

I urge the government to do everything in its power to make 

sure we leave our world, at least our province, a better place 

than when we found it. Then we know we have done our job as 

honourable members of this Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1591 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1591 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1591 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1592 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1592 
Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1592 
Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1599 
Flavel ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1619 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1622 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Child Care Week  

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1592 
Stanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

Endeavour Archery Club 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

Child Care-givers  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

New Business for Regina 
Flavel ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

WestJet Service  
Hamilton ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

Saskatchewan German Language Contest Winners  
Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1593 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Nurses’ Collective Bargaining  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

Health Information Network  
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

Service Districts Act  
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1595 
Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1595 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1595 
Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1595 

Independent Prosecutor’s Report  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1596 
Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1596 

Child Prostitution  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1597 
Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

Northern Housing  
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1598 

TABLING OF REPORTS  
Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE  

Bill C-68  
D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................... 1599, 1609 



Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1601 
Lorje ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1603, 1608 
Osika ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1604, 1608 
Johnson ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1605, 1609 
Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1606 
Bradley ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 
Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1608 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1609 
Stanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1609 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS  
Motion No. 9  Commitment to Young People in Saskatchewan  

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1610 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1612 
Stanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1617 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1621 

 


